FOREIGN
RELATIONS
OF THE
UNITED
STATES
VOLUME III
FOREIGN ECONOMIC
POLICY
DEPARTMENT
OF
STATE
Washington

Foreign Relations of the
United States, 1977–1980
Volume III
Foreign Economic
Policy
Editor
Kathleen B. Rasmussen
General Editor
Adam M. Howard
United States Government Printing Office
Washington

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office
Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov

SUBJECT
Visit to Europe and Japan
The reaction from the leaders of Western Europe and Japan to your
announcement of my overseas mission has been positive and enthusi-
astic.2 They welcome this early initiative to improve consultations and
strengthen cooperation. They view it as a positive signal that you will
exercise leadership on the economic, political and defense problems
they share in common with the United States.
The January 23–February 1 mission will include discussions in
Brussels with the North Atlantic Council, the Commission of the Euro-
pean Communities, Belgian and Dutch leaders; talks in Bonn with
Chancellor Schmidt; a brief visit to Berlin; talks in Rome with President
Leone and Prime Minister Andreotti; an audience with Pope Paul VI;
talks in London with Prime Minister Callaghan, in Paris with President
Giscard d’Estaing and in Tokyo with Prime Minister Fukuda. The pri-
mary focus of the trip will be on the personal discussions with Schmidt,
Callaghan, Giscard and Fukuda.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
dale did not initial the message, which incorrectly identifies Carter and Mondale as the
President and Vice President, respectively.
2 Carter announced on January 8 that Mondale would travel to Western Europe and
Japan for consultations with U.S. allies. (Charles Mohr, “Mondale to Explain Carter Aims
Togov 102 to Carter, January 5, Brzezinski proposed the trip as a way “to underline your
commitment to prompt action on international economic issues through close consulta-
tions with our principal allies, as well as to reduce pressures for early separate summits.”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 66, Tran-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
My primary purpose in these meetings will be:
—to listen and to report back to you on the subjects foremost on
the minds of each foreign leader and the proposals each wishes to offer
for your consideration;
—to convey the direction of some of your initial policies and to em-
phasize your determination to move ahead with the United States’
friends and allies quickly, creatively and cooperatively; and
—to move toward agreement on certain initial steps such as
summit location and timing, MTN consultations and consultations on
issues such as non-proliferation which might be announced by you
upon my return in the context of the accomplishments of the mission.
In each of the countries, it is probable that my hosts will raise a
number of specific bilateral problems ranging from civil air and fishing
rights, to steel quotas to host country negotiations with the IMF. With
the exceptions noted below, I will not get into detailed discussion of conten-
tious bilateral issues, to avoid complicating future specific negotiations.
The following paragraphs summarize principal issues I anticipate
being raised during the visit, the approach I recommend to take on
your behalf, and a request for your guidance.
The Summit:3 In discussing the summit and receiving the views of
our European and Japanese colleagues, I will stress your objective of
collaborating as closely as possible to speed international economic re-
covery. I will ask my hosts for their thoughts on the summit agenda. I
will note that our initial thoughts as to agenda items include both polit-
ical and economic issues: e.g., economic recovery, North South issues,
trade, international financial issues, energy, East-West relations and
procedural arrangements
for
continuing
consultations
after
the
summit. I will indicate that we would like to see the European Commu-
nity participate. I will explore Giscard’s suggestion of a side meeting at
the summit of the Europeans and the U.S.
I will emphasize the need for adequate preparation of the summit
agenda items and offer our thinking on the usefulness of a few
high-level preparatory meetings, with the first such meeting perhaps,
at the end of February. I believe it would speed the planning process if I
were in position to name the U.S. officials who will head our participa-
tion in planning meetings for the summit. The Economic Policy Group
at its meeting today is preparing a recommendation to you on an indi-
vidual to head the economic planning effort for the U.S. in coordination
Summit of the seven major industrialized democracies: Canada, the Federal Republic of
Germany, France, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States, known as the
G–7. Giscard also approached President-elect Carter about his proposal, which Carter en-
Document 152.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
with the NSC/PRC.4 I would also plan to indicate your preference for
summit timing no earlier than late May 1977,5 and to indicate that we
would be satisfied with London as the site. With your agreement, I will be
prepared to discuss the date, place and preparation for the summit, to name the
U.S. participants for the economic and political preparatory meetings, and to
propose that the summit date be announced after I return and consult with
you.6
Coordination of U.S., FRG and Japanese Economies: The visit will
allow me to review the details of the stimulative economic package you
are sending to the U.S. Congress,7 a package reflecting your full recog-
nition that healthy economic growth and measures to keep down infla-
tion in the United States are important not only for Americans but for
our trading partners as well.
I will state that a key factor in your decision to undertake addi-
tional economic stimulus to put the U.S. on a course of stable growth
was the positive effect it would have on the economies of our trading
partners. If the major economies do not at least meet their growth
targets, it will have an adverse impact on these nations and strengthen
protectionist pressures.
I will encourage the Germans and Japanese in developing their
economic policies to take into account the significant role each
country’s healthy growth plays in contributing to the recoveries of the
weaker economies, to the well-being of the world economy, and thus to
international political stability. If you agree, I will review the U.S. economic
stimulation program and encourage Schmidt and Fukuda to stimulate their
economies, unless they indicate they will do more than they presently plan
to do.8
Multilateral Trade Negotiations (MTN):9 I will make clear your inten-
tion to administer U.S. trade legislation in such a way as to avoid
solving our trade problems at the expense of others, and in a manner
consistent with America’s traditional policy of ensuring an open inter-
4 No minutes of this meeting were found.
5 Carter circled the word “late” and wrote “omit ‘late’” in the margin adjacent to
this paragraph.
6 Carter indicated his approval of this position and wrote: “except no need to name
our participants until agenda approved. Do not limit to ‘economic.’”
7 For the text of Carter’s January 31 message to Congress, in which he proposed a
8 Carter indicated his approval of this position and wrote: “Schmidt making major
statement this week.” See Document 2.
9 The seventh round of multilateral trade negotiations (MTN) held under the aus-
pices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, known as the Tokyo Round, was

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
national trading system. While avoiding detailed discussion of specific
contentious trade issues, I will note that we are troubled by the trend
toward bilateral solutions to trade problems, that such arrangements
feed pressures in the U.S. for unilateral action and weaken the multi-
lateral trading framework, and that the U.S., Europe, Japan and Canada
must find ways to manage trade issues in a cooperative multilateral
fashion, rather than further strengthen the dangerous precedent of bi-
lateral solutions.
I will state your view that the next several months provide the U.S.,
Europe and Japan with an excellent opportunity to regenerate political
commitment to a successful MTN. There is a new EC Commission and
new Administration in Japan and the U.S. 1977 thus presents a chance,
which we cannot afford to let slip by, to make significant progress on
those issues which are central to a successful MTN—agriculture, a sub-
sidies code, a tariff negotiating plan, and North-South trade issues.
I will state your intention to name a top-flight U.S. trade negoti-
ator, adding that the U.S. will be prepared to consult actively with the
EC and Japan to break any logjams which occur in the MTN. I will say
that we suggest that four or five representatives get together at a high
level to see how we might break existing deadlocks and avoid what we
see as a dangerous precedent of bilateral deals.
In my meeting with EC Commissioner Jenkins, I will say we would
like to begin informal discussions with a representative of the Commu-
nity as soon as possible, and invite him to suggest an individual.
With your agreement, I will emphasize that the United States wants to
get the MTN moving. I will recommend that we agree on intensive gov-
ernmental consultations as soon as feasible with our key negotiating partners
to develop realistic proposals for MTN progress, and I will seek their agree-
ment on having these consultations announced by you at the conclusion of my
trip.10
[Omitted here is discussion of NATO, East-West Relations, Berlin,
Communism in Italy, U.S.–Vatican Relations, Non-Proliferation, and
Arms Sales.]
Japan: In Japan, as in Europe, I will review planning for the trilat-
eral summit and I will encourage early MTN consultations and cooper-
ation on other stops on the trip, I will avoid detailed discussion of con-
tentious issues.11 I will plan to reaffirm your message to Prime Minister
10 Carter indicated his approval of this position.
11 At a January 22 NSC meeting, during a discussion of Mondale’s forthcoming visit
to Japan, Blumenthal, noting that Carter would “be confronted with some very important
trade issues in the near future,” suggested that if Mondale did not explicitly refer to such
issues, “the Japanese will consider the omission to be significant. The Japanese need con-
stant pressure.” Carter instructed Mondale to tell the Japanese “that unless they are re-
ceptive to voluntary agreements this will put us under great political pressure.” Blumen-
thal expressed his “doubt that we should raise the specific question of voluntary

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
Fukuda emphasizing the importance you place on US-Japanese friend-
ship and bilaterally and in the context of the interests we share in the
Pacific with our fellow industrialized democracies.12
With regard to the Philippines, I will say that we will be under-
taking review of our basing requirements, that we cannot accept the
current Philippine negotiating proposal, that the bases are as much in
the [interests of?] the Philippines as they are in U.S. interests—and that
if the current outrageous demands are not lower we are prepared to do
without the bases. I will assure the Japanese that we will consult fully
with them during the Philippine base negotiating process.13
I will discuss your policies toward the People’s Republic of China and
Korea, making sure Prime Minister Fukuda understands the importance you
attach to questions concerning Korea, including the issue of troop levels, but
not going beyond your stated positions. With your agreement, I will confirm
your desire to have close consultations with Japan concerning Korea and U.S.
relations with the People’s Republic of China, and agreement on the desir-
ability of close US-Japanese consultations on all issues of common interest can
be highlighted in your review of the results of the mission.14
[Omitted here is discussion of Southern Africa, Cyprus, and the
Middle East.]
North-South Issues: I will state your commitment to a constructive
relationship with the developing countries, and your desire for close
cooperation among the industrialized countries to achieve this objec-
tive. I will emphasize that your Administration has not yet had a
chance to examine North-South issues in depth and has not come to
firm decisions on specific subjects. We will want to consult with the Eu-
ropeans and Japanese at the earliest possible moment. I will say that we
believe there are several suitable forums for such consultations in-
cluding the Executive Council of the OECD, the Trilateral summit pre-
paratory meetings, and the commissions of the CIEC.
agreements. We should tell them that they have a large trade surplus and should watch
it.” When Mondale suggested raising the issue of Japanese color television exports, Blu-
menthal replied, “As an example.” (Memorandum of conversation, undated; Carter Li-
U.S.-Japanese issues be broached “in a somewhat larger framework. We should empha-
size the importance of Japan’s assuming a major international role. We should put it in
the perspective of history. Then we could turn to specific issues where they might play a
greater role: trade, North-South issues, defense, etc. But do it in the context of Japan
emerging as a major global power.” Carter agreed, adding, “If Fukuda raises some spe-
cific questions it will give us a better idea of their concerns.” When Mondale suggested
that the United States and Japan were “immediately establishing closer working rela-
tions—this is a beginning,” Carter noted that “Japan is now a major world power and we
look forward to sharing the responsibility with her.”
13 Carter wrote “Do not be belligerent re Marcos with Fukuda” at the end of this
paragraph.
14 Carter indicated his approval of this position.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
With your agreement, I will make clear your interest in early consulta-
tions on North-South issues, and I will assure the Europeans and Japanese
that there will be no surprise proposals from the United States.15
Energy: In each capital I will state that your Administration will
give high priority to establishment of a comprehensive U.S. national
energy program to reduce import dependence on Middle East oil, and I
will review the initial steps—including your plans for a Department of
Energy—that you are taking. I will further state that we strongly sup-
port cooperation among the industrialized countries in the Interna-
tional Energy Agency in behalf of concerted long-term efforts to reduce
collective reliance on OPEC oil and the imbalances in the world energy
market. I will suggest that technical cooperation on research and devel-
opment of new sources of energy might be particularly fruitful. I will
point out that, at present, the details of energy policy in your Adminis-
tration are being developed as a matter of great urgency. In this regard,
Jim Schlesinger is preparing specific talking points for the trip which I
will ensure coordination within the Administration prior to my depar-
ture. With your agreement, I will stress the importance you are according to
energy policy, the importance you attach to cooperation among the industrial-
ized countries on energy issues, and the value we see in cooperative research
and development programs on new energy sources.16
15 Carter indicated his approval of this position. At the January 22 NSC meeting (see
footnote 11 above), during a discussion of North-South issues, Carter asked whether the
U.S. position was “to shift to a multi-national approach.” Vance replied, “On the provi-
sion of capital funds, I believe we should,” while Blumenthal noted that, “Many of the so-
lutions in the US involve multi-national fora.” Vance raised the issue of CIEC timing,
asking, “Would we like a CIEC meeting before or after the summit? If after, their expecta-
tions will be raised and they may not be met. I would prefer early April.” Blumenthal re-
plied, “They already have great expectations about the new Administration. We will
have to disappoint them in some regard.” He also suggested that “If others are anxious
about it we should have a meeting in April. We could listen but say we have not yet
firmed up our views.” Vance agreed.
16 Carter indicated his approval of this position.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
2.
Memorandum From Zbigniew Brzezinski to
President-Elect Carter1
Washington, January 19, 1977
SUBJECT
Preview of Schmidt Economic Announcement
As Chancellor Schmidt promised in your telephone conversation,2
the German Government has provided us with the attached paper out-
lining the investment program which he, Schmidt, will announce on
marks ($4.1 billion) worth of investment over a period of four years at
the federal, state, and local levels; the federal government share will be
more than 50%. The spending will concentrate on river cleanup, re-
gional water supplies, inner-city development, energy saving meas-
ures, and protection of seashores.
The 10 billion mark figure—only 1% of GNP—appears unlikely to
have a major impact on the German economy. Even if the program be-
comes effective early this year, it is probable that no more than 1–2 bil-
lion marks will be spent over the year as a whole, and most of that will
probably be in the second half. The smallness of the program appears
to indicate that the government will wait until early spring before
making a decision on whether significant additional stimulus is
required.4
German GNP will probably fall below the 5% real growth target in
1977, although the Germans continue to argue that this target can be
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
dale. A stamped notation reads: “The President has seen,” and Carter initialed “C” at the
top of the page.
2 No memorandum of conversation of this telephone conversation was found.
3 Attached but not printed is a courtesy translation of a paper entitled “Public
Investment Program for Growth and Environmental Foresight—as per January 15,
1977—.”
4 At a January 22 NSC meeting, during a discussion of national economic stimulus
programs and Mondale’s forthcoming visit to Europe and Japan, Schultze noted that
while the United States was spending 1 percent of its GNP on its economic program,
West Germany was spending “only about ¼ of 1% of their GNP” to stimulate its
economy. When Vance asked why the West German program was so small, Schultze re-
plied: “Schmidt is just very, very conservative. Also, instead of trying to compromise be-
tween labor’s desire for greater production capital and business’ desire for investment
capital, they have done neither. They don’t want to antagonize either side.” Carter in-
structed Mondale to tell the West Germans that “we are quite disappointed with their
performance in this area” and that “we think 1% of GNP is an appropriate figure. Say
we’re very disappointed.” (Memorandum of conversation, undated; Carter Library, Na-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
achieved. The US Treasury projects 4% growth; the OECD projects
3.5%. Treasury’s projections appear to be more accurate. The new
measures, although marginal, will probably assure that the Germans
attain the Treasury projected figure.
As you promised Schmidt in your telephone conversation, we will
provide the Germans with a summary of your stimulative economic
package.
3.
Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC 71
Washington, January 21, 1977
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
ALSO
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Secretary of Agriculture
The Secretary of Commerce
The Secretary of Labor
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Chairman, Council of Economic Advisers
The United States Representative to The United Nations
The Special Representative for Trade Negotiations
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Assistant to the President for Energy Policy
SUBJECT
International Summit
The President has directed that the Policy Review Committee un-
dertake an analysis of, and provide options concerning, the major
policy issues to be addressed at an International Summit. The economic
aspects of this analysis are to be staffed through the Economic Policy
Group prior to their consideration by the National Security Council.
The agencies listed in parentheses should take leadership responsi-
bility for the following subjects:
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 25,
PRM–07. Secret. NSC Staff Secretary Jeanne Davis forwarded a copy of PRM 7 to the Sec-
retary of Defense under cover of a January 26 memorandum, in which she noted that he
had been “inadvertently omitted from the list of addressees.” (Carter Library, National

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
—Global economic recovery and stability (CEA)
—International financial arrangements (Treasury)
—Trade (State)
—North-South (State and Treasury)
—Energy (Schlesinger and State)
—East-West (State and Treasury)
—Investment (Treasury and State)
Each study should, in addition to presenting alternative U.S. posi-
tions, and making policy recommendations, analyze the likely posi-
tions of other Summit participants, identify points which they might
raise, and provide suggestions for response. These studies should be
completed by March 28 for submission to the President through the
National Security Council.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
4.
Paper Prepared in the Office of the Special Representative
for Trade Negotiations1
Washington, January 21, 1977
Major Trade Issues
During the coming months, a number of difficult international
trade issues are likely to command considerable attention both in the
United States and abroad. Concern will likely focus on (1) the general
trade climate and increased pressures for protectionism, (2) specific
trade actions which will be presented for decision (in particular, a
the Multilateral Trade Negotiations (which has been painfully slow to
date) and (4) the trade aspects of the North-South Dialogue.
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 88, Trade Policy Committee. Confidential. Sent to the Trade
Policy Committee (Vance, Blumenthal, Brown, Attorney General Griffin Bell, Secretary of
the Interior Cecil Andrus, Bergland, Kreps, Marshall, and Schultze) under cover of a Jan-
uary 21 memorandum from Acting Special Representative for Trade Negotiations
Clayton Yeutter. (Ibid.)
mation on the provisions of the act, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXI, Foreign

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
General Climate
The industrialized countries and LDCs are hoping that steady ex-
pansion of the United States, West German, and Japanese economies
will generate worldwide recovery. While the United States is com-
mitted to sustained economic expansion and has been willing to accept
the resulting trade deficit, Japan, in particular, has continued to main-
tain large trade surpluses both with the United States and the rest of
non-OPEC world. While the United States has shifted from a surplus
11 months of 1976 (annual rate on a CIF basis), Japan continues to run a
large trade surplus with ourselves and the rest of the non-OPEC world.
There is a significant danger over the next six months that the com-
bination of the slow economic recovery of the Western countries and
their growing oil-related trade deficits will result in an increasing
number of protectionist trade measures being imposed. The first sub-
stantial movement in this direction has taken the form of requests by
the European Community (EC) for Japanese export restraints.
The Japanese surplus, and its concentration in certain products,
such as automobiles, consumer electronic products, and steel, has led
to near hysteria in Europe. The EC Commission has wrung from the
Japanese export restrictions on steel and inter-industry discussions on
curbing other Japanese exports. The dangers to U.S. trading interests
are that the limitations on access to the European market will result in
diversion of these products to the U.S. market in injurious quantities,
that the Japanese will open their market in a way which discriminates
in favor of European exports at the expense of our trade, and that the
maintenance of an open trading system is threatened by the EC-
Japanese arrangements.
Strenuous U.S. efforts will be required to rebuild the commitment
of Europe and Japan to cooperate with us to manage bilateral trade
problems responsibly and to move now toward improving the frame-
work of the international trading system. A further Japanese response
to the EC on concrete trade advantages (and export restraints) is due in
just over a month. U.S. concerns must be made known to the EC and
Japan soon and forcefully, if we wish to avoid having bilateral arrange-
ments take the place of broader solutions.
Specific Trade Actions
A number of specific problems which have been raised by peti-
tions under the Trade Act of 1974 will have to be dealt with over the
next few months. These petitions have generated concern abroad about
the general direction of U.S. trade policy. United States leadership in
the effort to avoid a drift towards protectionism is greatly complicated

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
by the very real domestic legal and political considerations which, in
each case, will have to be taken into account.
a. Escape Clause Cases
In the first two months of the new Administration, a Presidential
decision will be required on whether to place import restrictions on
shoes as recommended by the U.S. International Trade Commission.
The domestic industry is clearly injured. Last year President Ford de-
cided that the impact on consumers was too great to provide relief. The
$1.4 billion in annual U.S. imports is primarily supplied by Italy, Spain,
Taiwan, Korea, and Brazil. Onerous import restrictions would be
reacted to strongly by exporting countries, especially the EC, Spain and
Brazil, any of which could retaliate against U.S. exports.
Import relief decisions will also more than likely have to be made
with respect to imports of televisions (1976 imports $800 million) and
sugar (1974 imports approximately $1 billion). These cases are likely to
be presented for Presidential action during March–May, 1977. A Presi-
dential decision on mushrooms (1976 imports $71 million) is due by
March 11. Under the Trade Act, Presidential decisions in any of these
cases can be overridden by a vote of both Houses of Congress.
b. Countervailing Duty Litigation
Perhaps of even greater concern than the above cases are two legal
actions which have been brought to require the Secretary of the Treas-
ury to countervail against the exemption of exports from taxes nor-
mally borne by products abroad. The Zenith Radio Corporation con-
tends that additional duties should be applied equal to the Japanese
sumer electronic products from Japan. If, as is not unlikely, the
Customs Court sides with Zenith under language contained in two old
Supreme Court cases, bonds will have to be posted by importers for the
potential additional duty. This will have an immediate restrictive im-
pact on trade. A court decision is expected soon.
The U.S. Steel Company has brought a similar case against the re-
bate of European value added taxes (VAT). The issue is the same in
principle as the Zenith case, and an adverse decision in Zenith would be
a precedent for the VAT case. The trial is scheduled for December, 1977.
The rest of the world would view U.S. countervailing against the
rebate of indirect taxes (sales and excise taxes, and the VAT), which is a
practice expressly sanctioned by the GATT, as an act of completely un-
warranted economic aggression. Massive retaliation against U.S. ex-
ports would be a real possibility unless the courts or the Congress give
the Secretary of the Treasury discretion to avoid countervailing against
these common practices.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
c. Steel
The domestic steel industry has repeatedly pressed its concerns
about adverse effects from import competition. Following a period of
improvement during the first half of 1976, the industry is suffering
from a setback in production, employment and profits. This follows a
very poor year in 1975. Imports are increasing.
A major objective of U.S. steel industry is an international agree-
ment which would regulate “cyclical distortions” in steel trade (in
times of reduced demand, foreign producers tend to maintain output
and employment and cut price; U.S. producers tend to maintain prices
and cut production). Partially in order to bring pressure for negotiation
of such an agreement, the industry has pursued a variety of domestic
remedies, including a successful import relief action on specialty steel
(quotas are now in effect), a major suit under the countervailing duty
law against an Italian state-owned steel producer, and an action under
Section 301 of the Trade Act3 against the EC/Japanese steel under-
standing. There is consideration in the industry of bringing a number
of additional actions against imports. Further problems are likely to be
caused by the EC’s adoption of its Simonet Plan,4 which could result in
the dumping of European steel here as well as in diversion of non-EC
steel exports to this market.
d. U.S. Agricultural Exporters’ Complaints
A series of petitions has been filed with STR against a number of
European trade measures fundamental to the EC’s current Common
Agricultural Policy (CAP). These apparently valid complaints by U.S.
agricultural exporters against EC export subsidies, and a variety of EC
import restrictions is a growing and major irritant to the EC. We are
trying to resolve the cases, which concern important U.S. interests,
through GATT proceedings but some basic accommodation to the U.S.
will be necessary in the MTN to avoid a continuing series of conflicts
with the EC on this subject. If this problem is not adequately dealt with,
it could easily grow into a major political and economic confrontation
trading practices.
its declining steel production; the policy was based on a plan named for EC Commission
Vice President Henri Simonet. In December 1976, U.S. and EC officials discussed steel
issues, including the Simonet Plan, in Brussels. The following month, the United States
delivered an aide-me´moire to the EC outlining its concerns with the plan. (Telegram

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
with the EC, which is already hypersensitive to the existence of the
complaints, but which is slow in working toward solutions.
The Multilateral Trade Negotiations (MTN)
The MTN was conceived as a means to further reduce barriers to
international trade and improve the rules and procedures that make up
the framework for the conduct of world trade. The understandable pre-
occupation abroad with domestic economic recovery, and with current
trade deficits, has prevented dedication of the necessary political will to
move the current trade negotiations toward a successful conclusion.
There has also been a major obstacle within the MTN to further
progress. This has been the deadlock between the U.S. and the EC over
what can be accomplished in these negotiations with respect to agricul-
tural trade.
There had been general agreement on an end of 1977 target date
for completion of the MTN, but both France and the United Kingdom,
neither of which are enthusiastic about a negotiation having substantial
results, have emphasized that the deadline can be met, provided that
the MTN is downgraded into a mini-negotiation. This position is not
justified by European economic difficulties as the MTN will not require
any substantial near-term economic adjustments by any participant.
Further movement in the MTN will be dependent upon strong U.S.
leadership, and upon our reaching a basic political level understanding
with the major participants on what this negotiation is to accomplish.
Trade Relations with Developing Countries
Increased coordination among developed countries of their pol-
icies towards developing countries (LDC’s) is necessary in order to
avoid developed countries damaging each others’ trade interests. The
developing countries seek primarily stabilization of earnings on their
exports of commodities, preferential market access in developed coun-
tries for manufactured products, and international recognition of their
right to more favorable trade treatment from developed countries.
The United States and other developed countries have differed in
their approaches to the LDC’s. The U.S. has been more wary of com-
modity agreements. We have not been willing to negotiate preferential
access for LDC’s to the U.S. market (nor to extend discriminatory pref-
erences to individual LDC’s). We have also insisted on receiving some
concessions for the more favorable market access that we are willing to
commit to in the trade negotiations. The LDC’s recognize, however,
that we are more willing to consider making specific concessions than
are other developed countries. Detailed consultations with Europe and
Japan on LDC policy should be an early priority.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Textiles
The Multifiber Agreement (MFA), which governs most of world
trade in textiles, will expire at the end of this year.5 The MFA provides
for the orderly expansion of textile trade without market disruption. Its
existence has reduced conflicts over textile trade that were very disrup-
tive to political and economic relations in the past. The United States
has pressed for renewal of the MFA without amendment, avoiding a
major DC/LDC struggle. The EC and Canada favor modifications
which will give them a freer hand to restrict imports. The renewal of
the MFA will be a major international issue in 1977, especially if
changes must be negotiated.
Trade Pledge
During the last few years, OECD countries have pledged to use
maximum restraint in the use of restrictive trade measures to deal with
economic problems related to the increased cost of oil and the world-
wide economic recession. The current pledge expires in June.6 The
Trade Committee is scheduled to discuss the future of the pledge in
March. Well before that meeting, the United States is committed to pro-
viding a paper on alternative approaches that could be taken with re-
spect to a possible pledge in the future.
East-West Trade
The freedom of emigration amendment to the Trade Act7 con-
tinues to inhibit the expansion of U.S. trade with the non-market
economy countries. The U.S. has proposed in the OECD that a study be
conducted leading to a common approach to a number of problems
shared by Western countries in their trade with the East. This study is
being carried out by the OECD secretariat with the assistance of experts
from capitals. It should have an important bearing on the future evolu-
tion of the trade relationship between the East European non-market
economies and the OECD countries.
5 The Multifiber Arrangement regulated the international trade in clothing and tex-
tiles from 1974 until 1994. It set quotas on products developing countries could export to
developed countries.
6 Rising oil prices after the October 1973 Arab-Israeli war resulted in growing trade
deficits for oil-importing countries. On May 30, 1974, OECD members pledged to adopt a
cooperative approach to the troubles besetting the global economy and to eschew for one
year unilateral actions, such as import restrictions, intended to protect their balance of
1976, Document 209. The pledge was subsequently renewed on an annual basis.
7 The Jackson-Vanik amendment to the 1974 Trade Act denied most-favored-nation
trade status and trade credits to countries with non-market economies that restricted
emigration.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
5.
Memorandum From Vice President Mondale to
President Carter1
Washington, February 4, 1977
SUBJECT
Results of Visit to Europe and Japan
I. Introduction
The leaders of Western Europe and Japan responded most posi-
tively to your initiative in launching high-level and substantive consul-
tations in the first week of your Administration.2
As a result of my conversations in the various capitals:
—each leader has received a clear and firm statement of your com-
mitment to the collective defense;
—each understands your determination to tackle successfully the
economic and political problems confronting the industrialized de-
mocracies—and your determination to make progress on such issues as
non-proliferation and reduction of international arms sales, which have
thus far been neglected;
—each is looking forward to participating with you in the summit
this spring;
—Prime Ministers Callaghan and Fukuda were extremely pleased
to receive your invitations to visit the United States; and
—the visit to Japan, based on my warm reception there, has served
to highlight the importance your Administration attaches to Japan’s
role in the front ranks of world leadership and responsibility.
As a result of the visit your Administration has confirmed the
United States’ commitment to the North Atlantic Alliance. My talks
with the members of the European Commission and with Secretary-
General van Lennep of the OECD have already extended, beyond the
actions of past Administrations, your commitment to working more
closely with a unifying Europe and with the principal multilateral insti-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page and wrote: “Comments given on previous
memos. J.” On February 2, Mondale sent Carter two memoranda: the first was on
“Europe/Japan Visit—Personal Appraisal of Leaders;” the second was on “Recom-
mended Actions Stemming from My Visit to Europe and Japan.” Both memoranda are
ibid.
2 Daily reports on Mondale’s trip are in the Carter Library, National Security Af-
fairs, Staff Material, Special Projects, Henry Owen, Box 29, Summit: London: (VP Trip):
tional Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit File, Box 8, Japan: Prime Minister

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
tutions of the industrialized democracies. With these initial consulta-
tions, momentum has been established.
The following paragraphs outline findings in each of the major
subject areas discussed during the visit. The different points of em-
phasis in my conversations with Chancellor Schmidt, Andreotti, Calla-
ghan, Giscard d’Estaing, Fukuda and others are summarized and
policy recommendations are included.
II. Findings3
—The Summit: A tentative consensus is emerging on a mid-May
date for the summit in London, following the NATO Ministerial
Meeting.4 A consensus is also emerging that it would be acceptable if
the summit were to include political as well as economic issues, al-
though both the French and the Japanese are extremely sensitive as to
how this is handled.
I recommend that you now communicate to Giscard the following pro-
posals on the Summit. They are based on my conversations with other prin-
cipal Summit attendees and reflect the area of consensus I found.5
Location and Timing: The meetings should be held in London in May fol-
lowing the NATO Ministerial meeting with a gap of two or three days.
London is acceptable to everyone including the Japanese if we
press them slightly. The timing I have recommended is acceptable to
everyone, although it creates a few problems for the Japanese who
would like to wait until the Diet is over on May 28, but who will be
willing to go along.
Participation: The participants should be France, the Federal Republic of
Germany, the United Kingdom, Italy, Canada, Japan, and a representative of
the EC as determined by the European Community.
—As agreed on February 2, I called Prime Minister Trudeau and had the
State Department contact Ambassador Togo. Thus, we have given the Cana-
dian and Japanese governments your considered views on summit site and
timing.
3 Most of the findings in this memorandum were previously submitted to Carter (in
an abbreviated, usually verbatim, form) in the February 2 memorandum from Mondale
entitled “Recommended Actions Stemming from My Visit to Europe and Japan.” Carter’s
decisions on Mondale’s recommendations are recorded on that February 2 memo-
randum. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 31,
“Have State do so” in the margin adjacent to this recommendation. Telegram 32620 to
Paris, February 12, transmitted Carter’s views on the Summit to be conveyed to Giscard.
proved the recommendations below on location and timing, participation, agenda, and a
four-power side meeting.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
Both Schmidt and Giscard wanted tight meetings but they recog-
nized the importance of Italy being there and our need to have Canada
represented. How they will come out on the European Commission is
not clear, particularly since Callaghan is not enthusiastic about having
Roy Jenkins there on a more or less co-equal basis. We favor European
Community participation, with the Europeans working out arrange-
ments. It is up to them to sort out their intra-European politics.
Agenda: The agenda should be developed by personal representatives of
the heads of government. They should not be Ministers (e.g., Foreign Secre-
taries or Treasury Secretaries). The purpose of the preparations should be, in-
sofar as possible, to develop an agenda and the agreed Summit outcome for each
agenda item.
It is clear that Fukuda, Schmidt and Giscard do not want to have
Foreign Ministers or Finance Ministers in charge of the preparations. It
apparently raises political problems within each of their governments.
Everyone wants a well prepared Summit. This means we are em-
barking on a very complicated program of negotiations on substantive
issues leading to joint policy decisions to be announced at the Summit.
Establishing the agenda should feature those issues on which the
Summit is likely to produce results. You have indicated a desire to
name your representative after we agree on the agenda. Instead, I rec-
ommend that you promptly name a specific individual or individuals
as your representative who can draw on different departments and
agencies as appropriate to develop the agenda and serve as the focus
for developing the United States’ substantive position on each of the
agenda items.6
There is no consensus that the Summit should deal with political
and security issues. Both the French and Japanese have demurred. This
is a subject which we can dodge for now and leave to the preparatory
phase, while we maintain our own position.
Four Power Side Meeting: You should indicate to Giscard that you
are willing to participate in a quadripartite meeting at the Summit if it
can be arranged discreetly, on the fringe of the main meetings, with
Berlin discussions as the nominal purpose.7
At the same time you communicate your views to Giscard, you should
also communicate them to the other potential members so that they know what
you are proposing. In informing Giscard, you will suggest that Callaghan
take the lead in coordinating the text and timing of the announcement.
the margin adjacent to his approval: “proceed to give me recommended names for a) po-
litical b) economic leader.”
the phrase “Berlin discussions” and wrote “OK” in the adjacent margin.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
The next step beyond that may be slightly disorderly, but the objective
should be a more or less simultaneous announcement in all capitals
about the time and place.8
The Economic Issues
Global Management: Our economic effort was premised on the con-
cept that the three “locomotive economies”—the United States, Ger-
many and Japan—must at present share responsibility for management of
an increasingly global economy. There was widespread and favorable in-
terest in your program to stimulate the U.S. economy, and we ex-
plained it in some depth.
Our specific goals were (a) significantly more German expansion
and (b) full Japanese achievement of their stated targets, which seem
roughly acceptable. We noted that your program for the United States,
and Fukuda’s for Japan, each approximately 1 percent of our respective
GNPs—but that Schmidt’s equalled only 0.25 percent of Germany’s.
Germany is also running larger external surpluses and has far less in-
flation. Hence we calibrated our encouragement, aiming much more at
Germany (and the Dutch, when I saw their Foreign Minister) than at
Japan. Neither indicated any hostility toward our offering such advice,
and both accepted the basic concept. The Japanese, incidentally, were
delighted to learn that we were not singling them out in this area, and
that the U.S. was no longer focusing on bilateral balances.
I am encouraged by the prospects, though both countries had lots
of excuses and one could not expect an immediate response. Schmidt
has explicitly left open both the size and pace of his program. Fukuda is
negotiating with his opposition on a larger tax cut. By the time of the
summit, or even sooner, I would not be surprised to see some addi-
tional action by both.
Aides to Schmidt invited further pressure on his government for
greater economic stimulus.9 He explained it on the basis of having to
convince the German Central Bank (Bundesbank) of the importance of
stimulus, but I believe it was also aimed at his coalition partner, the
Free Democratic Party (FDP), which is more conservative and is drag-
ging its heels on stimulus.
We encouraged the weaker economies to hang tough in damp-
ening inflation and stabilizing their currencies. Britain’s stabilization
State coordinate notices” in the margin adjacent to this recommendation.
mended that Carter telephone Schmidt “to encourage him to increase the size and pace of
his stimulus package.” Carter wrote “done 2/3” in the margin adjacent to this recommen-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
plan and IMF loan have already been completed. They are taking in for-
eign exchange at a record clip—$2 billion in January alone—and have
thus bought time to try to deal with their fundamental difficulties (low
productivity, an anti-growth tax structure, etc.). The “Barre plan” is
starting to bite in France, but the municipal elections in March could
bring new speculations against the franc. The underlying situation is
shaky in both countries, and unemployment will remain high. Close
surveillance by the U.S. will be essential.
Multilateral Trade Negotiations (MTN): We strongly advocated
rapid and comprehensive revival of the Multilateral Trade Negotia-
tions (MTN) in Geneva as a major element—along with more rapid eco-
nomic growth in the stronger economies—in avoiding protectionism.
I recommend that you promptly appoint a permanent Special Trade
Representative.10
He should begin early consultation with the major protagonists—prob-
ably bilaterally—to begin developing a negotiating package.
The U.S. should press the negotiations as fast as possible while avoiding a
commitment to the end-1977 deadline.
I remain convinced that we must make a major push to move the
MTN or protectionist pressures will grow. There was a notable lack of
enthusiasm for pressing MTN on the part of everyone I talked to except
the Japanese. On the other hand, all countries are worried about our
own possible protectionist moves in the next few months—on steel,
shoes, color TV—which could set a pattern. The British and Italians say
it would put them under “irresistible pressure” to restrict imports. I be-
lieve that the new leadership here and in the European Community in
Brussels may open the possibility for movement on agriculture—which
has been the major stumbling block so far with MTN.
International Monetary Issues: No problems arose over the funda-
mentals of the existing system, based on flexible exchange rates. We
stressed the need to assure adequate international financing capabil-
ities, to tide over the sizable payments deficits which will continue to
arise, but offered no specific proposals—except to suggest that Saudi
Arabia, and perhaps a couple of other OPEC countries, might be
brought into the picture. There was general enthusiasm for the latter
idea, and we may be able to draw on British and French expertise in the
Middle East to develop a specific approach. (However, we were cau-
tioned—by the debtor countries—against creating any new “creditor’s
club”.) In response to questions all over, we indicated that we had not
(Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No memorandum of
conversation of this telephone conversation was found.
take lead” in the margin adjacent to this recommendation.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
yet decided whether to seek Congressional approval for Kissinger’s
OECD “safety net” or go an alternative route.
Our discussions provided many opportunities to express support
for a wide range of important international institutions: EC, IMF,
OECD, GATT (for MTN) and the multilateral aid agencies (notably the
World Bank/IDA). The institutional framework for world economic
management seems to be holding up quite well.
North-South: All countries were intensely interested in whether
your Administration will be “more forthcoming” to the LDCs, on com-
modity agreements and other issues, as the LDCs expect. The French
hope/believe we might be moving toward them; the others basically
fear that we may “leave them alone,” and hence looking negative.
We indicated that no new policies had been adopted, that we were
hard at work on the issues, and that we would consult with them before
adopting any new policies. I did note your intention to increase U.S.
contributions to the multilateral aid agencies, and hit the French—pos-
sibly with some success—on the proposed cutback in their share. One
specific issue is timing of the pending Ministerial meeting.
You should keep your options open on whether CIEC should be held be-
fore or after the Summit. Though all the other countries, including
Canada, favor a CIEC meeting before the Summit, Giscard argued
strongly against it being held before the Summit. He feared it would re-
veal splits among the Allies on North-South issues and create a crisis
atmosphere for the Summit. This is essentially a tactical issue and you
should reserve your position in CIEC timing to see how the developing
countries’ position and Summit preparations develop.11
The Europeans and Japanese are looking to us for leadership and it
is important to engage in a more intensive consultative process,
working toward a common position among the industrialized nations.
[Omitted here is discussion of NATO and security issues,
non-proliferation, reduction of arms sales, the Middle East, Cyprus,
Berlin, Concorde, Iceland, Italy, U.S.-Vatican relations, and Portugal.]
Japan: Fukuda’s March 21–22 visit to Washington can have more
than symbolic meaning if we use the next 7 weeks to prepare to move
forward on several matters of substantive concern to them.
My trip allowed the Japanese to place their positions on such hot
domestic Japanese issues as nuclear proliferation, Korean troop with-
drawals, China policy, potential US countervailing duties, fisheries—
they feel that the fees we will be charging under our new domestic leg-
Canada & Venezuela co-chmn take lead—CIEC before Summit seems better” in the
margin adjacent to a slightly different version of this recommendation.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
islation are too high—and civil aviation on the record before our own
policies are set irrevocably. This satisfies their domestic political needs
and will prepare the ground for more productive discussions in March.
In return, we gently put their feet to the fire on matters such as US
citrus exports, the EC/GOJ steel agreement and Japanese color televi-
sion exports.
Items which require further work prior to Fukuda’s visit include:
—closer monitoring of each others’ economies. I proposed in both Bonn
and Tokyo that the three big engines of the world economy need not
only to work more closely together, but also to monitor each other’s
progress in achieving sufficiently expansionary goals. The Japanese ap-
pear receptive to this and, I suspect, Fukuda would in some ways, even
welcome pressure delicately applied. I would propose that you instruct the
State and Treasury Department to use OECD forums and the “Group of Five”
Deputy Finance Ministers, to do the monitoring in a more systematic way.
—nuclear technology. I see real difficulties coming up here. The
Japanese feel that they signed the NPT in good faith, expecting full
access to an assured supply of nuclear fuel and a complete fuel cycle.
Now they fear they are being lumped in with Brazilians and Pakistanis
and face new obstacles to the achievement of greater energy independ-
ence. I suggested that we consult in detail on this question in the near
future—a suggestion to which they appear responsive. If a GOJ team
could come to the US before the Fukuda visit, it might be possible for
that visit to result in some progress. But I must point out that we ur-
gently need a clear definition of US policy on this matter.
Prime Minister Fukuda is imposing some administrative con-
straints on the exports of color TVs; their economic stimulus program is
roughly equivalent in scale to ours. They told me in confidence that the
government of Japan will probably remove some impediments to US
citrus exports before Fukuda’s visit. The two areas of greatest concern
to the Japanese are your Korean policy and the impact of US non-
proliferation policy on their search for greater energy independence.12
In addition, the Japanese desire:
(1) Some access to Alaskan oil;
(2) a US contribution ($10 million) to the United Nations
University;
(3) rapid and satisfactory completion of the fisheries negotiations;
(4) Greater balance in US-Japan civil air arrangements;
(5) the avoidance of countervailing duties on their color TV
exports.
off the section that begins with this sentence and ends with the sentence “In addition, we
should initiate a study of Alaskan oil and review other matters mentioned above,” and
wrote “Zbig” in the adjacent margin.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
I recommend that we utilize the time prior to Fukuda’s visit to es-
tablish clear policy guidelines toward Korean troop withdrawals and
nuclear technology. In addition, we should initiate a study of Alaskan
oil and review other matters mentioned above.
—Korea. Fukuda, who has been very conservative on security
matters, displayed anxiety over our intent to withdraw ground forces
from Korea. Essentially they want the status quo. I think I was able to
alleviate some GOJ concerns, but we have not heard the end of this. The
Prime Minister will want to discuss this with you in some detail when
he visits. They can adjust to withdrawals provided they are slow, are
accompanied by continued assistance to South Korea and provided
U.S. air units are left in Korea. Done under a prudent timetable and
without pressure from Congress, a gradual reduction in US conven-
tional forces in Korea could serve US interests and objectives. The PRM
process now underway on Korea must be directed toward the develop-
ment of sensible guidelines for the timing and modalities of troop with-
drawals which adequately reflect the concerns of close allies like the
Japanese and the situation on the Peninsula. We should seek to be in a
position to lay out our thoughts in some detail to Fukuda by March 21.
The Korean Foreign Minister will be in Washington March 7; some clear
direction of our intentions conveyed to him in private at that time will
be an essential prerequisite to fruitful consultations.
—China. Fukuda did not conceal his preference for the status quo
in our China policy. But, while the GOJ is apprehensive about precipi-
tate moves in the direction of normalization, I do not believe the Japa-
nese expect to impede US efforts to normalize relations with Peking on
the basis of the Shanghai principles. They wish to be spared any “sur-
prises.” I recommend that you keep the GOJ informed in advance of
any significant initiatives.
—trade. We made some progress here. Fukuda told me in confi-
dence that he feels his government can give us satisfaction on the citrus
fungicide problem within six weeks, though he cannot allow this to be
discussed in public yet. I suspect he hopes to present this to you as a gift
just prior to his trip. He announced publicly that Japan would restrain
its exports of color TV’s to US, and his aides told me this meant a 10
percent cutback in 1977 from 1976. We need to follow up on steel,
though the real impact on us of the EC-Japan deal is minimal.
—the US in Asia. The stop in Tokyo had major regional implica-
tions. The Asians needed to hear that we intend to remain a Pacific
Asian power, that despite Vietnam we do not intend to turn our backs
on the area. We need to find ways to demonstrate that we will preserve
our substantial interests in Asia, not as in the Vietnam-dominated past,
but through new forms of involvement and support for regional
initiatives.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
I did not raise defense matters but at an appropriate time we
should remind Japan about our desire to see qualitative improvements
in their air and naval defense capabilities.
6.
Memorandum From Robert Hormats of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 24, 1977
SUBJECT
Debate Over Financial Support Fund (FSF)
There is currently debate, presently confined to the Solomon-
chaired International Monetary Group, on whether the US should sup-
port, and seek Congressional ratification of, the OECD Financial Sup-
port Fund (FSF), or abandon this approach and seek instead to expand
the resources of the IMF.
The FSF was originally proposed by Kissinger as one element in a
comprehensive industrialized nations response to the economic
problems arising from the 1973–74 oil price increases. It was designed
to provide mid-term financing to OECD countries on a “last-resort
basis” at market-related interest rates.2 All OECD countries except for
France and the US have authorized participation—when confirmed, all
pledges would add up to $25 billion. Congress has opposed participa-
tion to date, arguing: lack of need; undesirable competition with, and
duplication of, IMF functions; insufficient link to tough stabilization
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
of the page, Brzezinski wrote “plse assess more the implications of the two choices—FSF
or IMF—and let us discuss it. ZB” and drew an arrow pointing to Hormats’ name. Aaron
also initialed the memorandum.
sity of Chicago Board of Trustees entitled “The Energy Crisis: Strategy for Cooperative
Action.” (For the text of Kissinger’s speech, see the Department of State Bulletin, De-
Turkey (which signed on May 30, 1975), signed the agreement that would establish the
Financial Support Fund, pending its ratification by member governments. (Telegram
Policy File, D750213–0034)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
conditions by recipients; skepticism that the two-year life of the FSF
was adequate to deal with what is obviously a longer-term problem.
State continues to support the idea of the FSF, arguing that it has
been ratified by nearly all other participants and should not now be
abandoned by the US, that it can provide a substantial amount of offi-
cial financing relatively quickly, that the terms of the FSF are already
agreed upon and negotiated, and that it can be put into action immedi-
ately upon ratification by the US. Treasury opposes the FSF citing
strong Congressional opposition to it on the grounds that the FSF com-
petes with the IMF, is linked to a non-existent energy cooperation ef-
fort, that there would be a divergence between FSF conditionality and
IMF conditionality raising the possibility of conflicts in program and
approach, that the FSF excludes many important third-world countries
with potential financing needs, and that it will not be able to take ad-
vantage of key OPEC donors.
Treasury believes that we should strengthen the role of the IMF ei-
ther through an ad hoc borrowing facility, expanding the General Ar-
rangements to Borrow (i.e. borrowing additional funds directly from
industrialized and perhaps the OPEC nations) or forming a new cred-
itors club. All of these have various degrees of merit. All would clearly
be better able to induce Saudi Arabia to provide financial support to the
weaker economies than the FSF—an important objective which I have
been pushing for a number of months.
This memo is intended primarily to acquaint you with the
problem, and secondarily to solicit your political judgment among the
two approaches. A US contribution to the FSF would require a major ef-
fort on the Hill. On the other hand, it would generate new resources
quickly (which might be essential to aid Portugal, Italy, or even
perhaps Spain over the coming year). It would also be a major manifes-
tation of financial cooperation among the Trilateral nations,3 although
with the admitted drawback of not including important third-world
countries. Abandoning this approach for an IMF-oriented approach
would serve the essential objective of bringing in third-world nations,
but might take a considerable amount of time to negotiate.
My preliminary view is that a number of industrialized nations
may need assistance over the next year; there would need to be funds
available to avoid our having to scurry around for money as we are
now doing in the case of Portugal. The British specifically warned Mon-
3 Apparently a reference to countries represented on the Trilateral Commission, a
non-governmental organization founded in 1973 by Chase Manhattan Bank Chairman
David Rockefeller as an organization devoted to promoting strong relations among the
countries of North America, Western Europe, and Japan. Zbigniew Brzezinski was a
founding member, and Jimmy Carter was a member before his presidency.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
dale against abandoning the FSF unless we were sure we had some-
thing to put in its place.
Moreover, it will be difficult, as our initial venture toward the
longer-term goal of bringing the Saudis, the UAE, etc. into the system,
to ask them abruptly for money before they felt at home in the “club”.
Indeed, doing so might turn them off to longer-term cooperation. In-
stead, we should begin to bring them into the “club” through inviting
them first to participate in meetings of central bankers and finance min-
isters in order to improve their understanding of the system itself and
their stake in it. This would set the stage for their contributing re-
sources to strengthen the functioning of the system. Absent the FSF, we
would need to go to the Saudis almost immediately. Recognizing that
we had no other recourse over the next year but to strengthen the IMF
mechanisms, their bargaining position on the terms on which they
would provide resources to the Fund would be considerably strength-
ened, if they did not reject the idea entirely.4
I anticipate that a USG decision on this will have to be made within
the next two or three weeks. Indecision and delay only complicate
matters further, and weakens American leadership in a vital area of in-
ternational economic cooperation.
Do you have a preference:
FSF approach
Prefer IMF-oriented arrangement
Prefer to wait
See me5
4 Aaron highlighted the last sentence of this paragraph and wrote “Excellent point”
in the margin adjacent to it.
5 Brzezinski did not indicate his preference among these options. Below the op-
tions, Aaron wrote: “ZB—I would be inclined to support FSF if we can link it to IMF ‘con-
ditionality.’ We do not want it to undercut the IMF. We should discuss with Hormats +
maybe others like Ed Fried. DA.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
7.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, March 9, 1977
SUBJECT
Cargo Preference Legislation
You asked, Tab A, for a brief on oil cargo preference legislation.2
Congressman Murphy, Chairman of the House Merchant Marine
and Fisheries Committee, is now holding hearings on H.R. 1037, a bill
to “require that a percentage of US oil imports be carried on US-flag
vessels”. Executive Branch agencies have been asked to testify on
1980, 30% of US-imported oil be transported on privately-owned
US-built and registered commercial vessels. Similar legislation was
pocket-vetoed by President Ford on December 30, 1974 because, as he
then noted, of its substantial adverse effect on the US economy and in-
ternational interests.3
This bill would benefit the US maritime industry by increasing the
utilization of US tankers and jobs. However, it has a number of draw-
backs as well. It would, by extending cargo preferences to commercial
cargoes, deviate from the long-standing US policy of fostering competi-
tion in international shipping; violate most-favored nation and “na-
tional treatment” clauses of our Friendship, Commerce and Navigation
Treaties (which require that each treaty partner provide reciprocal
treatment to the flag vessels of the other party with respect to interna-
tional carriage of commercial cargoes); encourage the adoption of sim-
ilar measures by other countries (particularly oil-exporting countries
who are already demonstrating a tendency to get into the oil shipping
business); force the US consumer to eventually absorb the higher oper-
ating cost of using US-registered vessels as opposed to foreign vessels;
and force the US to underwrite the higher construction costs of new
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
half. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Sounds bad. J.”
2 Tab A, attached but not printed, is the second page of what appears to be one of
Vance’s daily evening reports to Carter. In the margin next to the third item in the report,
on “Oil Cargo Preference Legislation,” Carter wrote, “Zbig—give me brief on this.”
3 For Ford’s “Memorandum of Disapproval of United States Tanker Preference Leg-
islation,” issued December 30, 1974, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States:
Gerald R. Ford, 1974, p. 782.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
ship tonnage in a world already suffering from an unprecedented
tanker surplus.
A diplomatic note expressing “considerable concern”, delivered
on March 4 by the UK, Norwegian, Swedish, Greek and Danish Ambas-
sadors, and senior officials of the Netherlands, Belgian, Japanese and
Finnish Embassies made a number of these points regarding the bill.4
The EPG is now considering whether the Administration should
support or oppose this bill.5
4 Not found. Telegram 49149 to London, Brussels, Copenhagen, Helsinki, Athens,
Rome, Tokyo, The Hague, Oslo, and Stockholm, March 5, transmitted an aide-me´moire
given to Katz that day on the oil cargo preference legislation. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D770076–0269)
5 In a March 15 memorandum to Brzezinski, Hormats urged him to attend an EPG
meeting scheduled for March 16 in order “to express your strong opposition to the pro-
posed cargo preference legislation.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzez-
inski Material, Subject File, Box 16, Economic Policy Group Executive Committee:
8.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, March 12, 1977
SUBJECT
Negotiations in Geneva on the Multifiber Textile Arrangement
Beginning the week of March 14, member countries begin negotiating
renewal of the Multifiber Textile Arrangement (MFA), a multilateral agree-
ment that sets overall standards for bilateral negotiations concerning
textile imports.
The Economic Policy Group has agreed, unanimously, that the United
States should press for straight renewal of MFA, resisting reductions in
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 89, [Treasury Memos] [1]. No classification marking. A
typed notation reads “FYI.” Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Mike—ok. J.C.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
the present permitted rate of overall import growth (6 percent
annually).2
As it stands, MFA affords us the necessary flexibility to seek lower im-
port growth limits for particular products or countries in subsequent
bilateral negotiations. We intend to seek such relief in appropriate
cases.
W. Michael Blumenthal3
2 On March 7, the EPG Executive Committee decided that the U.S. delegate to the
Geneva MFA renewal negotiations “should favor straight extension of MFA and should
not favor tightening of the MFA’s import growth factor unless tightening appears neces-
sary to secure renewal of MFA. Apart from the instructions, however, the administration
would make clear to domestic industry and labor that bilateral quota negotiations would
be aggressively pursued where necessary to prevent undue disruption of U.S. markets by
imports.” (Minutes of the Economic Policy Group Executive Committee, March 7; Carter
Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Subject
Files) The Multi-Fiber Arrangement was renewed in December 1977 for 4 years.
3 Blumenthal signed “Mike” above this typed signature.
9.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs-Designate (Bergsten) to Secretary of
the Treasury Blumenthal1
Washington, March 16, 1977
SUBJECT
Trade Policy Strategy—Meeting on March 17 with Schultze, Strauss and Cooper
Issue
Our trade policy faces five fundamental problems:
(1) Japan is running a trade deficit of $20 billion annually with
OPEC and other resource producing countries, and a services deficit
with all countries of about $7 billion. Hence it must run sizable trade
surpluses with the U.S., Europe, and other LDC’s. Both aggregate and
sectoral (presently, steel and color TV) problems are thus inevitable for
the indefinite future.
(2) The LDCs are coming (textiles, shoes). They are the real threats
in more labor intensive industries. But they must keep going if their de-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
WM Blumenthal 1977. No classification marking. A copy was sent to Solomon.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
velopmental plans are to have any hope, and massive debt problems
avoided.
(3) Our own failure to develop a domestic program of structural adjust-
ment, as you have been discussing in the broad context of fighting
inflation.
(4) Our half-hearted implementation of the anti-dumping and counter-
vailing duty statutes. Virtually every industry complaint centers on “un-
fair” competition by foreign governments, and present law provides
ready remedies whenever such situations can be demonstrated.
(5) Our MTN strategy has not been geared effectively toward
dealing with our domestic problems. Its focus on agriculture is no help
in dealing with problems of government intervention—notably export
subsidies—in the industrial sector.
A Proposed Strategy
(1) A whole new program of structural reform must be at the center.
History indicates that such a program can be worked out. It has been
done in many specific cases outside the trade area—Studebaker,
Armour Packing, and numerous Department of Defense cases.
Three features are necessary:
—More money, though not necessarily a huge amount.
—An aggressive individual to manage the program, or perhaps dif-
ferent individuals for each key industry (starting with shoes).
—A focus on communities, rather than on firms or workers per se, as
is done by the Defense Department.
(2) A tough Treasury stance on anti-dumping and countervailing. This
might diffuse much of the pressure on steel, and some on shoes.
(3) Reorientation of our MTN strategy to downplay agriculture and
focus instead on export subsidies and other government interventions.
Such a reorientation could be announced at the summit, and provide
major help for our domestic effort.
(4) Where necessary, until the adjustment program becomes effec-
tive and credible, limited resort to import restraints.
—Firming up of Japan’s commitment to reduce its color TV ex-
follow up the commitment made to me during the Mondale trip,2 and
2 Bergsten discussed his observations while accompanying Mondale on his trip to
Western Europe and Japan in a February 2 memorandum to Blumenthal. On the issue of
Japanese TV exports, Bergsten reported that “Fukuda assured us that they will keep color
TV exports under control. MITI gave me the details: a 10 percent cutback from 1976 via
“administrative guidance.” But we will have to watch them like hawks, on this and
steel.” (National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for In-
of Mondale’s trip to Western Europe and Japan, see Document 5.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
the Japanese are now maximally willing to compromise to defuse the
issue prior to Fukuda’s visit.
—A straight tariff increase on shoes (and perhaps color TVs), to be
phased down over two years as the structural adjustment reforms
phase in.
—An international sugar agreement to deal with that product via
floor prices, buttressed by direct U.S. subsidies and higher tariffs is
necessary.
(5) Continued vigilance in minimizing Japan’s intervention in the
exchange markets.3 Appreciation of the yen resolved the U.S.–Japan
trade war of 1969–1972, and is a necessary condition for keeping that
problem under control now.
(6) Negotiation with key LDC’s, such as Brazil, of overall under-
standings concerning the breadth and depth of their export subsidies. We can
accept such subsidies only if they are limited in extent and phased
down over time.
Recommendation:
That you advocate all or part of this proposed program to our col-
leagues. I would be glad to elaborate on each, if you like the basic
approach.4
3 In a February 22 memorandum to Blumenthal, Bergsten noted the appreciation of
the yen during Carter’s 4 weeks in office and suggested “that there is an intimate causal
relationship, based on what must look to the Japanese like a carefully orchestrated Amer-
ican offensive.” (National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
4 Blumenthal did not indicate his preference with respect to Bergsten’s recommen-
dation. No minutes of Blumenthal’s March 17 meeting were found.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
10.
Memorandum From Robert Hormats of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 21, 1977
SUBJECT
EPG Meeting on March 21: Footwear
among other things, a draft options paper (Tab A) to the President on
the footwear import relief case.2 This will probably be the last inter-
agency meeting on shoes because the President must take action before
April 9. In view of the extreme importance of this case for our foreign
and economic relations, I strongly recommend that you attend the meeting
and strongly oppose shoe import restrictions.
Background
The STR memo points out that this is the largest case of its type in
domestic footwear industry employs 170,000 workers in 36 states.
(in volume terms) accounted for 46% of domestic consumption as op-
posed to 22% in 1968.
Interest in this case is running high both at home and abroad. The
New York Times and Washington Post both had editorials on March 18 ar-
guing against a protectionist US trade policy.3 The US footwear in-
dustry and labor unions see this as a do-or-die proposition and de-
mand import relief. Congress, particularly the Senatorial contingent
from the Northeast, wants the President to restrict imports; they may
attempt to override his decision if he fails to do so. My best Congres-
sional sources say there are likely to be insufficient votes to override,
but a Presidential turndown on import relief would certainly sour the
President’s relations with Congress.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 89, Economic Policy Group: 1977. Confidential. Sent
for action.
nied import relief to the footwear industry, opting instead to rely on adjustment assist-
ance. For Ford’s memoranda to the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations and to
Congress on adjustment assistance for the footwear industry, which were released on
II, pp. 1134–1137.
3 The editorial in The New York Times entitled “U. S. Tariffs, Global Risks” appeared

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
On the other hand, our trading partners are worried about rising
protectionism in the US and would find it difficult to resist similar de-
mands from their own industries if we show them the way. We could
be opening a Pandora’s Box of protectionism—which would have ex-
tremely adverse political repercussions. More specifically, key friends
and allies such as Italy, Spain, Korea, Taiwan and Brazil are major shoe
exporters to the US. And, a decision to restrain imports would clearly
have an adverse impact on the London Summit and the North-South
dialogue.
Options
The US International Trade Commission (ITC) has unanimously
recommended that the President establish a “tariff rate quota” system
calling for a stiff (40%) increase in duties on all imports above 1974
ports totalled 370 million, so the potential trade impact is significant.
The STR memo outlines three broad policy options:
I. Adjustment assistance (to help workers who have lost jobs as the
result of imports, to help those businesses either become more competi-
tive or move into some other line, or to help communities attract new
industries) but no import restrictions.
II. The ITC recommendation.
III. A modified (more liberal) version of the ITC tariff rate quota. It
also mentions several other possible options including an increase in
duties and orderly marketing arrangements. STR recommends Option
III (modified tariff rate quota). This option would call for use of a
mended by the ITC. The effect would be to enlarge country allocations
and give newer suppliers (Taiwan and Korea) a larger share of the
market that better reflects the recent increase in imports from these
countries.
Previous interagency meetings on this subject have been inconclu-
sive—with much needless debate about the intricacies of various op-
tions. Aside from CEA, which favors adjustment assistance and no im-
port relief, no other agency has yet been willing to reveal its hand. State
and, perhaps, Treasury might be prepared at this meeting to table pro-
posals for a comprehensive and expanded program of adjustment
assistance, which will be a significant departure from the old, ineffec-
imposition of a tariff rate quota on shoe imports. The Commission forwarded its recom-
mendation to Carter on February 8. (Edwin L. Dale, Jr., “New Curbs Asked on Shoe Im-
Jane Hinkle, “Shoe Industry Seeks Carter’s Protection,” The Washington Post, March 9,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
tive programs. However, they are working separately on this project,
and their programs may not dovetail. The Treasury plan will likely call
for the establishment of a Trade Adjustment Bank, a development bank
for the domestic economy. The State proposal would entail grants and
loans on the order of $50 million. Both see the need for a “footwear
czar” with overall responsibility for the assistance programs. DOD and
Agriculture may support such a proposal. Strauss, Labor, and Com-
merce will probably argue for some form of import relief.
RECOMMENDATION
Option I (enriched adjustment assistance) is the only option that
would not require a significant cutback in imports, would not penalize the
American consumer and would deal with the real problem in this case (i.e., the
inefficiency of certain sectors of the footwear industry). We recommend that
you support this option as articulated by Cooper and, perhaps, Blu-
menthal (although Blumenthal might combine it with an option to
moderately restrict imports).
As a fallback, but only as a desperation fallback, adjustment assist-
ance coupled with a brief (2–3 year), liberalized, tariff quota system
would be tolerable. Thus, while not giving up on Option I, you should
attempt to ensure that Option III is fashioned in a liberal way—i.e. that
the STR option to give some latitude for the newer entrants into the
market (mostly developing countries) and to avoid cutbacks for older
exporters such as Italy, Spain and Brazil]. All three are politically im-
portant, have large trade deficits, and face difficult financial situations.
To limit their exports below 1976 levels would be both politically and
economically harmful to our interests. The STR option (III) increases
which is excellent; but it cuts Spain from 38 to 37 million, and Brazil
from 27 to 25 million. You should accordingly argue for a larger overall
quota level—above STR’s proposed figures of 322 million pairs—to
avoid cutbacks in these countries and raise the level for others as well.
[You should not, in this argument, imply support for this option, but
point out that you are simply trying to improve it to make it more ac-
ceptable if selected by the President.]5
BASIC TALKING POINTS
—I take it that we are not going to make a decision here, but are
merely trying to refine options for the President.
5 Brackets in the original.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—(After Cooper presents State’s adjustment assistance option)—
Clearly from a foreign policy point of view this version of Option I is
preferable; and it also has appeal as a means of aiding adjustment
among workers, businesses and communities.
—The ITC decision is too restrictive. It would trigger not only re-
taliation—but worse, emulation—we would risk a sudden burst of pro-
tectionist measures. Other nations would clearly see this as an excuse
for imposing protectionist barriers for which these workers and indus-
tries are pressing hard. Callaghan and others have warned the Presi-
dent of this risk; and Mondale was also warned of it. The London
Summit and relations with our allies and friends would be severely
harmed, and there would be serious financial consequences due to cur-
tailed capacity from such countries as Italy, Spain and Brazil.
—The STR option would likely have a similar effect, and I am not
convinced it can be modified to avoid triggering emulation or retalia-
tion. I would, however, like to see the quota of 322 million pairs raised
so that Spain and Brazil are not rolled back below 1976. Both have
financial difficulties and both are extremely important politically.
Clearly, it makes no economic or political sense to cut back their ex-
ports; they should have a higher level than 1976. This would improve
Option III.
Tab A
Draft Memorandum From the Special Representative for
Trade Negotiations-Designate (Strauss) to President Carter6
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Nonrubber Footwear Import Relief Case
Under the Trade Act’s provisions, you must decide by April 9
whether to grant relief to the domestic footwear industry in the form of
restrictions on shoe imports, as recommended by the U.S. International
Trade Commission (USITC). The Commission recommended that a
tariff of 40 percent be imposed on most nonrubber footwear imports
above the 1974 level.
The law allows you the option of deciding that such relief would
not be in the national economic interest. A decision not to grant relief,
6 Confidential.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
or to grant relief different from that recommended by the USITC, can
be overridden by Congress by concurrent resolution.
Background
This is the largest case of this type in trade history, involving $1.4
billion in imports from 75 countries, shoe firms employing around
the consumer price index.
The shoe industry has been attempting to get Government action
to stem imports for almost a decade. Five separate investigations have
been conducted, with relief denied as recently as last year. During this
period the number of firms in the industry has declined by about 40
to 164,000). Unemployment in the industry is at 11 percent compared to
a national rate of 8 percent.
During the same period, 1968–1976, while domestic production of
shoes declined by almost one-third (with a slight recovery in 1976), im-
ports doubled, moving from a U.S. market share of one-fifth to almost
one-half. In 1968 most of these imports were leather, primarily from
Italy and Spain, with a substantial volume of vinyl shoes from Japan,
and a lesser amount from Taiwan. Now the market positions have
shifted so that by volume Taiwan is the largest exporter to the United
lion), Spain (39 million), and Brazil (27 million). Japan has ceased being
an important supplier. Some developing countries and Eastern Euro-
pean countries are beginning to increase their shipments here.
The trend in the domestic industry is toward concentration, with
the 21 largest firms producing over half of domestic output. The larger
firms are generally profitable and can compete with the imports. Many
of the smaller firms cannot. The greatest difficulty the U.S. industry has
is the differential in wages between developing countries and our own
country). Since shoe production is very labor intensive, the import
share of the U.S. market is likely to grow.
Factors Favoring Granting Relief
Trade Act criteria met. The industry has clearly been injured by im-
ports. There have been large declines in production and employment in
the past decade, soaring imports, and numerous firms with losses or
low profits.
Credibility with Congress, import-competing industries and labor. This
appears to be the type of case Congress had in mind for import relief. In
1974, the Administration promised import relief for footwear in order
to obtain support for the Trade Act. Such relief, however, was not

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
given. Your authority for trade negotiations is implicitly conditioned
on granting relief to industries that are injured by imports.
Adjustment assistance is not an effective alternative. No one has been
able to design a program of meaningful federal aid to make shoe firms
competitive if they are declining, nor to retrain and relocate a work
force that consists substantially of women over 50 and of minorities.
Import restrictions would have the short term effect of encouraging in-
vestment in more efficient methods of production and the development
of better marketing programs.
Congressional sentiment. The shoe industry has less political force in
Congress than many other industries, but there is much sympathy for
this declining “basic” United States industry. Inaction on this case
would almost certainly be subject to a vote in each house. The risk of an
override is substantial, because of general sympathy for the plight of
this industry, and because shoes are produced in 36 states. An override
would be seen as a substantial set-back both here and abroad to Presi-
dential leadership in setting U.S. trade policy.
Factors Against Granting Relief
Inflationary impact. The consumer cost of increased protection
would be heavy, ranging from about $145 million to over $1 billion the
first year, depending on the restrictiveness of the remedy. Shoes ac-
count for 1.4 percent of the consumer price index.
Protectionism abroad. Internationally, U.S. leadership against pro-
tectionism would be weakened. Other countries will feel more free to
protect their own industries, from which actions the world economy
and the United States economy would suffer.
Impact on foreign suppliers. Most of the exporters of shoes to this
country are in a far worse economic position than we are, many with
very severe balance-of-payments and debt positions. Our restrictions
could also radicalize developing countries with an important stake in
this market, resulting in an adverse impact on our economic relations
with those countries generally.
Long-term ineffectiveness of relief. No form of remedy will prevent
the longer term contraction of the industry. It is likely that a core of
competitive firms will remain even without import relief.
Possible wind-fall benefits. Import relief will benefit mainly the large,
integrated firms that account for a major part of production and com-
pete profitably. Legislation providing for effective federal assistance (if
an appropriate program could be designed) would help those who are
injured, without giving windfalls to healthy firms at the expense of the
consumer.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
Options
You have various options involving how much stimulus to give to
production and employment, if any, and how much added cost con-
sumers should be asked to bear, if any.
I. No import restrictions
A. Adjustment assistance (mainly loans or loan guarantees to firms
and supplemental unemployment compensation to workers).
B. A new special program with increased benefits that could be de-
veloped to provide effective help to the injured firms, workers and
communities.
II. Increase the tariff to 40 percent on imports above the 1974 level
(a tariff rate quota) as proposed by the USITC. The 40 percent over
quota rate would be phased down in the fourth and fifth year. The
quota is allocated among countries on the basis of their 1974 market
shares.
III. Modify the tariff rate quota (TRQ) of the USITC (Tab A).7
average level and divide the TRQ between imports valued at $2.50/
pair or less and those valued over $2.50/pair in order to assure a con-
tinued supply of low cost footwear for consumers. Include athletic foot-
wear valued over $8.00/pair, which the USITC excluded. Allocate
country quotas according to 1974–76 shares of the U.S. market so as to
reflect more recent trade patterns than the USITC formula.
average level plus five percent of 1974–76 imports so as to provide
growth for newer suppliers. The over quota rate of 40 percent would be
phased down during the five year period (as recommended by the
USITC) but the level of imports entering before the over quota rate ap-
plied would remain the same throughout the period.
IV. Other import relief options:
A. A straight tariff increase, e.g., to 30 percent as proposed by one
Commissioner. The present tariff rates range from 6 to 20 percent and
average 8.5 percent.
7 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Modified Version
of ISITC Tariff Rate Quota (TRQ).” Also attached, but not printed, are Tabs B through F.
Tab B is an undated paper entitled “Considerations the Trade Act Directs the President to
Take Into Account.” Tab C is an undated paper entitled “Adjustment Assistance Given to
Firms.” Tab D is an undated paper entitled “Adjustment Assistance Given to Workers.”
Tab E is an undated paper entitled “The Effect of Import Relief on U.S. Trading Partners.”
Tab F is an undated paper entitled “Key Non-Rubber Footwear Data.”
8 This option could be made more or less restrictive by adjusting the over quota
rate. [Footnote in the original.]
9 This option could be made more or less restrictive by adjusting the over quota
rate. [Footnote in the original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
B. A quota placing an absolute ceiling on imports, e.g., at the 1975
import level of 287 million pairs, as proposed by the industry.
C. Negotiate restraints with foreign suppliers (orderly marketing
agreements), based on absolute limits or a tariff rate quota. Under the
Trade Act you would have 90 days after April 9 to negotiate such agree-
ments before restrictions would have to enter into force.
Adjustment assistance can be combined with any of the above im-
port relief options.
On balance, the arguments favor some form of import relief. How-
ever, to increase the effectiveness and saleability of a less restrictive
remedy than proposed by the USITC, it would be desirable to couple
any import relief action with a special adjustment assistance program,
which could be developed on a priority basis and the necessary legisla-
tion obtained before the end of the year.
Among the options, a tariff increase sufficient to generate any sig-
nificant amount of production and employment is probably ruled out
because the European Community, and possibly other suppliers,
would retaliate against a large volume of U.S. exports. Agricultural
products would be key targets.
The quota option interferes most with market forces and at any
level acceptable to the industry would entail huge costs to consumers.
Orderly marketing agreements would prolong the agony of im-
posing restrictions. Pressure could arise for another textile-type agree-
ment. Practical considerations (e.g., the 90 day statutory deadline)
would probably prevent negotiation with all of the countries involved.
The EC would not negotiate and others would resist and resent any
cut-back from current levels. The industry would oppose any nego-
tiable level of restraints.
A tariff rate quota offers the flexibility needed to provide relief ac-
ceptable to the Congress at lower costs than other import relief options.
The USITC remedy, however, requires certain modifications as sum-
marized in Option III above and spelled out in Tab A.
The modified TRQ has the selling point on the Hill of being the
same form of relief as that of the Commission. The variations are defen-
sible because:
base was the lowest level of imports since 1970.
2. Country allocations should reflect more recent trade patterns
suppliers. 1976 should not be used because the EC would be cut back,
thus generating major frictions jeopardizing broader trade objectives.
and under will avoid shifts in imports to higher priced models and

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
maintain a large supply of less expensive footwear. The alternative of
excluding the lower price footwear would make the remedy applicable
to only 57 percent of imports and give no remedy to domestic produc-
tion in competing retail price brackets (about 26 percent of total do-
mestic production).
4. Addition of a “growth basket” of 15 million pairs would allow
for some growth from newer suppliers whose quota allocation was
below their 1976 shipments. This growth basket would be very impor-
tant in countering foreign countries’ claims for compensation or retalia-
tion. Including the basket, the TRQ would allow a level of imports at
regular duties that is approximately half way between that of the
USITC and the 1976 import volume.
5. While consumer costs would be increased, the burden would be
less than under other saleable import relief options.
The interagency Trade Policy Staff Committee and Trade Policy
Review Group have considered the USITC report and various op-
tions. The agencies represented on these bodies take the following
positions:10
Decision
Option I. No import restrictions
A. Existing adjustment assistance
B. Special adjustment assistance program
Option II. Trade Commission remedy
Option III. Modified version of Commission remedy
Option
amended as noted
See me11
10 The various agency positions were not included in this draft memorandum.
11 No decision is indicated on this draft memorandum.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
11.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs-Designate (Bergsten) to Secretary of
the Treasury Blumenthal1
Washington, March 21, 1977
SUBJECT
Shoes—For Today’s EPG Meeting
I have looked long and hard at the shoe case, hunting for a reason-
able compromise. Such compromises are available for color television
sets and sugar, and we are actively pursuing them. But I have concluded
that we should limit our shoe action to beefed-up structural reform, for six
basic reasons:
1. The industry is a chronic case of inexorable consolidation and
decline. Import relief won’t help the small firms; it certainly won’t
trigger increased investment. The big ones don’t need it.
2. Ford’s decision to avoid import relief in May 1976,2 despite his
“commitment” to the industry, is the benchmark against which our decision
will be judged—not the ITC or industry recommendations.
3. This is especially true as it will be our first big one. Any restrictions
will be widely interpreted as presaging “a protectionist tilt,” with severe
costs, even if subsequently proven to be unfounded.
4. This will be the only big U.S. trade decision prior to the summit.
(Sugar, being agricultural, is viewed differently.) Adoption of restric-
tions would greatly weaken the President’s position, and significantly under-
mine our efforts to (a) strengthen the trade pledge and (b) rejuvenate the
MTN.
5. The effect of restrictions on the North-South dialogue would also be se-
vere. Twenty-two separate countries, virtually all of them LDCs, would
be hit with sharp cutbacks (even if the base period is liberalized).
1 Source: National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
Group (EPG) 1977. Confidential. Sent through Solomon. Printed from a copy that indi-
cates that Bergsten and Solomon initialed the memorandum. Tabs A–E are not attached.
A list at the end of the memorandum identifies them: Tab A, “STR paper” (printed as Tab
A to Document 10), Tab B, “Economic Effects of Various Options”; Tab C, “Editorials on
Shoe Case” (see footnote 3, Document 10); Tab D, “Analysis of Various Options;” and Tab
E, “Detailed Description of Possible Structural Reform Program for Shoes.”
wear industry. See footnote 2, Document 10.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
6. Perhaps most important is the broad foreign policy effect. The coun-
tries to be hit hardest would be among those most important to us, and
with whom relations are most delicate:
a. Italy—Eurocommunism, balance of payments crises
b. Spain—perhaps next big economic crisis, battling to restore
democracy
c. Brazil—already rejected U.S. military aid; non-proliferation and
human rights confrontations; must be hit on several other economic
fronts (countervailing duties, tax rebates)
d. Korea—panicked over announced U.S. troop withdrawals,
human rights offensive
e. Taiwan—economic ties increasingly critical as U.S. normaliza-
tion with PRC progresses
f. Mexico—economic crisis, main industry in several states with
overall unemployment rates of 40 percent, hence closely linked to
illegal alien problem; agreement with Lopez Portillo seeks increased
access to U.S. market
g. Also key to Greece, Uruguay, several Eastern Europeans and
others.
The main argument for import relief is the threat of a Congres-
sional override. But most observers believe that the shoe supporters
can’t override on their own, and we can move on color television and sugar
to avoid any risk of a joint step.
RECOMMENDATIONS:
1. That you oppose any resort to import relief for shoes, coupled if
necessary with agreement to move on color television (Japanese export
restraints or higher tariffs a la ITC) and sugar (an international agree-
ment with floor prices, deficiency payments and/or sliding tariffs).
2. If shoe import relief is deemed necessary, a formula less restric-
tive than the STR proposals:
a. A hike in the over-quota tariff to 20 percent instead of 40 percent
c. A three-year phase-down of the duty and a “phase up” of the
quota (instead of five years for the former only)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
12.
Memorandum of Conversation1
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Takeo Fukuda, Prime Minister of Japan
Vice President Walter Mondale
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Iichiro Hatoyama, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Zbigniew Brzezinski, National Security Advisor
Sunao Sonoda, Minister of State and Chief Cabinet Secretary
Thomas Shoesmith, Charge d’Affaires, American Embassy, Japan
Fumihiko Togo, Japanese Ambassador
Keisuke Arita, Deputy Vice Foreign Minister
Richard Holbrooke, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia
Toshio Yamazaki, Director General
Hisashi Owada, Private Secretary to the Prime Minister
Koji Watanabe, Division Chief, First Section, North American Affairs Bureau,
Foreign Ministry
Henry Owen
Michael Armacost, Senior Staff Member, NSC (Notetaker)
Robert Hormats, Senior Staff Member, NSC
Ryuichiro Yamazaki (Interpreter)
James Wickel (Interpreter)
William Sherman, Japan Country Director, Department of State
The President began by outlining to the large meeting the points
discussed in his preceding private talk with Prime Minister Fukuda.2
[Omitted here is discussion of non-proliferation and nuclear
reprocessing.]
The President, turning to a new subject, referred to the impact of
accelerated imports of certain commodities from Japan on the U.S. un-
employment rate. He noted that the shoe and color TV industries are
particularly hard hit at present. Noting the International Trade Com-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Cabinet Room, ended at 11:37 a.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s
Daily Diary) Fukuda made an official visit to the United States March 20–23. Memoranda
of conversation of Carter’s March 21 meetings with Fukuda are in the Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 34, Memcons: President:
brary, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) A memorandum of conversation is
in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 34,
Memcons: President: 3/77.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
mission recommendations regarding color TV imports;3 the President
indicated he would like to avoid both import restrictions and increased
tariffs. But, he said, he regarded Japanese export levels of color TVs to
the United States in 1976 excessive, and would like a government-
to-government agreement limiting the number of such exports. Such an
export restraint agreement would enable him to take actions that
would not disrupt efforts to reach long term solutions to these
problems which we hope to resolve in the GATT. The President sug-
gested, if there were no objections, a level of about 2.5 million color TV
imports from Japan this year, and affirmed that he would be happy to
negotiate that level privately if the Japanese were agreeable.
Prime Minister Fukuda reiterated his belief that the high color TV
export figures for 1976 were an unusual phenomenon about which he
had expressed concern at the time. He said he had already asked the
electronics industry to exhibit self-restraint. He said that the Japanese
Government did not have the capacity to impose such restraints le-
gally, in view of Japan’s antitrust laws. But Fukuda emphasized that
export levels this year would not reach 2.7 million sets as they did last
year. The Prime Minister indicated that he fully appreciated the Presi-
dent’s concerns, and he expressed willingness to hold government-
to-government talks on the subject after the ITC report was in.
The President emphasized the fact that he did not have much time
on this issue. Having received ITC’s recommendations on color TV’s
and shoes, he would be compelled to reach decisions on shoes by April
9, and color TV’s a bit later.
Prime Minister Fukuda said that he hoped that the President’s ref-
would not get out of the room. If the matter became public, it would be-
come an obstacle to the negotiation of an agreement.
The President noted that he had gotten the figure from Fred
Bergsten of the Department of Treasury, who in turn had obtained it
from an official of the Ministry of International Trade and Industry in
Tokyo in late January. He added that he also would not like a figure
mentioned outside the room because 2.5 million TV sets is a large
figure and he would not like his people to know that he was such a
poor bargainer.
[Omitted here is discussion of China, civil aviation, a potential visit
by Carter to Japan, U.S.-Japanese relations, and a Japanese seat on the
UN Security Council.]
3 On March 14, the USITC found that imports of color televisions were causing in-
Lewis, “Tariff is Urged for TV Imports by Trade Body,” The New York Times, March 15,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
13.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, March 24, 1977
SUBJECT
Cargo Preference Legislation (H.R. 1037)
Executive Summary
H.R. 1037 provides that 20% of the U.S. oceanborne oil imports will
be carried by U.S. tankers, with the percentage rising to 30% by 1980.
The EPG has reviewed H.R. 1037 and is unanimous in opposing it for a
number of reasons, including cost and inflationary impact, adverse im-
pact on the Navy shipbuilding program, precedent for other countries,
violation of treaties, and exacerbation of the world tanker service.
The EPG has also considered possible amendments to H.R. 1037, such as
extended timetable of implementation, reduced preference per-
centages, construction subsidies, and allowance for foreign-built tanker
participation. We have also considered supporting an amended H.R.
1037 in conjunction with reductions in the maritime subsidy program.
The EPG was unanimous, again, that the bill will be unsatisfactory even in
amended form.
During the campaign, you did make statements which maritime in-
terests understand as commitments to support cargo preference. Some
alternative initiatives to assist the maritime industry would mitigate adverse
political reaction from a negative stand on cargo preference, and you
may wish to consider such alternatives as described in this memo-
randum. The EPG has not staffed out in detail these proposals, but we
felt it appropriate to seek your guidance before proceeding further. In any
event we should not take a formal public position until there has been addi-
tional consultation with the Congress.
Options
The Options are:2
Option A: Oppose H.R. 1037 and take no further action.
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
ident has seen.” Attached is an undated note from Carter to Eizenstat that reads: “Stu—
Check w/Congressional leaders or staffs. Then report to me. I want to build up MM
[Merchant Marine] but with minimum adverse effect on consumers—HR 1037 may be
best way—but I doubt it.” Hutcheson forwarded the memorandum to Eizenstat under
cover of a March 28 note. (Ibid.)
2 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to any of these options.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
Option B–1: Support H.R. 1037 with amendments.
Option B–2: Support H.R. 1037 with amendments in conjunction
with reductions in the maritime subsidy program.
Option C: Seek postponement of legislative action. (EPG to give ur-
gent consideration to possible new initiatives.)
Full discussion of these options follows.
Discussion of Options
H.R. 1037 provides that 20 percent of U.S. ocean-borne oil imports
will be carried by U.S.-flag, U.S.-built tankers, with the preference per-
bills with similar provisions have been introduced in the Senate.
The Economic Policy Group (EPG) has reviewed H.R. 1037, and is unan-
imous in opposing it. Advantages and disadvantages considered by the
EPG include:
Advantages
—Tanker Safety and Pollution Avoidance—Advantages are those
which stem from existing superior U.S. standards. Future improve-
ment of standards constitutes a separate issue.
—National Security—Advantage would lie in the capability to
move essential oil imports in U.S.-flag rather than less reliable foreign-
flag ships. U.S.-flag tanker fleet is inadequate for this purpose.
—Employment—Would generate 13,000 to 49,000 shipyard and
supporting industry jobs, depending on the level of U.S. oil imports
and the duration of the shipbuilding program, plus 2,100 to 4,800 sea-
going jobs.
—Balance of Payments—Could improve the U.S. balance by $170
million to $250 million. Treasury notes that the reduction in net U.S.
payments could create upward pressure on the exchange rate for the
dollar, which would make U.S. exporters less competitive.
Disadvantages
—Cost and Inflationary Impact—Would cost an estimated $560 mil-
barrels/day and $1,030 million at 12 million barrels/day. Spread over
total U.S. oil consumption, the additional cost would be .18 to .28
cents/gallon. Spread only over the reserved cargo, the cost would be
—Adverse Impact on Navy Shipbuilding Program—This was a reason
for the veto of the similar 1974 bill. While not inevitable, it is a matter of
some concern to DOD.
—Precedent for Other Countries—State feels that it would encourage
the adoption of similar measures by other countries. Advocates note
that many other countries already have cargo preference.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—Reversal of U.S. Policy—U.S. policy has favored free competition
for commercial cargoes.
—Violation of Treaties—Would be inconsistent with existing U.S.
obligations under more than 30 bilateral commercial treaties.
—Addition to World Tanker Surplus—Foreign tankers totalling more
than 30 million DWT are not in layup. Tanker prices are much below
U.S. tanker construction costs.
The EPG has considered possible amendments to H.R. 1037 to make it
more acceptable. It is unanimous, however, in the view that the bill would be
unsatisfactory even in amended form. Modifications considered include:
1. Extend implementation timetable—Would reduce near term cost
impact and might mitigate foreign objection, but would fail to over-
come basic objections.
2. Reduce ultimate preference percentages—Would reduce advantages
and disadvantages proportionately.
3. Provide operating and construction differential subsidies for preference
tankers—Would minimize direct consumer impact by transferring most
of cost to the general taxpayer.
4. Allow some foreign-built tanker participation—Would materially re-
duce costs, potential impact on Navy program, and addition to world
overtonnage. Would not obviate basic foreign policy objections.
(It is understood that U.S. maritime unions and shipbuilders
would not object to some limited level of foreign-built tanker
participation.)
During the election campaign, you made a number of statements under-
stood and remembered by maritime interests as commitments to sup-
port cargo preference. Some of these statements were quite categorical.
A decision against cargo preference, which is recommended by the EPG on
economic and foreign policy grounds, would be viewed by the maritime
unions, and probably by the AFL/CIO generally as the breaking of a promise. It
is possible that some alternative initiative or combination of initiatives to assist
the maritime industry would mitigate somewhat the anticipated adverse
political reaction to a negative decision on cargo preference.
The EPG believes that under the stated circumstances the decision
must be made by the President, and three basic options are worthy of
consideration:
OPTION A—Oppose H.R. 1037 and take no further action.
OPTION B–1. Support H.R. 1037 with amendments. Would be con-
sistent with campaign commitments. (An acceptable amendment
package, including some combination of the four above noted sug-
gested amendments, would have to be developed under this Option.)
B–2. Support H.R. 1037 with amendments in conjunction with reduc-
tions in the maritime subsidy program.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
OPTION C—Seek postponement of legislative action pending develop-
ment of the Administration position. We would then give urgent consider-
ation within the EPG to new maritime initiatives other than cargo prefer-
ences.3 Potential initiatives include:
—Support legislative and regulatory initiatives to facilitate expan-
sion of the U.S.-flag dry bulk carrier fleet. (There are currently only 16
active U.S.-flag dry bulkers.)
—Support “3rd Flag”4 legislation intended to eliminate predatory
rate cutting practices of carriers, particularly Communist country car-
riers, who serve U.S. trades other than those with their own countries.
Basic intent is to minimize Soviet merchant fleet inroads into U.S. for-
eign trade.
—Support “all-American” route for Alaskan north slope gas vice
trans-Canada route. All-American route would generate significant U.S.
employment and would involve as many as 11 large U.S.-built lique-
fied natural gas-carrying ships and more ships in future years oper-
ating between Alaska and the West Coast.
—Repeal U.S. Income Tax deferral provisions relating to shipping in-
come received by foreign subsidiaries of U.S. corporations. This so-
called “Subpart F” income exclusion constitutes a tax subsidy ($90 mil-
lion to $140 million/year) to U.S.-owned foreign flag shipping.
—Support additional bilateral shipping agreements. Opposed by many
in the Executive Branch as contrary to U.S. free competition policy,
such agreements are increasingly common and provide substantial
benefits to ship operators.
—Support extension of U.S. cabotage laws (Jones Act)5 to the Virgin
Islands for oil. Legislation to effect this was reported out by the Senate
Commerce Committee in 1976 and has been reintroduced. It would
mean about 2,000 seagoing jobs and employment for about 25 tankers.
3 In a March 26 memorandum to Carter, Eizenstat indicated his support for Option
C and suggested that if Carter decided in favor of Option C, he should consult selected
Congressional representatives “to get their assessment of the strength of Congress’ com-
mitment to Cargo Preference Legislation, as well as to give them a sense of involvement.”
Eizenstat also advised a meeting between administration officials and maritime industry
representatives “to explain why the Administration cannot support Cargo Preference
and to discuss the alternatives we are interested in pursuing.” (Carter Library, Records of
4 “Third flag” shipping refers to the carriage of cargo between two countries by a
ship that is registered in neither the exporting nor the importing country, but instead in a
third country.
5 A reference to the cabotage regulations in the Merchant Marine Act of 1920 (often
referred to as the Jones Act), which stipulate that cargo transported between U.S. ports
must be carried in ships that are built and registered in the United States and owned and
predominantly operated by Americans.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—Provide for additional contract manning of Navy support ships. Con-
tract manning of over 100 fleet support ships now crewed by military
personnel, plus some MSC ships now manned by civil service crews,
would be technically feasible. Costs might be marginally higher, but
this would strengthen the Navy–merchant marine bond and would be
considered beneficial by the industry.
Thus far the EPG has formally reviewed only Options A and B, and has
reached a negative conclusion in both cases. We have not yet staffed out in de-
tail the various proposals under Option C, but we felt it appropriate to seek
your guidance at this stage before proceeding further. I should note,
however, that there are likely to be economic and foreign policy
disadvantages to most if not all the potential initiatives listed under
Option C.
You may wish to consult further with Secretary Kreps who has taken
the lead in developing this issue. I would also advise that we not take a
formal public position until there has been additional consultation with the
Congress.
14.
Memorandum From Robert Hormats of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 26, 1977
SUBJECT
Shoes: EPG Meeting, March 28
The EPG will hold a “principals only” meeting on Monday, March
The President must decide before April 9 whether to grant or deny im-
port relief as recommended by the US International Trade Commission
(ITC). I strongly recommend that you support Option I, calling for no import
restrictions.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
2 The meeting took place in the Roosevelt Room of the White House on March 28
minutes of the meeting were found.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
You are familiar with some of the details of this case from my pre-
vious memorandum (Tab II).3 After innumerable interagency discus-
sions, a number of options have been rejected. No agency recommends
implementation of the tariff rate quota system proposed by the ITC; it is
simply too restrictive. Other recommendations for import quotas, vol-
untary restraint agreements or tariff increases were also considered un-
acceptable or unworkable. All agencies recommend that the President
announce a program of expanded adjustment assistance, regardless of
whether he also decides to provide import relief. Thus, it all boils down
to two options:
I. No import restrictions; with special adjustment assistance.
II. Tariff rate quota; with special adjustment assistance.
State, Treasury, CEA and HUD support Option I. The details are
set forth in Tab A.4 In brief, under this option the President, on April 9,
would announce:
—establishment, by Executive Order, of an Office of Structural Ad-
justment to coordinate and oversee programs to assist workers, firms
and import-impacted communities adjust to import competition. This
office would use existing legislative authority under the Trade Act, the
Public Works and Economic Development Act, manpower and em-
ployment training programs, and other programs under the Small
Business Administration and DOD to stimulate productive economic
activity in areas suffering from import competition.
—plans to introduce new legislation to facilitate adjustment. These
would include a Trade Adjustment Bank, tax relief and/or subsidies
for US shoe firms, and additional amendments to the Trade Act to im-
prove existing programs.
STR, OMB, Commerce, Labor and Agriculture (all largely for do-
mestic political reasons) support Option II (Tab B).5 This would establish
a tariff rate quota which would increase duties on imports above 322 million
pairs (1976 imports amounted to 370 million pairs). This option:
lion pairs).
1974–76 imports) open to all foreign suppliers.
—sets quotas for 18 countries plus the EC with an “all other”
basket category for the smaller suppliers.
—imposes a 40% duty on above quota shipments.
3 Tab II, attached, is printed as Document 10. It sets out the options discussed here.
4 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Option I (No Im-
port Restrictions, Special Assistance Program).”
5 Tab B, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Option II (Three
Year Tariff Rate Quota).”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—calls for a program lasting 3 years with the possibility of one
3-year extension.
There are numerous arguments against import relief. We would
expect Blumenthal and Schultze to emphasize the domestic aspects of
the problem, e.g. that relief would be inflationary, hit low income con-
sumers hardest, give the most efficient domestic producers windfall
profits, and do little to help the domestic industry improve its competi-
tive position against imports.
From a foreign policy standpoint, trade restrictions would:
—invite emulation on the part of our trading partners (many of
whom face severe domestic economic difficulties and have gov-
ernments too weak to resist an assault by protectionist forces.)
—have especially adverse political repercussions in Italy, Spain
and Brazil (although Option II is not harsh in restricting exports from
these countries, their peoples will miss the technical nuances and see
this as a threat to a key export sector); endanger economic recovery in a
number of countries.
—have a highly negative effect on the Summit and North/South
relations.
Those who favor protection will likely emphasize the domestic po-
litical and Congressional considerations, and downplay the foreign re-
action. They will stress that the law exists to deal with such trade injury
situations, that the shoe industry has a prima facie case for relief, that
Congress expects prompt and effective action to restrict shoe imports,
and that failure to provide import relief could lead to a Congressional
override with possible adverse implications for the President’s pro-
grams in other areas. They may also argue that Option II allows for an
increase in Italian shoe exports and only a slight decrease in exports
from Brazil, Spain, etc.
On balance, the costs of restricting imports in terms of our broader
foreign policy objectives coupled with the cost in terms of the Presi-
dent’s domestic economic goals far outweigh any benefits that might ac-
crue to the domestic shoe industry from reduced import competition.
Moreover, there are important domestic political benefits—viz. all con-
sumers. Thus, I strongly recommend that you support Blumenthal, Schultze,
and State in opposing import restrictions.
Talking Points
—This is the single most important decision in the area of foreign eco-
nomic policy that the President will have to make in the first year of his Ad-
ministration. The stakes are extremely high.
—It impacts on our relations with key allies, on the Summit, on our
relations with the developing nations, and on the international finan-
cial and trading system. If the US turns towards protectionism at this
critical stage of Western economic recovery, we can expect others (with

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
weaker economies and governments too shaky to resist protectionist
pressures) to follow suit. The liberal trading regime that we have nur-
tured since the end of World War II may not be able to stand the strain.
If the US cannot hold the line against domestic pressures, we can
hardly expect the Italians, British and others with payments problems
to do so.
—Import restrictions will hit the developing countries in East Asia
and Latin America hardest. These are the newest entrants to the US
footwear market. They took seriously our advice to diversify exports
and seek out new product lines to promote their development. Now
that they have done so, and quite effectively, we threaten to shut the
door. Our credibility in the North/South dialogue will suffer as a re-
sult. Since we are about to renew important discussions in the CIEC,
the timing would be most unfortunate.
—(If it is argued that there would be no cutback in Italian exports,
and only a slight cut in imports from Brazil, Spain and other LDCs.)
This misses the emulation point. Also even if our restrictions are rela-
tively mild, they will be seen as a blow to key industries in these coun-
tries, and will stimulate other countries to impose restrictions which
will have a more severe impact on the shoe exports, and other exports,
of these countries.
—We cannot ignore the impact that trade restrictions will have on
our own export sectors. By limiting imports, we are not only asking our
consumers to pay higher prices, but also to the extent that our trading
partners retaliate or demand compensation we are forcing other US in-
dustries and workers to bear the financial burden for protecting the
shoe industry.
—Also, the supposed gains in domestic jobs in the shoe industry
may be less than expected. The lawyers representing the Mexican foot-
wear manufacturers have gathered data showing that there is a high
correlation between Mexican shoe production and movement of illegal
aliens into the US. They assert that if we limit Mexican shoe exports, the
workers will simply move across the border and market their skills in
Los Angeles and elsewhere. A certain percentage of domestic jobs sup-
posedly gained by import restraints would thus be lost to illegal aliens.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
15.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, March 26, 1977
SUBJECT
Your Monday EPG Meeting on Shoes2
Because Cy Vance will not be here to attend your shoe meeting—
which will discuss what is probably the single most important issue in
the international economic area that you will have to confront during
the first year of your Presidency—I want to note briefly a number of
foreign policy considerations which Cy and I share.
First, shoes represent a vital export of countries with whom our
economic, political and security relationship is extremely important.
These include Italy, Spain, Brazil, Korea, Taiwan and Mexico. Many of
these countries face extremely difficult financial situations, which they
rely in part on their exports to remedy. Restricting their exports will
further weaken their economies. It will also make them more difficult
to deal with on any non-economic issues.
Second, the implications for the London Summit are very serious.
Our imposing import restrictions will, as Prime Minister Callaghan
pointed out to you, sour the atmosphere in which the Summit takes
place. Further, it will put unbearable pressure on governments too
weak to resist protectionist pressures, forcing them to follow our lead
and impose restrictions of their own. You will therefore likely go to
London in a climate of significantly rising protectionism, shifting the
emphasis of the Summit from solidarity, and cooperative efforts to
achieve economic stimulus, to bitter recriminations in the trade area.
Third, developing countries seeking to increase exports will bit-
terly resent this action. The result could well be a deterioration in the
North-South dialogue and an undermining of the very constructive
start you have made in strengthening U.S. relations with the devel-
oping world.
While I am told that you will probably not make a decision at this
meeting, and know you will also have a range of domestic consider-
ations to factor in, I thought these points worth your attention.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Confidential.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
16.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs-Designate (Cooper) to the President’s
Assistant (Watson)1
Washington, March 30, 1977
SUBJECT
Shoes
The Strauss memorandum fails to point up adequately the consid-
erable difference, both from a foreign policy viewpoint and from the
viewpoint of domestic consumers, between an “orderly marketing
agreement” approach and a “voluntary restraint” approach to limiting
imports of shoes.2
A decision to negotiate formal orderly market agreements would
be interpreted in the United States press and by the world as a turn
toward import restriction. While this course would permit 90 days
during which agreements could be negotiated with the two largest sup-
pliers representing over 50% of the imports, the President would have
to inform the Congress and the public now of the course he is taking.
The impact of the policy decision would thus be immediate. Failing
agreement, the President would be required to impose unilateral re-
straints on all imports. Moreover, if agreements were negotiated, they
would contain “equity” provisions which would obligate the United
States to undertake unilateral restraints against non-agreement coun-
tries whose imports “disrupt” our market. This will invite continuing
controversy with other exporting countries.
The “orderly marketing agreement” route is in fact a more protec-
tionist solution than the tariff quota option. It results in absolute quan-
titative limitation on imports and does not permit imports above quota
to come in, albeit at a higher tariff. Thus, a tariff quota would, in gen-
eral, have a smaller impact on consumer prices.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980: Lot
2 In a March 30 memorandum to Carter, Watson wrote: “Pursuant to your request,
Bob Strauss has prepared the attached memorandum outlining the third option which he
proposed at the EPG meeting on Monday [March 28]. As Bob’s memorandum indicates,
there is still considerable disagreement among the group as to whether option three
should follow the course of voluntary restraints or one of orderly marketing agreements.
Mike Blumenthal, Henry Owen, Charlie Schultze, Zbig and Warren Christopher all favor
voluntary restraints; Bob Strauss and I think the Vice President, Bert Lance, Juanita Kreps
and Ray Marshall prefer orderly marketing agreements.” Strauss’ memorandum was not
attached to Watson’s memorandum. (Carter Library, White House Central Files, Subject

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
The alternative of voluntary restraints avoids these problems. The
primary relief provided is adjustment assistance with voluntary agree-
ments designed to avoid disruption of the market during the adjust-
ment process. Since the arrangements by their nature are not manda-
tory, they provide much greater flexibility. They do not create the same
complications with other exporting countries. Most importantly, they
would not present the image of the President having adopted a protec-
tionist approach in the first and most important trade case coming be-
fore him in his Administration.
17.
Editorial Note
On April 1, 1977, President Jimmy Carter announced that the
United States would seek orderly marketing agreements on footwear
imports. Noting his reluctance “to restrict international trade in any
way,” Carter asserted: “Only problems as extreme as those faced by the
American shoe industry could force me to seek even modest manda-
tory limits on imports.” Carter explained that his decision in favor of
orderly marketing agreements reflected his conclusion that the U.S. In-
ternational Tariff Commission’s tariff rate quota proposal “did not
fairly balance our concerns for domestic jobs and production, infla-
tionary pressures, and expanded world trade.” In addition to the or-
derly marketing agreements, Carter announced the expansion of cor-
porate and worker assistance for the footwear industry. For Carter’s
statement on his decisions concerning the U.S. footwear industry, see
Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1977,
randa to Special Representative for Trade Negotiations Robert Strauss
and to various department and agency heads on his decisions are ibid.,
pages 552–554.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
18.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, April 4, 1977
SUBJECT
Letter from Bob Strauss to Carry to Prime Minister Fukuda
The State Department and STR believe that the 2.5 million restraint
figure on Japanese color TV exports to the US, which you told Prime
Minister Fukuda was acceptable to us,2 would in fact be seen by do-
mestic industry and labor as too high. The ITC finding, which (by
raising tariffs) implies an import level of 2.5 million for all countries,
would probably mean a 1.9 million level for Japan. At Tab A is a letter
to Fukuda, which Strauss would like to deliver personally;3 it indicates
that after your examination of the International Trade Commission’s
report and the most recent trade figures (roughly 25% above compa-
rable months last year), you believe that the figure which you men-
tioned to Fukuda would prove unrealistic in the US, and that the
problem needs a fresh look to arrive at a figure below this level. It ex-
presses the hope that this can be worked out on Strauss’ visit to Tokyo.
In seeking to reopen these discussions, we are, of course, going
back on the figure you proposed to Fukuda as a US position. But failure
to reduce this number would likely provoke a hostile domestic reac-
tion, which would be harmful to our longer-term trade policy and
Japan’s interests as well.
RECOMMENDATION
That you sign the letter at Tab A.4
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 11, Japan: Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda,
2 See Document 12.
3 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated and unsigned letter from Carter to
Fukuda. Strauss visited Tokyo April 6–8 for talks with Japanese officials.
4 A handwritten notation at the bottom of the page reads: “signed revised letter
revised version of the letter; a handwritten note on the profile reads: “Sorry. Copies are
not available in the NSC/S [NSC Secretariat]. It was [signed] & is being hand carried by
Strauss.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Cor-
respondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 11, Japan: Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
19.
Memorandum From Robert Hormats and Michael Armacost
of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 5, 1977
SUBJECT
President’s Letter to Prime Minister Fukuda on Televisions
We were surprised,2 indeed concerned, about the final letter to Fu-
kuda which the President sent via Ambassador Strauss.3 During the
meeting with Fukuda the President put forward the 2.5 million figure
as an acceptable figure for 1977 exports.4 He did not press for the Prime
Minister’s agreement on the spot. He acknowledged that the figure
would be considered high by U.S. labor and business circles. Fukuda
was prepared to strike a deal on the spot; his advisors suggested that he
hold off until he had a chance to consult with his Cabinet and business
circles. But the Japanese by no means rejected the figure.
However, this letter implies that having been unable to reach an
agreement in Washington, we are going to make another effort to reach
a compromise.5 In fact, of course, Strauss intends to propose a consider-
ably lower figure—and the line about failing to reach agreement is
simply a shallow pretext for seeking a better deal.
To make matters worse, Strauss apparently indicated to Ambas-
sador Togo that the President did not put forward a U.S. position
during his talk with Fukuda, but that the number he discussed was
really one which was given to him by a U.S. official who had earlier
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
2 Brzezinski underlined the phrase “We were surprised” and wrote above it, “I was,
too!”
3 Attached but not printed is an unsigned April 4 letter from Carter to Fukuda,
which is different from the letter attached as Tab A to Document 18. The final version of
4 See Document 12.
5 The relevant section of the letter reads: “Another important matter which I know
is of considerable concern to both of us is trade in color television sets. Since we discussed
this subject but were unable to reach an agreement, I have had the opportunity to ex-
amine the Trade Commission’s Report and the latest trade figures. I therefore think that it
is important for us to take a fresh look at this problem without regard to previous posi-
tions. I believe that we can arrive at a figure which meets our mutual interests. It would
be desirable if Ambassador Strauss and you or your representatives can reach an under-
standing on an appropriate level of imports, so that this issue might be resolved before
the Summit.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
talked with the Japanese, and did not really represent a U.S. position.
This shades the truth a bit; it is at best disingenuous.
Obviously, it would be dandy if Strauss could persuade the Japa-
nese to accept greater restraint on TV exports than the President sug-
gested in his meeting with Fukuda. But we fear the language in this
letter may seek that worthy objective at the risk of jeopardizing the
President’s credibility with Fukuda. The Japanese attach great impor-
tance to gentlemen’s agreements. They are also pragmatic. If Strauss
were to straightforwardly indicate to Fukuda that on reflection the
President has come to the conclusion that the 2.5 million figure cannot
be sold to the American public as plausible rationale for foregoing the
ITC recommendations, we suspect the Prime Minister could accept that
and would probably be prepared to consider a somewhat lower figure.
But this letter is too sly and lawyer-like to be appropriate to this
situation.
We presume it is too late to do anything about this, but we did
wish to at least register our misgivings.6
April 6–8 visit to Tokyo, “two days of intensive discussions on television problem re-
sulted in outlines of several possible approaches to an agreed resolution.” The U.S. and
Japanese representatives agreed to come to a “mutually satisfactory negotiated settle-
ment on television this month so that this question would be out of the way by the
conclusion of the U.S.-Japan negotiations on color television receivers, see Document 31.
20.
Editorial Note
On April 9, 1977, Secretary of the Treasury W. Michael Blumen-
thal, acting in his capacity as the Chairman of the Economic Policy
Group, forwarded to the President’s Assistant for National Security Af-
fairs, Zbigniew Brzezinski, and the Special Representative for Eco-
nomic Summits, Henry Owen, a paper entitled “Final Report and Rec-
ommendations: Economic Issues at the London Summit.” The paper,
which was drafted by the Economic Policy Group, was prepared in re-
sponse to Presidential Review Memorandum 7 (see Document 3).
(Memorandum from Blumenthal to Brzezinski and Owen, April 9;
Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 25,
PRM–07)
During an April 14 Policy Review Committee meeting on Europe,
Owen discussed the status of the preparations for the London G–7

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Summit, highlighting several issues likely to prove contentious:
“British-German differences over economic stimulation, British reser-
vations on trade and strong North-South commitments, and French ob-
jections to non-proliferation if reprocessing is excluded from the inter-
national fuel cycle evaluation.” Assistant Secretary of the Treasury C.
Fred Bergsten asserted “that one version of the small-car rebate in-
cluded in the President’s energy program would dominate the Summit,
suggesting, especially in combination with the Zenith issue, that the
United States was turning protectionist.” The national energy plan pre-
sented by President Jimmy Carter to Congress on April 20 included a
provision to offer rebates on purchases of fuel-efficient cars made in the
United States and Canada; purchases of cars produced in other coun-
tries would be eligible for rebates “on the basis of treaties or executive
agreements entered into between these countries and the United States.
The President’s Special Representative for Trade Negotiations will
work with other nations to develop equitable rebate agreements.” See
the Fact Sheet on the President’s plan in Public Papers of the Presidents of
the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1977, Book I, page 674.
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance argued against the institutionaliza-
tion of summits, suggesting instead that the United States “try to make
better use of existing cooperative institutions. Others agreed, while
pointing out the utility of informal small groups. Owen pointed out the
need for following up the agreements at the Seven Nation Summit. The
NATO Summit may foreshadow a successor next year; there will be no
commitment to another Seven Nation Summit in London, although the
Canadians have talked of initiating one.” (Summary of discussion,
April 14; Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files,
Summit—PRM).

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
21.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, April 15, 1977
SUBJECT
Summit Preparations—A Progress Report
I gather from what you said to me after the Fukuda dinner2 that
you wanted informal progress reports from time to time. I am sending
you this report while preparations are still in mid-stream, so that if you
do not feel I am on the right track, you can let me know.
To make a success of the Seven Nation and NATO Summits, we
need (1) a clear view of their purpose; (2) allied agreement on specific
actions to achieve this purpose; (3) means of sharing both these actions
and the purposes to which they are directed with public opinion; (4) ef-
fective follow-through. This memorandum discusses means of meeting
all four needs.
I. Purpose
The economic and political progress achieved by the industrial
world since World War II is threatened by two inter-related problems:
—Economic. The world economy has the potential for healthy
growth; present trends in Germany, Japan, and the U.S. are favorable.
But in the UK, France, and Italy, steps to curb inflation and the eroding
effects of inflation itself have slowed economic growth or brought it to
a halt. International indebtedness is mounting, partly as a result of
high energy costs. In France and Italy, these economic and political
problems have weakened moderate forces and threaten a shift to the
Left, which could endanger confidence and stability in neighboring
Germany. Parochial and protectionist pressures in the industrial world,
triggered by these economic problems, also hinder joint action by rich
nations to help developing countries.
—Security. U.S. and German forces are in good shape, and there is
no prospect of early East-West conflict. But NATO is not keeping pace
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
for information. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page and wrote “good.” The memo-
randum was sent to Carter under cover of an undated note from Brzezinski that reads:
“The enclosed is only for scanning. It will be in your briefing book.” (Ibid.)
2 Apparently a reference to a March 21 working dinner held at the White House
during Fukuda’s March 20–23 official visit to the United States. A memorandum of con-
versation is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
with modernization of Soviet forces. It is difficult for NATO to do so,
within realistic fiscal ceilings, without rationalization of NATO pro-
grams to reduce waste and overlapping. Continuation of present
trends could eventually threaten the balance of military power that
keeps peace in Central Europe.
These two problems interact: Political and economic trends hinder
defense efforts in some European countries, and an evident weakening
of European defense could hinder European recovery.
Meeting these problems will require cooperative effort by the main
industrial countries. In the economic field they will need to confirm
each other in sensible domestic policies, and to join in enlarging inter-
national financing, reducing artificial obstacles to trade, improving the
balance between global energy demand and supply, and providing
more effective help to developing countries. In the security field, they
will need to modernize NATO forces and rationalize NATO defense
programs.
Action to these ends will confront major obstacles. These cannot be
overcome without a powerful political impulse. The purpose of the
Seven Nation and NATO Summits should be to generate that impulse.
Implementing action can then be taken in other forums.
II. Specific Actions
Seven Nation Summit. To serve this purpose, we are negotiating in
the international preparatory group to include the following in the
draft Seven Nation Declaration:
1. Domestic. Germany, Japan, and the United States would commit
themselves to achieve present expansionist targets; Britain, France, and
Italy would pledge to maintain their stabilization policies until infla-
tion had been brought under control; and both groups of countries
would agree to concert about these actions in the OECD.
2. Financing. The seven nations would agree to support Wit-
teveen’s proposal to expand the IMF’s resources in order to help debtor
countries finance their deficits on current account.3
3. Trade. The seven participating governments would agree to seek
specified substantive results, including progress toward an interna-
tional system of national grain reserves, in 1977 in the multilateral
GATT trade negotiations.
3 In February 1977, concerned that delays in the expansion of IMF member quotas
would combine with large-scale demands on IMF resources to produce a situation in
which the IMF could not meet its members’ financial needs, Witteveen proposed the cre-
ation of a “supplementary financing facility.” Also known as the Witteveen Facility, this
initiative would allow the IMF to borrow funds from member countries that it could then
lend to other member countries. (De Vries, The International Monetary Fund, 1972–1978:
Cooperation on Trial, vol. I: Narrative and Analysis, pp. 545–546)

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
4. Energy and Non-Proliferation. Governments would pledge to re-
duce energy consumption, increase energy supply, share research and
development to these ends, and concert about these measures in the In-
ternational Energy Agency. They would also agree that legitimate nu-
clear needs should be met, that this should be done without enhancing
prospects for nuclear proliferation, and that studies of national and
international means of reconciling these two objectives should be
pursued.
5. North-South. The Summit nations would agree that the level and
quality of aid to LDC’s should be raised, and that resources of the World
Bank should be increased—thus permitting more of its resources to be
devoted to expanding energy and raw materials production. Govern-
ments would agree to negotiate flexibly about individual commodity
stabilization agreements, and to finance these agreements through a
common fund. I hope that the Summit nations can also agree to ask the
World Bank to explore the concept of a world development budget or
program; I’ll have a better feel for other countries’ reactions after the
next meeting of the International Preparatory Group.
The agreements outlined above would launch or reinforce action
to address the main problems that the industrial countries face, and
they would strengthen the international agencies in which that action
must be taken. Taken together, they should convey a persuasive im-
pression of governments that are in control of their destiny, and whose
policies promise a better future for their peoples.
When I have asked journalists what it would take to convince them
that the Summit was a success, their answers have called for a less am-
bitious outcome. What emerges from the Summit will probably also be
less ambitious; we are unlikely to achieve international agreement on
all the above points. But I hope that our main goals can be fulfilled. The
main obstacle at the moment is that the British draft Declaration is in-
adequate; our own is better,4 but the British (as hosts) have the main
drafting responsibility. I am encouraging the Canadians to prepare an
alternative draft which will borrow the best from the British and Amer-
ican drafts, and which I hope can provide a basis for discussion at the
April 25–26 meeting of the International Preparatory Group.
Arms transfers will be taken up in the Four Power Berlin Summit
meeting.5 Human rights will be covered in your NATO speech; it
4 Neither the British nor the U.S. draft declaration was found.
5 The three Western powers occupying Berlin at that time—France, the United
Kingdom, and the United States—along with the Federal Republic of Germany, held a
Four-Power Berlin Summit on May 9 in London. A joint declaration on Berlin issued on
that day is printed in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1977,
Book I, pp. 840–841.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
would not be in our interest to make this a major issue in the Seven Na-
tion Summit, since intensive discussion there would probably generate
allied disagreements on which the media would focus, overshadowing
constructive economic agreements.
NATO Summit. We are consulting with NATO embassies in Wash-
ington about the following initiatives for your speech to the North At-
lantic Council:6
1. NATO Forces. Defense Ministers would be asked to develop a
program of needed modernization and improvement of NATO forces,
and to examine possible changes in NATO machinery to ensure effec-
tive follow-through. The Defense Ministers’ recommendations would
be reviewed (after an interim report to the December NATO meeting)
at the NATO meeting of May 1978, which might be held at the Summit.
2. Defense Production. The U.S. would indicate its willingness to
work with a collective group of European countries in improving
present procedures for development, production, and procurement of
NATO defense equipment—in order to avoid waste, promote joint Eu-
ropean effort, and increase U.S.-European defense trade. This seems
like a dull technical issue, but it is tearing NATO apart politically and
wastes large resources (perhaps as much as $10 billion annually) that
are badly needed for more effective defense.
3. Political. We have in mind that you would speak in some depth
about East-West relations. You might suggest launching a major joint
reappraisal of the alliance’s role in changing East-West relations—also
for review in May 1978. This would provide a more effective basis for
inter-allied consultation on this subject, and could help to create a polit-
ical framework in which the need for effective NATO defense effort
would be more evident.
These actions would not be dramatic. But they would respond to
the main threats that NATO faces and should reassure the Europeans.
If followed through, they would eventually reverse the adverse mili-
tary trends in Central Europe noted under I, above.
III. Sharing Perceptions
It will be important not only that the Summits achieve the purpose
defined above but that they be seen to have done it.
This requires explaining to the media and to our own people what
we are trying to achieve—creating an environment in which the indus-
trial world can register steady economic growth, helping developing
countries achieve more rapid progress, and making NATO a more ef-
6 For Carter’s speech on May 10 at the London NATO Summit, see ibid., pp.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
fective means of defense and consultation. It also means explaining
how the actions taken at the Summit can help to fulfill these goals—
pointing out that this requires an on-going process in diverse forums
that Summits reinforce.
I will send you an action memorandum later, raising the question
of whether you wish to meet with the Congressional leadership in late
April or early May to discuss both Summits, and then meet with the
leadership again after you return from London to acquaint them with
the results. I will send you another memorandum asking if you would
like to meet with business and labor leaders to the same end.
After the Summits, and depending on their results, you may wish
to make a TV report to the nation about these results; in such a speech
you could present a broad view of these meetings’ role in your foreign
policy. I will begin drafting an outline, for use in case you decide to
make such a speech.
IV. Follow-Through
The business-like approach to Summitry outlined above hinges on
effective follow-through. After the Rambouillet and Puerto Rico
Summits7 this was lacking. At both Summits, for example, it was
agreed that Multilateral Trade Negotiations should be concluded by
the end of 1977, but this had little effect on the conduct of negotiations.
At the first meeting of the Seven Nation international preparatory
group, we discussed whether finance ministers of the seven partici-
pating nations should meet regularly to consider whether their coun-
tries’ policies were fulfilling Summit directives. The general reaction
was
that
this
would
antagonize
non-attending
nations
and
over-burden finance ministers. It was suggested that follow-through
should be “flexible” and “informal”, which—to judge from past experi-
ence—means that it would be slight to non-existent.
Of course, much of the economic follow-through will take place in
other forums; the OECD for domestic and balance of payments eco-
nomic policy, the IMF for international financing, the GATT for trade,
the IEA for energy, and the World Bank for aid. The same is true on the
security front: The NATO Defense Ministers’ Committee is the place
for defense improvements, and the North Atlantic Council is the place
for consultation. But we need to be sure that ministers and civil serv-
ants in these forums are following Summit guidance, instead of al-
lowing that guidance to be eroded by time and new events.
Foreign Economic Policy, 1973–1976.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
To meet this need within our own government, you may wish,
after the Summit, to arrange for periodic NSC meetings, at which the
actions taken to fulfill Summit actions are reported and reviewed. Prep-
arations for these meetings will keep the government’s attention fo-
cused on carrying out Summit agreements.
On the international level, civil servants of other governments will
only concern themselves with follow-through if instructed to do so by
their political masters. At the final session of the Seven Nation Summit
you might propose that there should be a follow-up meeting, say, five
months after the Summit, attended by whatever official each head of
government designates. It need not be finance ministers; it could be the
same group that has been preparing for the Summit. This meeting
would survey progress made in executing Summit decisions and
submit a report to the heads of government. If the meeting were con-
ducted quietly and without publicity (meetings of the preparatory
group have attracted no media attention), there should be little basis for
resentment by countries not attending the Summit. While this would
place some additional burden on the officials involved, it would be
small compared to the advantages of ensuring that Summit decisions
had some effect on what happened in the real world.
22.
Memorandum From the Representative to the European
Communities (Hinton) to the Special Representative for
Trade Negotiations (Strauss)1
Washington, April 20, 1977
SUBJECT
Negotiating Agriculture in the MTN
The US agricultural community has feared that agriculture would
be left to the last in the negotiations—as in the Kennedy Round2—and
Strauss wrote: “Wolff + Starke—Let’s discuss.” According to another copy of this memo-
randum, “Starke” was in fact STR staff member James Starkey. (National Archives, RG
Community 1977)
2 The Kennedy Round of GATT multilateral trade negotiations took place in Ge-
neva from 1964 until 1967.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
that the United States would fail to get major concessions. Our answer
has been to insist on negotiating industry and agriculture together.
Now, however, we have a chance to improve the situation: we should
make agriculture our first priority. Agriculture is central in and by itself
and it also poses the key export subsidy problems.3 Here we have le-
verage since our countervailing waiver authority expires in early 1979.4
We should use this leverage to get well ahead in 1977 on agriculture
generally and to break the subsidy/countervailing duty code problem
by this time next year at the latest.5
In our view, the basic US goals in agriculture should be:
—a grains agreement which provides some price stability, relieves
us of the burden of carrying almost all the world’s reserves and guar-
antees steady US export growth, combined with restraints on EC use of
subsidies on exports into third country markets;
—a modus vivendi on subsidies on EC exports into the United States
(cheese, hams) and other subsidy practices (which could be incorpo-
rated into a subsidies/CVD code);
—tariff reductions on products of special interest to the United
States (citrus, tobacco), preferably as part of an application of the tar-
iff formula to agriculture or, if that fails, in a product-by-product
negotiation.
Grains
Our best chance of results in the grains area lies not in a frontal at-
tack on access but in an agreement cast in the framework of the world
food problem and world trade in grains, but negotiated as part of the
MTN package. We would aim for a reserve agreement with a wide
price fork. This cover can serve US goals by restraining the Commu-
nity’s use of export subsidies on grains, requiring it to share the burden
in adjusting to both surplus and shortage situations, and by dampening
excessive price swings. It will meet the Community’s goals by being in
the form of a commodity agreement with price provisions and by con-
tributing to world grain market stability.
Subsidies
The general problem of export subsidies on industrial goods is not
insurmountable. The real problem is how to include agricultural
products, where the Community considers export subsidies as an inte-
gral part of the Common Agricultural Policy. Arrangements limiting
3 Strauss underlined “Agriculture is central in and by itself” and “poses the key ex-
port subsidy problems.”
4 Congress had granted the President temporary authority to waive the imposition
of countervailing duties on subsidized imports.
5 Strauss wrote “explain?” in the margin adjacent to the final two sentences of this
paragraph.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
subsidies may have to have three parts: (1) limits on grain subsidies in-
cluded in a grains arrangement; (2) limits on certain other commodity
export subsidies contained in ad hoc or commodity specific arrange-
ments; (3) a general arrangement on subsidies to include all other
products and at least by reference other ad hoc arrangements.
The US problems with US-Community subsidies are essentially of
two kinds: (a) their subsidies on sales to the United States and (b) their
competition with us in third countries.
A) Community Subsidies on Agricultural Sales to the US
The crucial commodities are dairy products and hams, which are
both presently covered under countervailing duty waivers which ex-
pire in 1979. While the preferred resolution would be an overall code
on subsidies/countervailing which would cover agricultural products,
the EC, for domestic political reasons, will not be able to subject its agri-
cultural exports, particularly in dairy, to a general code. Another ap-
proach would be to negotiate an ad hoc set of arrangements on cheese
and hams, and possibly beef and processed foods, by which they
would limit their subsidies in our market. This could be based on EC
observance of minimum export prices as negotiated on cheese and then
dropped in the spring of 1975. The EC has such arrangements with
Switzerland and Spain. Their demands will undoubtedly include a
trade-off on US dairy quotas and some requirement of injury in US
countervailing duties.
B) Community Agricultural Subsidies to Third Countries
Apart from grains and flour—which would be dealt with in a
grains arrangement—this is not a major problem, but it does have to be
handled. The key may be an approach based on avoiding predatory
marketing. The challenge is to devise an agreed consultative mecha-
nism which would dry up excessive subsidies in time to avoid market
disruption. One approach would be to accept EC subsidized sales to an
agreed list of LDC’s as aid devices along with a tight EC agreement to
respect world prices (as defined during the negotiation) by avoiding
market expansion—or taking away existing commercial markets—for
all other sales. These rules could be elaborated in the more general sub-
sidies code.
Procedure
We must promptly get to the substantive agriculture issues. My
proposal to break the procedural impasse at Geneva would be to seek,
in return for our accepting the grains agreement approach and com-
modity discussions for other variable levy items, EC agreement to in-
clusion of non-variable levy agricultural products under the agreed
tariff-cutting formula. Total US exports to the EC in these items amount
to over $1 billion, with citrus and tobacco being particularly important.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
While there are, of course, other ways to get to substance, this proposal
is a politically acceptable compromise between the US view that in-
dustry and agriculture move in lock step and the Community view that
agriculture is different. But I repeat that the main assurance we get is
that in making agriculture top priority for this year we will know better
where we are before we strike the industrial tariff and MTN deals.6
6 In a May 5 letter to Hinton, Strauss noted that he had read Hinton’s memorandum
“three times—not because it is poorly drafted but because I think it is exceedingly well
thought through. I look forward to our pursuing the subject as well as our many other
23.
Briefing Memorandum From the Under Secretary of the
Treasury for Monetary Affairs (Solomon) to Secretary of the
Treasury Blumenthal1
Washington, April 21, 1977
SUBJECT
Supplementary Briefing for the G–5 Meetings This Weekend2
I think our objective for this meeting should be to get firm agree-
ment among the “Five” to press hard for the Witteveen facility,3 and to
avoid letting action on this get cluttered up or side-tracked by discus-
sions of a further increase in IMF quotas or SDR allocations. We have
placed fairly heavy bets on the Witteveen proposal and we need to see
that it gets a strong push. This will involve a clear statement from you
not only that we support Witteveen’s proposal and will participate on a
significant scale—on the order of SDR 2½ billion—but that we will
drop the OECD Financial Support Fund4 alternative if Witteveen’s pro-
posal flies. Burns is pressing for us to go even further and drop the FSF
and Jeanne Davis of the Executive Secretariat. A typed notation reads: “Noted by
cials, see Document 24.
4 See Document 6.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
now, but he accepted my view that this was the farthest we could go
now—where the FSF is, at least theoretically, a fallback. We have kept
the Support Fund alternative open for very good reasons while as-
sessing the prospects for the Witteveen proposal, but we need to re-
move any doubts the others may have about where our preferences lie.
A second main point we need to nail down relates to the broad
character of the Witteveen facility—i.e., that it will be available to coun-
tries only on the basis of effective policy conditionality comparable to
that applied by the IMF in the higher credit tranches. The British will
try to weaken this point and they will get support from the LDCs in the
IMF. You will probably get strong support from the Germans, French,
and Japanese.
I talked to Witteveen last night, and there is still no clear response
from the Saudis. The Finance Minister, Aba al-Khail (to whom you
wrote) will be in London for the next few days.5 Witteveen plans to call
him and may go to London to meet with him. There may be a need for
you or me to see Aba al-Khail while we are in Europe, which I will ex-
plain verbally.
Also, in my discussion with Witteveen last night, he and Bill Dale
referred to the possibility of large market borrowings by the IMF. They
have been told by Eugene Black, Jr.6 that they could borrow $10 billion
at the prime rate. I have major doubts about the IMF’s real prospects for
borrowing in the markets on this large a scale. If this question arises
this weekend (which it shouldn’t since I doubt Witteveen has told
anyone else) I would suggest that you take the position
—that this idea represents a real fork in the road in terms of the
character of the IMF and must be given a great deal more thought;
—that any indication that people are thinking in terms of this ap-
proach will take the Saudis completely off the hook and destroy any
chances for the Witteveen facility.
This is a possibility that we should study and an alternative to
keep in our pockets if the Witteveen facility fails, but if it is brought out
now it will side track the whole effort.
On the other main points to be covered this weekend in the mone-
tary area—a further quota increase and the possibility of SDR alloca-
tions—I recommend the following:
5 No memorandum of conversation of Solomon’s discussion with Witteveen was
found. On April 13, Blumenthal approved transmission of a letter from him to Saudi Min-
ister of Finance and National Economy Mohammad Aba al-Khail, in which he discussed
the merits of the Witteveen initiative as well as the need for swift action on it. (Memo-
randum from Solomon to Blumenthal, April 12; Carter Library, Anthony Solomon Col-
6 Eugene R. Black, Jr. was an investment banker with Lazard Fre`res & Company.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
1. We believe a quota increase will be needed but we don’t have to
decide now on the amount or the distribution. We should keep an open
mind even though other G–10 countries are falling into either the
herents. The target date for completion of the quota review is February
1978 and we can let this be discussed in the Executive Board. We
should concentrate now on the Witteveen proposal.
2. On SDR allocations, we don’t believe there is a need this year,
but we do not need to foreclose the possibility for the next several
years. We would be willing to look at the question again next year.
I briefed Burns at his and your request this morning for two
hours,7 especially on last night’s conversation with Witteveen. Since
you don’t have free time today I will brief you Saturday8 morning at the
Embassy Residence.
7 No record of this briefing was found.
8 April 23.
24.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, April 26, 1977
SUBJECT
Finance Ministers Meeting in Paris Saturday, April 23, 1977
Under the Chairmanship of Prime Minister Raymond Barre of
France (who is also Finance Minister), the Finance Ministers of the U.K.
and Germany, the Deputy Finance Minister of Japan, and myself, ac-
companied by Deputies and the respective Central Bank Presidents,
met in Versailles in a private meeting to review major international and
economic questions of common concern.2
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
seen,” and Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page.
2 No memorandum of conversation of the meeting was found; an April 25 memo-
randum to Blumenthal and Burns from Solomon summarized the discussion. (Carter Li-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
The agenda was dominated by international financial issues, re-
plenishment of the IMF, trade and relations with developing countries.
All of these issues will be before the Heads of State at the Summit. The
meeting, thus, provided a good preview of likely attitudes for London.
1. General
The attitude and atmosphere was cordial and cooperative. The
French, German, and U.K. Ministers clearly reflected the political
weaknesses of their respective governments, i.e., (a) next year’s elec-
tions in France, which the present government may well lose; (b) the
extreme weakness and possible short life of the Labor government in
the U.K.; and (c) the weakening position of the SPD-Liberal Coalition in
Germany, marked by internal dissension and made somewhat more se-
cure only because of the relative disunity among the opposition.
The weak economic situation in France and the U.K. added to the
undertone of caution and the willingness to be cooperative. Each of
these governments knows it may need help from the outside, possibly
from the “economically strong” countries such as Germany, Japan, and
the United States.
2. Chronic World Balance of Payments Imbalances and What
To Do About Them
The chronic surplus in current account of certain OPEC countries
and the corresponding chronic deficits of a number of non-OPEC
LDCs, as well as some developed countries in the Mediterranean area
and elsewhere were the main sources of long-term concern.
Everyone wishes to treat this issue gingerly so as not to threaten
the tenuous quality of world financial confidence. Yet no one has come
up with any long-term solutions to what is a potentially very dan-
gerous problem. Most of the discussion accordingly centered on short-
term measures—to provide additional loans to the deficit countries and
to “recycle” the surpluses from OPEC in one way or another.
There is universal agreement that the IMF/Witteveen initiative to
from the OPEC countries, is the highest priority item. All depends on
whether the Saudis will agree to contribute at least $3 billion or more. A
major effort is going to be made this week to get the basic commitments
and to button down some of the details so that this program can be con-
sidered as reasonably firm by the time of the Summit.
Some countries are still looking at the OECD “Safety Net” idea3
originally proposed by the United States and accepted by all countries
but not approved by the U.S. Congress, as a possible fallback. We made
3 A reference to the OECD Financial Support Fund. See Document 6.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
it clear that the chances for Congressional approval for this approach
are dim.
3. Trade—MTN and Protectionism
There is a general fear of protectionism and agreement in principle
that the Summit is a good opportunity for the Heads of State to coun-
teract the trend. There is, however, no clear view on what specifically
should be done beyond a general endorsement of the value of trade
liberalization.
Denis Healey implied that the economically stronger countries
should liberalize more than the weaker ones, a view which I strongly
rejected and which was not supported by other Ministers. Beyond that,
a general consensus emerged on the need to focus the MTN impor-
tantly on new agreements to limit export subsidization.4 It is felt that
this is the new form which protectionism takes around the world and
that formal agreement on this question within or parallel with the MTN
is perhaps as important as agreement on further tariff reductions and
non-tariff barrier commitments.
4. Relations with LDCs
There was fairly general agreement on a common approach on
Commodity Agreements and on a cautious though positive attitude
toward exploring sensible Common Fund5 ideas. I went clearly on
record as opposing the German “Stabex” scheme,6 favoring instead the
Commodity Agreement Common Fund or other IMF linked approach.
Our viewpoint is likely to prevail although we will hear more about
Stabex at the Summit.
There was general agreement on the commitment to the $1 billion
added aid program to be endorsed by the Summit.
5. Portugal
The Germans and others signaled their basic sympathies to doing
something for Portugal. Chancellor Schmidt will wish to negotiate his
country’s commitment with you at the Summit. The other EEC
members and the Japanese will come in to varying degrees, following
the lead of what the two of you decide.
4 Carter underlined the phrase “export subsidization.”
5 At the end of UNCTAD’s fourth session (UNCTAD IV) in Nairobi in May 1976, it
agreed to consider the establishment of a Common Fund to finance a buffer stock pro-
gram designed to smooth out primary commodity price fluctuations. See Foreign Rela-
includes provisions for an earnings stabilization fund for LDC primary commodity ex-
ports, known as Stabex, and other development assistance initiatives.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
The issue will require careful handling with the Germans, who are
using it partly to show their displeasure over our attitude toward the
German/Brazilian nuclear deal,7 and partly over the method in which
the previous administration launched the Portuguese aid program
without prior consultation with them. The German attitude in part
also reflects some self-serving tightfistedness in that it seeks to maxi-
mize Portuguese sales of gold beyond what Soares is presently
contemplating.
6. U.K. Attitude
Of all the countries present at the meeting, the United Kingdom is
perhaps least in tune with the other countries. To a large extent this re-
flects the weak internal economic situation of the British. They are
pushing strongly and sometimes not too subtly for the proposition that
Germany, Japan, and the United States should stimulate more, so as to
help countries like the U.K. toward an export-led exit from their do-
mestic recession. They argue implicitly that even a little inflation in the
strong economies is not too high a price to pay. This is the reason why
they tend to project a gloomier future for the world economy than do
the rest of the countries.
This attitude is perhaps the greatest source of potential threat to a
unified position on the world economic outlook emerging at the
Summit. It is, of course, an attitude to be resisted and it should not be
too difficult to do so.
W. Michael Blumenthal8
7 Earlier in April, in spite of protests by the Carter administration, West Germany
had agreed to the sale of nuclear equipment to Brazil. (Craig R. Whitney, “Bonn to Send
8 Blumenthal signed “Mike” above this typed signature.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
25.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, April 29, 1977
SUBJECT
Seven Nation Summit
I am transmitting a briefing book that includes:
—Three overall papers that Bob Hormats has prepared (drawing
on work by Dick Cooper, Arthur Burns, and CIA) about the interna-
tional economic setting, the international financial setting, and an over-
view of North-South issues;
—Six briefing papers on individual issues likely to arise at the
Summit: macro-economic policy, financial indebtedness, trade, energy,
North-South relations, and non-proliferation. The first five papers were
prepared by Bob Hormats and the last by Roger Waldman (NSC staff);
all draw on the work of other agencies.
The first step in preparing for the Summit is to ask: What are we
trying to achieve?
In one sense, we are trying to achieve something intangible: a close
personal understanding among the heads of government. This may be
the Summit’s most important result, but it’s not one I can do much
about, so I’ll simply note it and pass on to discuss our substantive
objectives.
You defined these well when you said in answer to a recent press
question about the London Summit: “Our own people are best served
when we . . . have open and free trade, when we have proper concern
about the less developed countries . . . when we have multilateral
lending institutions like the World Bank that can function effectively,
when we have a proper and multilateral approach to solving the
chronic and rapidly deteriorating energy circumstances . . .”2
The main goal of the Summit is to strengthen international institu-
tions for tackling these common problems, and to forge a strong inter-
national consensus about their solutions. Only heads of government
can provide the political impetus required to this end—and thus per-
suade peoples in the industrial world that their governments are coop-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
Sent for information. A handwritten notation at the top of the page reads: “DA—FYI.”
2 Carter made these remarks during an April 25 question-and-answer session with
European newspaper journalists in the Oval Office; see Public Papers of the Presidents of the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
erating effectively to improve their destinies. There was general agree-
ment on that purpose at the International Preparatory Group that met
here earlier this week.3 The hard question is how to apply it to specific
issues. I discuss that question below in relation to the Preparatory
Group’s work on the Summit Declaration, not because its work is that
important (it will surely be greatly changed by the heads of gov-
ernment), but because this is a convenient way to get at the specific
issues involved and the attitudes of other countries.
Domestic Policy
The Preparatory Group did not agree on what the Summit should
say about domestic economic policy. The disagreement focused on two
issues:
1. The British want the Summit to lean on Germany (and implicitly
the U.S. and Japan) to reflate more rapidly. They had support only from
the French. Callaghan will no doubt urge you to join him in pressing
Schmidt. You will recall that you agreed with Roy Jenkins that this
would be counter-productive.4 I feel the same way: It won’t have any
effect on German policy and will just irritate the FRG and trigger leaks
of discord to the media.
2. The British want a long analytical section in the Declaration dis-
cussing the world economic situation and giving loud cries of alarm
about it—presumably to encourage Germany, Japan, and the U.S. to do
more to improve it. The rest of us (the French, again, excepted) felt
things weren’t really that bad, and could see nothing but damage to
business and investor confidence in saying otherwise.
The Preparatory Group, whose members will be in the anteroom at
10 Downing Street, can readily draft language for the Declaration on
domestic economic policy, once the heads of government have reached
substantive agreement. Most members of the Group believe this lan-
guage should describe briefly the world economic progress that has
been achieved since the last Summit and the problems that remain. It
should stress the need for (i) the U.S., Germany, and Japan to keep their
policies under review to ensure that they achieve their moderately ex-
pansionist target rates of growth; (ii) the UK, France, Italy, and Canada
to Schmidt, April 29; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
4 On April 18, Carter, Jenkins, and other U.S. and EC officials met in the Cabinet
Daily Diary) During the meeting, Jenkins told Carter that “further debate over the extent
of stimulation appropriate for the stronger economies would be sterile.” Carter replied
“that he did not view the Summit as an occasion for further argument over stimulation.”
(Memorandum of conversation, April 18; Carter Library, National Security Affairs,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
to continue to pursue their stabilization policies until they have
brought inflation under control. The message should be that while we
still have problems, we are implementing policies that will correct
them. The Preparatory Group agreed that the Declaration should also
say something encouraging about efforts to deal with youth unemploy-
ment. Callaghan may propose an international conference on this sub-
ject, which could be useful.
International Economic Policy
The Preparatory Group had no difficulty in agreeing on draft Dec-
laration language dealing with international issues: financing, trade,
energy, and North-South relations. I attach the agreed text,5 which is
largely based on the U.S. draft; the British draft, which was more gen-
eral, met little favor. The Group noted that this agreed language would
have to be drastically revised to take account of whatever the heads of
government decided at London. Herewith a few comments on the at-
tached draft:
—Balance of Payments Financing. The draft supports the large IMF
expansion that has been proposed by Witteveen and that would help
both developed and developing countries. As of this writing, the
IMF Interim Committee6 is discussing this issue. We will know in a
day or two whether its discussions require change in the agreed draft
language.
—Trade. The British and French, who favored blander language,
were persuaded both to accept the proposed U.S. trade language. This
language rejects protectionism in strong terms, indicates that the Tokyo
Round should achieve results as important as the Kennedy Round, and
pinpoints the areas in which the heads of government will seek
progress in trade negotiations in 1977. These areas include an interna-
tional system of national grain reserves (tactfully described as an
agreed approach to grain stocks). The British were convinced by the ar-
gument that the only way for the industrial countries to avoid suc-
cumbing to growing protectionist pressures is by being able to show
our peoples that the trade negotiations are making real progress: Hence
the importance of each head of government being able to return from
London saying that the Summit had achieved concrete results in re-
viving trade negotiations. This required a Declaration with specific
commitments; generalities would not suffice. Bob Strauss made the
5 Attached but not printed at Tab B are four undated papers on “Balance of Pay-
ments Financing,” “Trade,” “Energy,” and “North-South Relations.”
6 The IMF Interim Committee (formally known as the Interim Committee of the
Board of Governors on the International Monetary System) was established in October
1974. It succeeded the Committee of Twenty as the primary international monetary re-
form group.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
same argument, with good results, in Brussels, London, and Tokyo—as
I did in talking to Jenkins when he was here. At the Summit you may
get either a frontal attack, i.e., an attempt to return to the original bland
British draft, or some nibbling at the edges—e.g., an attempt to take out
either the reference to the Kennedy Round, which knocks down the no-
tion of a mini-package, or the reference to grain stocks, which is useful
in giving a push to negotiations for an international system of national
grain reserves. There was some resistance, by the way, to the last para-
graph of the draft language, on illicit payments, as being beneath the
dignity of heads of government; we argued for keeping it, in order to
provide some moral content to the meeting and the Declaration.
—Energy. There was general agreement on the need to reduce en-
ergy consumption and increase energy production, and to press ahead
with measures to exchange technology, which Jim Schlesinger had
asked me to mention—as well as commendation for the new U.S. en-
ergy program.7 There was also agreement on the need to meet coun-
tries’ legitimate energy requirements, and to do this without enhancing
nuclear proliferation, as well as on announcing our proposed program
of studies as to how these objectives can best be achieved—except for
the French delegate, who had not gotten the word as to whether his
government was prepared to enter this program. The Italian delegate
was mildly unhappy about singling out nuclear energy, which he said
was essential to his country’s economic future, for special attention.
The French delegate objected to the reference to coal which, he said,
would make it more difficult for his government to close down uneco-
nomic mines, and Giscard may raise this at the Summit.
—North-South. There was agreement on the need for the large gen-
eral increase in the World Bank’s resources that Bob McNamara has in
mind, and which he is most anxious to have the Summit support. The
language is rather general, since McNamara hasn’t made a specific pro-
posal and we don’t want to alarm the Congress while it is still consid-
ering the IDA appropriation. There was no disagreement on the com-
modity price stabilization language: All believe that commodity
sented his program of action to a joint session of Congress. For the text of both addresses,
see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1977, Book I, pp.
Schmidt, noting that the U.S. “energy program affected every country,” had recently
asked him “why the key countries concerned had not been consulted. He said energy was
to be a major subject at the Summit, but he asked what was the point now that the deci-
sions had been made.” Schmidt made the same complaint about non-proliferation and
U.S. economic stimulation. In the margin adjacent to this paragraph, Carter wrote, “We
are not part of EC & still sovereign.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brze-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
agreements should be negotiated individually, that prices should be
stabilized around market trends, and there should be a common
funding agreement for these individual agreements. This is not what
the LDC’s want, but it’s as close as we can get without doing violence to
their interests and ours. The Group put in some language about study-
ing stabilization of export earnings; Schmidt will propose this and we
see no harm in a study so long as it embraces not only his proposal but
other means of achieving the same objective, e.g., an increase in the IMF
compensatory financing facility (which would be additional to the gen-
eral increase in IMF financing mentioned earlier). You will note that the
penultimate paragraph of the North-South section refers in rather gen-
eral language to the world development program and asks the World
Bank and IMF to study it. We gave the other members of the Prepara-
tory Group a memorandum on this subject (attached)8 which the World
Bank had prepared. Before seeing this memo, some of them had wor-
ried as to whether this venture would generate new demands for in-
creased aid; they now seem reassured, especially since the draft Decla-
ration only proposes that the Summit ask the World Bank and IMF to
study the idea—presumably for review by the IBRD–IMF Develop-
ment Committee,9 which is interested in this subject and which in-
cludes both developing and developed countries.
General Statement
The Group agreed on the need for a general one page statement
concerning the overall meaning and message of the Summit, which
would precede the more detailed five page Declaration. The British and
I will try our hands at drafting such a statement. Like all other parts of
the draft Declaration, it will be revised in light of Summit discussions,
as they progress.
European Community
The European Commission was represented at the preparatory
session. British thinking is that Jenkins will attend the second day of the
Summit, but not the first—when domestic economic policy, non-
proliferation, and other subjects not thought by the French to be in the
Commission’s competence will be discussed. This will create problems,
since it will be difficult to dissociate non-proliferation from energy,
which is to be discussed the second day. The British hope that Giscard
will relent and let Jenkins come part of the first day, as well.
8 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated 3-page paper entitled “An Ap-
proach to a World Development Program.”
9 The IMF/IBRD Development Committee (formally known as the Joint Ministerial
Committee of the Boards of Governors of the World Bank and the Fund on the Transfer of
Real Resources to Developing Countries) was established in October 1974 to address the
problems of developing countries.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Conclusion
Except for domestic economic policy, the chief problem will be the
inherent tendency of any meeting to water down controversial specifics
and resort, instead, to generalities. Nothing would be more dismaying
to the media than a Summit that produced only such bland generalities.
We need specific content if our basic purpose—strengthening interna-
tional institutions and giving a sense of hope and leadership to the in-
dustrial democracies—is to be achieved. The Declaration now has that
content; I suspect that you will have to fight hard to keep it—e.g., in re-
spect of the listing of trade issues to be settled in 1977, the reference to
international grain reserves, the request to the World Bank and IMF to
study the World Development Program, and the announcement of the
international fuel cycle evaluation program studies.
To judge from the Preparatory Group meetings, you will find the
Germans a strong ally in arguing for specificity; the Japanese generally
feel the same way, but have to be prodded to say so. The Canadians are
also generally on our side; the Italians were pretty much a cipher, but
don’t seem anxious to disagree with any positions strongly held by the
U.S. The push for blandness comes mainly from the British, with
French support: The UK is now a weak country, and its representatives
are wary of launching initiatives that imply new burdens. In the end,
however, they recognize that world economic problems won’t wait and
are ready to go along with realistic proposals, if strongly favored by the
other participants.
Follow-Up
Effective follow-up was largely lacking after previous Summits. At
the final session of the Summit, you might propose that there be a
meeting of the Group that helped prepare the Summit, say five months
after the Summit, to survey progress made in executing Summit deci-
sions and to prepare a report for the heads of government on what has
been done and what remains to be done to this end. You will encounter
these objections:
—The follow-up takes place anyway in other forums: OECD, IMF,
GATT, World Bank, etc. Answer: We need to be sure that our ministers
in these forums are following Summit guidance, instead of allowing
that guidance to be eroded by time and new events, as in the past.
—This would institutionalize Summitry and antagonize non-
attending nations. Answer: There is no reason why this follow-up
meeting could not be as private and free from publicity as the prepara-
tory meetings have been. Countries will not be antagonized by a
non-event.
—It would place an additional burden on busy officials. Answer:
This burden would be small, compared to the advantages of ensuring

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
that Summit decisions had some effect on what happened in the real
world.10
Summit, as well as talking points based on the Summit briefing book. (Memorandum
from Hormats to Brzezinski, May 4; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
26.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 6, 1977
SUBJECT
Confidence is the Theme
On the eve of the second debate you decided that leadership was
the theme. By focusing on it, you gave your presentation a coherence
that your opponent lacked.
The underlying mood of the forthcoming Summit meetings is one
of anxiety. That anxiety pertains to the quality of leadership, to the via-
bility of the social systems, and to the West’s staying power particu-
larly in the East-West competition.
In that context, I think you should very deliberately project two
roles:
(1) By showing command of the issues, by displaying a genuine fa-
miliarity with the key problems, you will assure your colleagues that
you are capable of dealing realistically with complex dilemmas;
(2) By projecting a sense of confidence about the future, you can
both reassure and infuse your colleagues—as well as the publics at
large—with a greater degree of optimism, something which they des-
perately need and something which only America can provide.
By suggesting that confidence be your underlying theme, I do not
wish to suggest that you ignore the need for concrete action. Far from it;
without concrete proposals the stress on confidence would become just
“happy talk.” I do feel, however, that there is a danger of becoming ex-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
cessively absorbed by detail and thus of not responding to the more
fundamental crisis of confidence that pervades the West. In other
words, it is the old issue of the trees vs. the forest.
I attach a sheet of paper on which some thoughts of a more general
nature are briefly sketched out.2 They can be related to the needed ad-
vocacy of concrete actions. I also attach a useful article from today’s
London Times which reinforces the points I am trying to make,3 as well
as the pessimistic polls about East-West relations to which I referred at
breakfast.4
2 Attached but not printed is an undated paper entitled “Some Themes on the Sub-
ject of Confidence.”
3 Attached but not printed is an article by Hugh Hanning entitled “President Carter
adopts the ways of the Ugly American.”
4 Attached but not printed is an undated paper entitled “European Perceptions of
Comparative East-West Military Strength.” The President’s Daily Diary contains no
record of a May 6 breakfast meeting between Carter and Brzezinski, nor was a memo-
randum of conversation of a meeting found. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials)
27.
Minutes of the London Economic Summit Meeting1
London, May 7, 1977
LONDON SUMMIT—First Session (May 7, 1977)—Morning Session
Callaghan: I want to welcome all of you to London. We are sitting
close together today because in my view the closer we are, and the
more intimate, the less likely we are to make speeches. This is not as de-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
Carter under cover of a May 20 memorandum from Owen that reads: “I attach the notes
that Bob Hormats took of the Downing Street Summit. They cover the first day and the
morning of the second day. They do not cover the afternoon of the second day, which
was largely devoted to revising the Declaration.” (Ibid.) The sessions of the London G–7
and from 3 p.m. until 6 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily
Diary) The minutes of the Summit’s second session on May 7, which covered nuclear
non-proliferation and human rights, are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
lightful a setting as Puerto Rico or as splendid as Rambouillet,2 but
there is a small garden in the back if you wish to walk around. In the
past we have made a major effort to keep the same group together
throughout all meetings. But I know that the French Prime Minister
must return to Paris tomorrow and his place will be taken by M. Boulin.
I know President Carter also wants to make a change, but as far as pos-
sible we should try to keep the same people around the table.
Also it was agreed that at this meeting the EC would be repre-
sented by the President of the Council, namely me. The President of the
Commission will be present on matters of EC competence—trade,
North-South and energy—to be discussed tomorrow.
As far as agenda is concerned, I propose that we start with a dis-
cussion of the economic situation and, if you agree, devote the after-
noon to proliferation and human rights. I would like to ask President
Giscard to begin the discussion of the world economic situation. I will
inform President Jenkins today of any matters which arise which are in
the competence of the EC.
With regard to substance, I feel that there has been good prepara-
tion for the Summit by our officials. They have met and exchanged
views, thereby providing us with a valuable starting ground. Some of
these issues are most easily handled by officials, but some will require
the thoughtful consideration of those of us sitting around this table. On
North-South, for instance, it is a matter of high importance that we de-
velop a common view. We do not necessarily have to put in the com-
munique everything we decide. We can make a general statement, but
more important is what we agree among ourselves.
GENERAL ECONOMIC SITUATION
If you will allow me to put the ball into play. There are a range of
different views on the health of the world economy. We ought to record
our successes. For instance, a few years ago we all thought it unlikely
that you could have the sort of deep depression we have had and resist
protectionism so successfully. There are of course examples of protec-
tionism, but there has generally been strong resistance. This has been
helped by the Puerto Rico and Rambouillet Summits and the OECD
trade pledges.3 This is a success we should record. None of us believes
in protectionism and the best way now to avoid it is if we give one an-
other combined strength.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Some can also claim success because they have taken harsh meas-
ures to reduce inflation. This is hard in a democratic country. The UK
standard of living has been cut by 5% to restrain inflation. No wonder
people don’t vote for us in democratic societies. We must continue for a
time to follow harsh policies. But unemployment is also an extremely
important problem. There are 15 million people unemployed in the
West. I am glad to hear from President Carter that unemployment has
fallen in the US last month. But whereas the US seems to be leading in
this category, in most countries unemployment is likely to go up in
1977. In the UK and perhaps in other countries, we may be doomed to
some further increases in unemployment.
We all recognize, however, that inflation is the enemy—the father
and mother of unemployment. Chancellor Schmidt said yesterday that
you can beat inflation and still have high unemployment, and you can
have high inflation and also have unemployment. First priority is infla-
tion, but does that mean we cannot also reduce unemployment?
In my view it is not right for Britain to press other countries to re-
flate beyond the level they think necessary or right for their countries,
and beyond that which they think is needed to get to their objectives.
But I should relate to you a meeting I had with a delegation from the
International Conference of Trade Unions which included repre-
sentatives from the US, Germany, Japan as well as the UK. They said
they would sooner have one or two extra points on inflation if it can
soak up unemployment. I pressure no one to reflate beyond the level he
thinks he ought to go, but unemployment can put the system under se-
rious strain. We should understand the political consequences of un-
employment. This springs to mind especially for certain countries
which we all know.4
A second problem is OPEC’s $45 billion surplus—which is
matched by the equivalent deficit of many developed and developing
countries. This will likely remain and we therefore must have coopera-
4 In a pre-Summit message to Carter, Callaghan discussed his concerns about un-
employment. Owen sent Callaghan’s message to Carter under cover of a May 3 memo-
randum, in which he suggested that while Callaghan was “right to be concerned about
unemployment in” the United Kingdom, France, and Italy, he was “wrong to think that
marginal changes in the rate of German, Japanese, and U.S. expansion can set this
problem right.” Owen asserted that unemployment would “not yield to quick fixes—
only to long run remedies. At present, each of the Seven Nations is embarked on the right
long-term policies: moderate expansion in the U.S., Germany, Japan; stabilization in the
UK, France, and Italy. Over time, these policies will bring down both inflation and unem-
ployment—if the countries concerned stick to them.” (Carter Library, National Security

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
tion in an effort to match these deficits. Countries collectively are not
likely to reduce their deficits.
Another problem is that there could be less growth in 1978 than in
1977. From now until 1980, apart from Japan, it is difficult to see who
will meet the OECD targets. Only Japan will have larger growth in 1978
than in 1977. The US and Canada are doubtful as are France and Italy.
How can we answer this problem?
Also, with regard to balance of payments again, the US has moved
to a deficit while the UK is moving to surplus on balance of payments
but with less growth than we would like. We must ask whether the IMF
proposals are adequate. Are they sufficient? And, I must say that I
doubt whether they will be carried through on time.
Helmut Schmidt said, and I agree, that we should project confi-
dence. But this should not be a false confidence. We should give a real
assessment on this situation and find real answers. I have one final con-
cern. People are looking for direct benefits from the Summit; we must
all keep that in mind as we proceed.
Giscard: I thank you Mr. Prime Minister for living up to London’s
tradition of hospitality. I welcome also two new leaders. President
Carter has already gained considerable popularity in international
public opinion. I also welcome Prime Minister Fukuda whom we all
know and respect.
I would caution before we begin that the final outcome should
avoid a bureaucratic tone. Our experts excel at bureaucracy. We should
ensure the final outcome reflects this group in this room.
I have five comments on the economic situation:
First, I deeply believe that profound structural changes have taken
place in international economic affairs over the last three or four years.
This is not a conventional crisis of 18 months or two years; there are
profound changes. We had accustomed ourselves to cheap energy and
reliable raw materials. The developing countries were not seen as a
threat to our industry. We were accustomed to the healthy growth of
the 1960s. We wasted resources and all of our emphasis was on rela-
tions among developed countries. All that now is behind us and we
cannot go back to an old situation. We must adjust to a new resource
distribution by organizing ourselves differently.
Second, on the issue of employment. While things are improving
in the US, the situation in Europe is poor. Whether in countries of low
inflation (such as Germany) or high inflation (such as ourselves), the
unemployment situation is serious. It will have an ideological content
for our youths. The Socialist countries seem to have low growth but ap-
pear to be able to solve the problem of unemployment. Whatever their
economic problems, they solve unemployment. We cannot accept high

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
unemployment among our youths. The result will be an ideological
shift in favor of Eastern Europe. I subscribe to President Carter’s views
on human rights. One key element of human rights is the right to
employment.
Third, energy is at the heart of our problem and the worst may still
be before us. When we look at the projections for 1985 and 1990 there
will be more difficulties. In 1974 we thought that if we broke OPEC we
could cause a drop in the price of oil. But now oil is becoming a rarer
substance, and other minerals as well. We must define new and wider
range energy policies. For instance, the US made a very positive deci-
sion on this a few weeks ago.5
Fourth, on trade the industrialized world has gone through three
years of crisis without protectionism. But there are new causes of con-
cern with some shifts in trade terms. The share of the market of certain
countries has abruptly changed, for instance in steel, shipbuilding, etc.
There is also competition in high technology areas, such as aerospace
and computers. We should not be compelled to forego our positions be-
cause others are stronger in these areas.
Fifth, the developing countries do not like our meeting here in
London. It is anathema to them. We should devote a considerable
amount of time here to meeting their aspirations. For instance, their
high level of debt has repercussions on us. And if CIEC fails, there will
be serious consequences.6 The Canadians are particularly aware of this.
We should say that we are concerned about these problems and say
that CIEC should succeed.
Fukuda: The world economy is in a serious situation. All of us here
are capable of finding a breakthrough. I was posted here in London in
the 1930s—one-half century ago. The situation is reminiscent of today.
The Hoover depression in the US spread to Britain. It triggered a UK
departure from the gold standard. Others followed suit. Unemploy-
ment led to social insecurity. In 1933 an international economic meeting
was convened in London, chaired by Ramsay MacDonald. I was deeply
involved. I recall that in the 1929–34 period there was a drastic decline
in world production, by 30%, and a 40% drop in world trade. This led
to great social instability. A number of countries turned to totalitar-
ianism and fascism. The 1933 conference tried to deal with these
problems but did not succeed. The meeting was recessed and never re-
5 Possibly a reference to the Carter administration’s proposed energy program; see
footnote 7, Document 25.
6 The final Ministerial meeting of the Conference on International Economic Coop-
communique´ issued at the conclusion of the meeting. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D770206–0274) The communique´ is printed in the Department of

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
convened. We can learn from this. Countries resorted to protectionism.
They thus worsened the depression still further. All tried hard to deal
with the problem, but the situation instead became a backdrop to
World War II.
Today there is a much better regime for international economic co-
operation, but in many ways the situation is worse. As Giscard said,
there are limited resources and energy. But there is also East-West ten-
sion and a North-South rift which did not exist then. The situation is
made more serious by such structural problems. The question then is,
what to do. We must contain inflation but also do what is necessary to
recover world economic health. This is the predominant issue. There is
much that President Carter can do in this regard. The US is the greatest
economy in the world. It can lead other nations to provide the stimulus
for world economic recovery. It is important for all of us to have a
healthy recovery in order to stimulate employment. This also has an ef-
fect on North-South issues. It is important for us to recover so that
others can sell more commodities to us. And it is helpful in dealing
with the balance of payments issue. Countries which can help should
take the lead. This can lead the world to recovery without rekindling
inflation.
I want to mention in this context US policy. The US initially took
action to provide a tax rebate; this was a significant step, but it was sub-
sequently withdrawn.7 Because of this, there might be concerns that
you have given up the effort to further strengthen your economy. But I
still believe that the US is trying to stimulate its economy. I think the US
feels that the rebate is not necessary anymore. I feel that the US is not
giving up the idea of leading the world economy. I hope there is no
change of policy by the US leadership because I believe that the US can
lead us to pull out of the recession. But I still feel a nagging apprehen-
sion. Some people feel that the US is moving a little backward.
In the 1930s in London we witnessed the world moving into war.
We cannot afford that mistake again.
Andreotti: An analysis of the world economy provides conflicting
conclusions. It is better than we thought, but there are still signs of in-
stability and developments in many cases are unsatisfactory. Expan-
sion has been lower at this point than previous similar points of the
economic cycle. We have not properly increased the use of human re-
7 Fukuda is referring to Carter’s January 31 proposal to Congress for an economic
recovery program that included, among other measures, individual tax rebates. See foot-
Carter announced that the proposed $50 tax rebates were to be eliminated from the eco-
nomic recovery program. See Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
sources. Unemployment is still very high and inflation affects all of our
systems.
With respect to balance of payments issues, only a few OECD
countries have surpluses. Most of them, and most LDCs, are in deficit.
The surplus OECD countries simply add money on top of the already
large OPEC-related deficit. To overcome this, we need to deal with the
structural problem. All of us must make an effort to bring the structure
to conformity with new realities. This requires time and a gradual ap-
proach to adjustment. If not gradual, there will be negative conse-
quences for unemployment. We should reduce our deficits, but this
also depends on countries with favorable balances. If the stronger
would reaffirm their primary role in achieving growth, it will be easier
for the weaker economies.
Also, there must be adequate balance between financing and ad-
justment. The oil importers have turned primarily to the private
markets for finance. Now they are less solvent and find it more difficult
to sustain future deficits. The financial market has reacted positively
but there cannot be a solid financial position without a positive attitude
by the creditor and debtor countries. The creditors have been lending
primarily to good-loan risks—the low-risk countries. The debtors could
restore solvency if they stress the will and ability to put their economies
in order. The IMF has a role to play, in that it can provide adequate re-
sources to support stabilization plans. But the Fund should act more
symmetrically in order to lay the preconditions for recovery. We our-
selves are contributing through our stabilization policy and by not im-
posing trade restrictions. This involves major efforts to secure the con-
sent of various elements of society and our political parties.
With regard to unemployment, Giscard highlighted the political
aspects of the problem. We should leave no stone unturned to reduce
the gravity of the phenomenon. Also, we should discuss the growth of
youth unemployment. Seven million young people, 40% of unemploy-
ment in the OECD, are a major problem. The young represent 22% of
the work force. Also there is high unemployment among degree
holders. We cannot await an impact in a drop of the birth rate, which
should take effect in the mid-1980s, to deal with this.
Certain actions must be taken. We should refer to this in our final
Declaration. Unemployment is a major challenge to us all.
Schmidt: I thank Jim for his traditional UK hospitality and also
welcome President Carter and Prime Minister Fukuda. Valery is right
in saying this is not a normal situation, or typical business-cycle reces-
sion. It is a structural crisis. It reflects a lack of confidence among the
world’s rich nations, particularly among our consumers. In Germany,
we have a 14% rate of savings and the lowest interest rate in history. No
one asks for credit, yet we have money available. People do not use it

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
because there is lack of confidence. This Summit ought to give more
confidence in the ability of our countries to pursue complementary pol-
icies to achieve growth and lower unemployment.
Conditions are more favorable today than at Puerto Rico or Ram-
bouillet. Prime Minister Fukuda had compared today with the 1930s,
but conditions are different. There is greater cooperation in the IMF
and through the use of Summits, and there has been no resort to eco-
nomic warfare. These have prevented us from having the problems of
the 1930s.
The reasons for the structural differences and changed business
cycles in the 1970s are different from the 1930s. Both periods had high
unemployment but the causes are different. We must address the
causes of unemployment.
What are the causes of the structural crisis? There are, in my view,
three:
First, we should not ponder on the issue of inflation versus unem-
ployment. Unemployment followed inflation. Since the 1960s, inflation
has expanded. One reason for this was the way in which the war in
Southeast Asia was financed. The US flooded the world with liquidity.
But inflation has also been homemade. Parliaments and governments
have not resisted inflationary pressures. In addition, there are dispar-
ities in the rate of inflation from country to country. Also related to this,
and because of these disparities, the fixed rate system of Bretton Woods
had to collapse. It was inevitable after the disparities in the rates of in-
flation. We can get back to fixed rates, but not quickly. We all have a
long-range goal, Germany as well as France and others, to get back to
fixed rates, but I do not think this is probable for at least 36 months or
so.
The whole monetary system was, however, a regulating factor
after World War II. With the transition to flexible rates, countries were
no longer forced to obey the rules of Bretton Woods. The new flexible
rates were also a major uncertainty. If you bought or sold on install-
ments, or on six-month payments, your financial risks of trade were
very large. This was especially bad for the smaller firms.
Second, there was the oil crisis and the oil price explosion. This
dramatically changed the terms of trade and caused major balance of
payments problems. It led to a shrinkage of demand and a reduction of
international trade, which came to a low point in 1975, and weakened
confidence in the industrialized countries.
Third, is this overall lack of confidence in the world economic
order, particularly on the part of industries and trade unions.
We must fight unemployment and inflation together. The pros-
pects for OECD country growth in 1977 are not too bad. Growth was

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
The US and Japan are likely to lead; Germany will not attain the im-
pressive figures of last year, but we will have 4½% to 5% growth this
year. We will watch our growth to ensure that we have a healthy
economy. If not, we will do something; not by printing money, how-
ever. We do this, quite frankly, because we want to survive, but we also
do it because of our international responsibilities.
As a social democracy, my first aim is to reduce unemployment.
The question is how do we do it. We do this not by neglecting price sta-
bility since inflation is the underlying uncertainty. We cannot create
necessary capital until there is confidence that we will not have a new
round of inflation leading to a new clampdown by governments which
will make resources idle. A go-stop policy is disastrous.
But we recognize that in the meantime, without necessary private
expenditure, governments must fill in the gaps. There must therefore
be additional public capital expenditures. I just launched a 16 billion
DM program in addition to the money that the local, state and federal
governments are already spending. This is the biggest in our history.
But we cannot fix unemployment in a short period of time.
We also have to live with large OPEC surpluses. The structural up-
heaval in balance of payments is also likely to continue for a while. En-
ergy policy is one important tool in this remedy. For this reason, I wel-
come President Carter’s initiatives to reduce dependence. And there
must also be a structural network of balance of payments cooperation.
Germany has up-valued the DM by 18% since the beginning of 1976;
imagine what that means for our exports—18% in less than 18 months.
We do this because we think it is our responsibility to help others. But
this has an impact since we export 29% of our GNP. We will stick to our
flexible currency regime because it helps others to let this happen.
There have, however, been some examples of competitive devaluation;
for example, Sweden. I am not talking about you, Jim. (Callaghan: I can
do without mine.)
I want to stress that we cannot cure the illness without curing the
cause of the illness. We must deal with inflation, the problems of the in-
ternational monetary system, uneven exchange rates, and unequal dis-
tributions of incomes. We need a stable consensus among us and a
stable social consensus within our countries. Most of our efforts must
be autonomous national tasks, but we also need psychological help
from other parties.
The results of the Summit need not stress all of the measures that
have been decided—but they should give the impression to the world
that we are not going to fight each other by means of economic warfare,
and that instead we will have complementary economic policies.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
Trudeau: I am encouraged by what has been said so far. Giscard
mentioned the ideological difficulties relating to the problems of youth
unemployment. Fukuda referred to the 1930s and the consequences for
growth. In Puerto Rico we had not gone that far. We had not crossed
the threshold. We discussed structural problems without accepting the
need for structural change and without even recognizing the structural
changes which had already taken place. Our democracies are threat-
ened unless we find ways of affecting the structural changes to which
all here have referred. We all see the same problems in terms of funda-
mental changes which have taken place. These concerns are major ones.
I agree with Schmidt that we must tackle the causes if we do not want
the causes to continue to produce the same effects.
Giscard also said the freedom of trade should be organized. This
warrants our attention. It is not novel but we should take a close look at
it. To some extent, this has already been done; for example, by OPEC.
There is also a danger that actions by the dominant economies will
have consequences for all countries; for example, in such areas as com-
puters and aerospace. We have been dealing with OPEC, for instance,
recognizing that it may be essential to organize our markets to defend
ourselves. This is in some ways a new task for our liberal economies. In
addition, we must also intervene in the mechanisms of the market,
perhaps to help the developing countries.
This means that we must realize that our liberal philosophy is un-
dergoing change. When we look to the causes and solutions, we must
also look at certain additional measures of cooperation. Cooperation is
essential and unavoidable. These types of meetings have in the past
prevented economic wars which would have been a disaster to the in-
dustrialized world.
We must recognize, however, that there is no single formula to
combat unemployment and inflation. We must enlist the support of our
citizens. This issue was not addressed sufficiently in Puerto Rico.
Problems are caused by excessive hopes and aspirations of our citizens.
The problem is that people like to live beyond their means. It is hard to
say to them that things are going badly because all unions and em-
ployers are asking for more. We need a spirit of discipline in our coun-
tries. We should use our democratic institutions to help each other and
to direct our attentions to the need for restraint rather than simply
allow the market to give free reign to unrealistic expectations.
Callaghan and Schmidt agreed on the need to generate confidence
and a spirit of optimism. But how can we encourage people to have
confidence in the future and then turn and say that things are going
badly. We cannot say that all will be well because things are not all that
well unless we scale down expectations. This is the paradox I put be-
fore you.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Callaghan said that we need greater confidence but he also said
growth will be lower. We should make our people aware of the pos-
sible consequences for industrial democracies, of not winning the ideo-
logical war. This is not only true with the Third World, although it is
important because it will determine whether they look to us or to the
socialist countries, who have no unemployment and greater order, as
examples. But it will also have a serious impact on our own positions,
particularly on growth.
As presently worded, the communique does not sound a warning
note. It only talks of structural change without appealing to the
people’s attitudes and telling them that they share responsibility for the
health of the democracy. We cannot fail to invite people to live up to
their responsibilities. Each of us needs to do this. If we sound this
warning collectively, indicate the threat that our democracies are sub-
ject to, and bring about greater awareness in people, we can get support
from our people for the necessary measures that we need to accommo-
date structural change.
Carter: Thank you for your very cordial welcome. I come here not
as an economist, though I know many of you are very experienced in
this area, but as an eager student. I know many of you were former Fi-
nance Ministers and have valuable experience in working together. I
look forward to hearing your views so that when I get back I can make
better decisions. I recognize the deep importance of our decisions on
one another.
We in the US have set specific goals. I give you my assurances that
we will maintain our efforts to achieve healthy growth. I believe we can
ment. I predicted we could get it down to 7.1% in my first year. Now it
is down to 7%. I believe this is because of a surge in new confidence.
This is in part reflected in a US rate of savings of 6% compared to 14%
in Germany. There has been a big increase in consumption of consumer
goods and we have gotten figures indicating an upswing in invest-
ment. This is the reason—after these changes in unemployment and
consumer spending—that we saw no need for the $50 rebate. We still
have more than $20 billion worth of stimulus in the economy. We have
tried to focus this on the structural needs of our economy. We have
paid direct attention to youth unemployment—particularly summer
jobs—as well as employment for adults. We plan to continue our direct
attack on unemployment. We hope to get it below 5% at the end of my
term. For instance, we have a $4 billion public works program.
But we are also concerned about inflation. Our basic or underlying
wholesale level. This leads to uncertainties about the future, even
though results to date are encouraging. We do not want to stimulate

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
any more than presently proposed. As I mentioned, we have indica-
tions that business investment is increasing rapidly—about 17% or
18%. Discounting for inflation, this means a 10% or more real growth in
business investment. At the beginning of my Administration there was
uncertainty in the business community about what I would do. But
now investment is increasing very well, which to me indicates a new
business confidence.
One issue I have been facing is protectionism. I have received a
number of very harsh recommendations from the International Trade
Commission. These are in response to domestic pressures but give no
consideration to international relations. They are designed to protect
US industry. I believe I have fought off these recommendations very ef-
fectively. We have a deep commitment to fight protectionism. A strong
declaration by the Summit against protectionism would help me in re-
sisting it in the US. As many of you know, Congress can override my
decisions. But now I believe I am strong enough to prevent this. It is not
likely during my first year or two in office.
We are trying to overcome a very large trade deficit, particularly
our oil deficit. We collectively will have a $45 billion current account
deficit, which matches the OPEC surplus. We are bearing our part of
the deficit. Last year our current account position was zero. In 1975 it
was $12 billion in surplus. This year it will be roughly $12 billion in def-
icit. We have over a $20 billion trade deficit, but our economy is strong
enough to absorb this. Germany and Japan, however, continue to have
large surpluses; these increase the deficit for others. We can sustain our
deficit because we are strong enough to do so, but some countries are
too weak to accept this burden. We should all recognize this.
On energy, we have launched a major program. In 1985, we would
without this program import 16 million barrels per day. Our program
will try to get this to 6 million barrels per day through conservation and
by moving toward coal and gas. We have ended our moratorium on the
export of fuel; just before I left, I approved a large sale of enriched ura-
nium. Under adequate conditions on the export of enriched uranium,
we will be able to meet the world’s needs. We believe that supplies are
adequate provided that there are strong safeguards to avoid the use of
uranium for explosive purposes.
A key issue for all of us is confidence. I feel very confident about
the future of the US and the Free World. Vietnam and Watergate shook
confidence in the US, but I think this lack of confidence is past and I am
not concerned about it anymore. The new confidence can only come
from within people and I believe that this has emerged. But we should
not be afraid about explaining problems and the need for bold action,
and saying that we need one another. If we are timid about stating our
problems and the need for cooperation, pessimistic predictions about

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
the future, predictions about loss of confidence, might come true. We
need here a frank discussion of the challenges and how to meet them
effectively working with one another.
Also we need to be sure that our decisions are carried out by our
bureaucrats. We should not just discuss things, but do something about
them. For instance, we should try to have a Tokyo Round of trade nego-
tiations as successful as the Kennedy Round. We should try to meet our
energy problems, cooperatively deal with developing countries and ef-
fectively deal with the problems of nuclear fuel. We have combined
strength and we should use it. We should follow up promptly at staff
level to achieve results. And we should be certain to set our goals fairly
high. If we set goals too low, they will represent the maximum we will
be able to achieve.
On trade, we should say that we would like to do as well as in the
Kennedy Round. Unless we set high expectations, others will lower
their expectations.
We should also consider how to absorb the new leaders of the eco-
nomic world. Saudi Arabia comes to mind. Saudi Arabia wants to par-
ticipate with us in the Horn of Africa, to help the developing countries
and to establish fuel reserves so we won’t be hurt so much by any em-
bargoes. Their strength and financial influence need to be recognized.
We should give them the influence that they deserve along with re-
questing their financial contributions.
In addition, we should strengthen the IMF and the World Bank.
Together they are very effective and provide useful guidance. We wel-
come the efforts by the IMF to ensure financial accountability on profli-
gate nations. For this reason, we need to strengthen the IMF. Here
again Saudi Arabia can be helpful. We should also carry out our com-
mitments at Puerto Rico on strengthening the IMF. We are ready to par-
ticipate in the Witteveen plan.
I welcome this opportunity to meet with you, and to have your ad-
vice and counsel. I am here to learn and I think I can learn a great deal
from you. If I ever make a decision which is contrary to your important
interests, I hope you will let me know. On two or three occasions, we
were too insensitive to your needs, and it has taken me a while to un-
derstand this—for instance, on the nuclear fuel issue.
Callaghan: I agree we should try to do just as well on trade as in
the Kennedy Round, but we need to reconcile this on one hand and our
concerns about such problems as those in the shipbuilding and steel
sectors on the other. We need to give guidance to our people on such
issues in the communique.
MacDonald: On the issue of confidence, I speak as a lawyer sur-
rounded by economists. But I must say I am not sure that professional
economists today know what is going on. The pattern of events that

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
they talk about does not fit current facts. I have heard Prime Minister
Fukuda’s excellent analysis of the problems of the 1930s. I fear that
people think in terms of Keynesian analysis and are now applying
these old patterns to present circumstances and that pattern of thinking
is not consistent with present facts. Hoover economics has not been up-
dated to deal with such issues as how do we give resources to devel-
oping countries.
Our task as politicians is to make the choices, such as how much of
our GNP we give to the developing countries. These are allocating
problems. Also for instance, we have discussed youth unemployment.
Here there is a problem with the unions, which is part of a generational
problem.
We should think about an inter-generational transfer of resources.
There is a structural problem in unions which is harmful to youths.
How do we transfer resources from the older generation to our youths?
This may be how we have to deal with this problem. The job-creation
programs today are not necessarily sufficient. I have noted Prime Min-
ister Barre’s proposals of a make-work nature for dealing with youth
unemployment. When such projects come to an end, we will still have
youth unemployment. This should be an important issue discussed
here.
Healey: I want to support some of the things that Don MacDonald
has just said. Prime Minister Fukuda has used the words “nagging ap-
prehension”. Chancellor Schmidt spoke of “lack of confidence”. But ex-
cept in the US, who is confident? In other countries there is a certain
malaise, characterized by high savings and low investment, high un-
employment, high inflation and election losses. At our meeting in
Puerto Rico, we were too complacent and this complacency was unjus-
tified. In some of our countries a downturn had begun, from which
President Carter benefited later in the year.
All of us have been taught the relationship between growth and
unemployment, and growth and inflation. But all established relation-
ships seem to have disappeared. The inter-relationships appear to be
different in different countries. Canada and France have recovered
from a recession and have increased output, but also suffer from in-
creasing unemployment. The UK has increases in its labor force and
low growth, yet unemployment is falling when we expected it to be
rising. We do not quite understand this. We have much work to do to
understand these problems and should share the lessons of our
experience.
One key element is high inflation and high unemployment. This
has contributed to the five-fold oil price increase. The OPEC countries
couldn’t spend all the money, therefore it led both to inflation and de-
flation. We must finance the counterpart to the oil surplus or have de-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
flation. The problem is that the balance of payments is unevenly dis-
tributed. Germany and Japan have substantial surpluses. Others have a
$20 billion shared deficit as a result, on top of other OPEC-related def-
icits, to accommodate.
Another problem related to this is that we have concentrated on
the growth of countries’ GNP rather than the source of growth. If
growth has been led by exports, as is partly the case in Germany and
Japan, the burden on the weaker economies is greater even if the strong
countries achieve their growth targets. The stronger economies should
follow the US example in taking a bigger share of the deficit.
Countries should agree to stick to announced targets and monitor
progress, and they should take action to reach the targets if it appears
that they are failing to do so. And we should do our best to see that the
global deficit is financed in ways acceptable to the deficit countries and
does not weaken the overall financial system.
There is a risk that the type of credit provided by the IMF at the
moment is not acceptable to countries who need financing. If the IMF
requires stringent conditions, countries might prefer not to borrow
from it and resort instead to protectionism or induced recessions,
which can lead to the overthrow of the government. Their successors
might go for protectionism. What I am talking about does not only
apply to the developing countries, but also to some developed coun-
tries like Spain, Portugal or Turkey, which have serious financial
problems. It is far from clear that they can meet IMF conditions. There
are similar problems in the Caribbean, for instance Jamaica and
Guyana. We should accept the principle that the Fund should not be so
tough on conditionality that the offer of money is meaningless.
And we ought to monitor what happens after this Summit more
closely than after previous Summits. There could be periodic reports.
We meet frequently in the OECD and IMF. We could do reports on
growth, the financing of payments imbalances, unemployment and es-
pecially youth unemployment, and extension of the freedom of trade,
taking advantage of our opportunity to get together at these various
meetings.
Apel: I want to make five quick points. In 1975 we had a growth
high growth rates there has been little reduction of unemployment.
Some foreign labor has not returned to Turkey, and others took their
pensions. We hope to meet our 5% target this year. But even with this
high unemployment, we will have large amounts of imports. Our im-
ports from the non-oil LDCs will increase 30%. This shows that our
wage-cost level is very high. But on the other hand we have increased
our export balance with European countries with very high inflation
rates. As you see, there are a lot of German cars in London. This shows

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
that we are not unwilling to increase imports, but countries with high
inflation must stabilize prices if they are to be able to export to us. Last
year we had a $3 billion current account surplus. This year it will be $2
billion. Therefore, we are approaching equilibrium.
I also agree that that the IMF must play an important role in fi-
nancing imbalances. The banking system has reached certain limits. I
am afraid that certain banks cannot increase their liabilities. Therefore,
we need an increase in financing by official institutions. In this respect
the IMF is extremely important. We will do our best to strengthen the
Fund working with other industrialized countries including the US,
Japan, Sweden and Switzerland. It is important to have close contact
with the Saudis as well. It is a good idea to have market-related interest
rates in the new facility. This benefits the Saudis. This facility also re-
moves some of the risks. A depreciation of national currencies does not
hit them to the same extent as it otherwise would, if they put their
money in the Witteveen facility. On conditionality, the IMF should be
strict, but not too strict. It must depend on the character of the recipient.
My third point is that we should be careful not to put too much
emphasis on energy saving. It could reduce economic growth if we do
so. We must also understand that we need nuclear energy within the
next few years. If we cannot have nuclear energy, it could seriously
hurt our industry and we would be in trouble in a few years. We need
energy sources now in order to save imports later on.
Fourth, we need resource transfers to the developing countries.
But if they ask too much of us, they could destroy their sources of help.
If they do this, they will run into trouble because their electorates will
not stand for it.
Fifth, we must spread confidence without creating false hopes.
Prime Minister Trudeau indicated quite correctly that we should avoid
creating false hopes. If we do, we will be confronted with our own
words in 12 months. I agree that Rambouillet was a success, but that
Puerto Rico was too complacent. Here we should be confident but indi-
cate the dangers which should be overcome.
Blumenthal: I am impressed by the fact that there is a general view
here that protectionism is not the answer. President Carter has indi-
cated that we should strive for results which match those of the Ken-
nedy Round in their economic and political significance. The goals we
set should attempt to equal those of the Kennedy Round while recog-
nizing that the conditions are different. We should, of course, as sug-
gested, look at shipbuilding and steel, hopefully attempting to achieve
greater openness. We should not move toward government-blessed
cartels which would work in the opposite way. We hope that the results
can be far reaching. We should project a sense of commitment and give
assurances of our positive attitude.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Our recovery has also meant that we have a high trade deficit—
roughly $20 billion, which means a current account deficit of roughly
$10 billion. One point in this is not fully understood. The large invest-
ment by the Saudis and others in the US and the high demand for
dollars keeps our exchange rate higher than would otherwise be the
case and thus contributes to our current account deficit. It gives us a
higher exchange rate than otherwise. If we did not have such large in-
vestment, the dollar would decline in value.
2.25 marks, so that the dollar has weakened and not strengthened.
Blumenthal: All I am saying is that the dollar would have been
lower without Saudi investment.
Apel: They invest in the Federal Republic too.
Blumenthal: I understand that, but the higher exchange rate con-
tributes to our current deficit because of Saudi investment. On condi-
tionality, we believe it is important and must be retained, but with flex-
ibility. Political leaders must say what they can bear with respect to
conditionality. We are trying to be helpful in our bilateral relations to
Mexico and Portugal. There are various ways of dealing with these
problems in which the IMF is not the most appropriate vehicle.
Healey: I agree, but if other ways are used too often, it could erode
the IMF. We should soften IMF conditionality rather than have new
channels.
Callaghan: I am not sure I agree with Denis on this. I think politi-
cians should say to the IMF that, for instance in the case of Jamaica, if
you insist on these conditions, you will throw them into the hands of
the Cubans. Our technicians and officials should be tough. It is leaders
who should intervene for political reasons.
Blumenthal: Just to finish up on our energy program, which was
mentioned earlier, it is true that we place primary emphasis on conser-
vation and savings, but we also place strong emphasis on the develop-
ment of other sources of energy.
Jamieson: Do I take this to mean that the US wants less Saudi
money? You should be aware that you were the Saudis of Canada for
years.
Blumenthal: Yes, we still want Saudi money. I was just pointing
out one implication.
Carter: Following up a point on energy, our target calls for an in-
crease in coal of 60% and new uranium enrichment through use of the
centrifuge. We expect to get 600 million to 1 billion tons of coal per day.
The centrifuge plant is a big investment—perhaps $4–5 billion. So our
program is not just conservation but it also has a strong emphasis on
production. We feel that our overall program can reduce the world bal-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
ance presently in favor of OPEC, and in so doing reduce the pressure
on other oil importers. Also, we recognize that the development of new
supplies, for instance, solar energy, is very costly. We should look for
ways to reduce the costs of research and development and pilot
models. We would like to see additional cooperation on R&D financing
in such areas as the EC (JET) project. We would like to pursue this idea
further.
Callaghan: We encourage your conservation efforts and support
increased cooperation.
Fukuda: I am impressed by the emphasis in this conversation on
structural problems. But what are they? One key element is that we are
now in an age of finite resources. People are worried about the future. I
congratulate President Carter on his bold energy program. We need
additional efforts to increase energy sources through strong interna-
tional collaboration. The US is a large country. But all of us will do
better if we engage in a collective effort and effective collaboration to
develop new energy sources, such as fusion. We must deal with the
problems of petroleum investment and investment in a variety of new
sources.
CIEC is particularly important in an energy context as well as in
North-South context. Unless we resolve our differences, we risk further
difficulty and unrest. All of our efforts will take time. If these are really
structural problems, they take time to resolve. But we should see what
we can do immediately to address the problem of unemployment and
address North-South issues together. We should achieve harmoniza-
tion between surplus and deficit countries. If the strong countries get
together to reflate, it will provide great buoyancy for our economies.
Without it, unemployment is bound to rise, and there will be more
North-South confrontation. Without it the developing countries will
push us further in a number of areas. Economic confrontation and po-
litical chaos will result.
This is why we in Japan want to restore our economic vitality. We
are carrying a high fiscal deficit. We want to contribute to recovery in
the world and to finance the deficits of others. We want to stimulate de-
mand by deliberate action. Through our fiscal actions, we have rein-
vigorated our economy and generated more effective demand. We
have applied $36 billion of fiscal expansion for public works; 73% will
be spent in the first 6 months—April through September. This will
create jobs in the Japanese economy and it will also encourage imports
into Japan. We import much from the LDCs. Our stimulus helps the
LDCs. Also our exports will be more sluggish as a result. Our goal is
6.7% growth. We would like to accomplish this objective at any cost.
One way we have attempted to do it is to lower our interest rate. We
have lowered our discount rate to 5%. Now our exchange rate is 275

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
yen to the dollar, up from 300 yen to the dollar. This is a 12% apprecia-
tion in 6 months. It will help.
We must also recognize the need for a follow-up to our discus-
sions. I am pleased that President Carter suggested this too. We need
this follow-up on other levels and in a variety of institutions, such as
the DAC, IMF, OECD, IEA, GATT, etc. All meet separately rather than
as part of one unified effort. But we should now attempt to get all of
them to concert their efforts in the same direction. When the Finance
Ministers meet in these various forums, they should be sure that every-
thing is going in one direction.
There is one trade problem I want to raise. Last year we saw a con-
centration of Japanese exports of color TVs. There was a torrent of ex-
ports. I will see that this is corrected. We all must avoid any inclination
to protectionism. I am referring to the protectionism of the 1930s, espe-
cially 1934. We must not repeat this. This will weaken us vis-a`-vis the
East and South. Today the Eastern Bloc is about as powerful as the Free
World. If we are lax enough to sink to protectionism, it will be a
tragedy. The OECD pledge is important even if we don’t repeat it. The
spirit is important and we should make sure this spirit is upheld.
Barre: I have three short points. This Summit can have major psy-
chological value as well as practical value if followed up energetically.
But it should not raise false hopes. We are, first of all, in a crisis of confi-
dence. This is due basically to the fact that we have had 20 years of
prosperity which has slowed down in recent times. Some thought that
the slowdown would be a short-term phenomenon, and that soon we
would return to the period before 1973–74. We should not allow this
thought to continue. We should make public opinion aware of the facts,
as President Giscard said. For instance, the oil-importing countries
should recognize that the transfer of resources to exporters will reduce
the possibility for increasing the quality of living and the standards of
living in the developed countries. If we don’t do this, we will all expect
too much over the short-term. Also confidence has been shaken be-
cause of uncertainties over the shortages of supplies and the problem of
prices. I believe that the CIEC shows that the oil-importing countries
are aware of this difficulty.
The second problem is unemployment. We should not give the im-
pression that our struggle against unemployment replaces our fight
against inflation. These efforts must be undertaken side-by-side. We
must continue to struggle against inflation which will lead to a reduc-
tion in unemployment as well. This should not be done in the Keyne-
sian context of the 1930s. The labor situation has changed. People get
unemployment benefits. They are not looking for just any employment,
but are looking for a job they will accept. Many women are coming into
the labor market and turnover has increased significantly. Youths

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
today do not have the same motivation. There is less concern with the
continuity of work. The struggle against unemployment calls for spe-
cific programs to find long-term employment rather than part-time
jobs. We should not say we are going to solve the unemployment with
a big rush forward because this would soon mean the application of re-
strictive measures.
My third point is on trade. President Giscard stressed structural
changes and the need for organized freedom of trade. We should safe-
guard the freedom of trade. If we want to guarantee freedom of trade,
opinion will not be impressed. We should make a collective commit-
ment not only to resist protectionism but also to deal with problems of
trade.
We also need access by exporters to important markets which are
closed not only because of customs duties, but other barriers as well.
The EC has given the developing countries great access and tech-
nology. A number of countries are now subsidizing their exports and
closing their markets to the developed countries. A lack of symmetry
cannot be supported in the future. If this exists, the negotiations cannot
deal with the problems in a climate of cooperation. Public opinion will
not allow cooperation. We should stress that the new problems require
new approaches, and give an acceptable content to the notion of trade,
demonstrating that it is not in conflict with the notion of employment.
A follow-up is a good idea. The Summit could lead to positive re-
sults on trade, economic growth, and employment.
Callaghan: This has been a useful discussion. We have overlapped
into other areas. One essential point which has emerged is that we not
only want a good declaration, but good results. We should relate the
declaration to our people.
I listened to Prime Minister Fukuda express his concerns and com-
pare this period to the period of the 1930s. I believe that President Gis-
card was the first to mention structural changes which makes this pe-
riod different from both the 1930s and the period before 1973. Prime
Minister Trudeau also added a point about the consequences of this for
ourselves and indicated the need to educate our people, the developing
countries, and the oil producers who do not understand the change in
the situation. Our communique should have a short analysis at the be-
ginning which points to these matters. We need an analysis of this
situation.
On the issue of inflation and unemployment, all of us are agreed
on the political consequences of high unemployment. Our number one
aim, as Chancellor Schmidt said, is to reduce high unemployment, par-
ticularly among the youth. But there are also serious inflationary pres-
sures which must be dealt with.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
On the issue of confidence, we need to bring renewed confidence
and a greater sense of certainty. We should say that we intend to carry
out our commitment on growth for this year. As Prime Minister Tru-
deau said, we should reinforce each other by telling people not to exag-
gerate in their minds what can be done. The points that were raised on
the IMF and protectionism should also be included.
Another good point was on the proliferation of international insti-
tutions. Our actions must be followed up in institutions by our people.
We can take a bird’s eye-view of what they are doing in these institu-
tions. We must we willing to meet again to keep an eye on what they
are doing—to keep an eye on these goals. The Foreign Ministers at
lunch should inform our colleagues of these objectives. We should in-
vite our colleagues to meet in the afternoon to draft a communique.
Carter: We should say that unemployment is the most important
issue, but follow immediately by discussing inflation to show that they
go together. We should let the world know what we discussed and
what we think. We should lead off the communique with the main
points we agreed on and then follow-up with the supporting facts. We
should present our conclusions in the first paragraph.
Giscard: I believe that the communique was read last time only by
those who drafted it. It is too long now.
Callaghan: We should cut it down and make it direct.
Fukuda: You have correctly indicated the high points. We should
also put in that one change is a tighter supply of resources and energy.
Callaghan: I agree.
Andreotti: The communique should have value, something for
public opinion. We want to stress the main points and give reassur-
ances and hope. It should have a political content.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
28.
Minutes of the London Economic Summit Meeting1
London, May 8, 1977
LONDON SUMMIT—May 8, Morning Session
North-South Issues
Callaghan: We welcome the President of the European Commis-
sion, Mr. Jenkins, and M. Boulin, the French Minister of Finance.2
Giscard: The French President and Prime Minister by custom, are
not supposed to be absent from the country at the same time. I assume
that this is because it is felt that were they to disappear it would be a
catastrophe. I believe it is the same for the US President and Vice
President.
Turning to North-South issues, these are one of the most important
subjects we will discuss at this meeting. This is true, not only because
the subjects themselves are significant but also because the meeting is
being watched with anxiety by the developing countries who are not
keen on this meeting of the wealthy nations. As we know, the EC has a
Community mandate on this issue so it is suitable that the President of
the Commission be here with us.
I would like to briefly discuss how the North-South dialogue came
about and its economic and political character. The idea was broached
first in 1974. Then there were two strategies vis-a-vis the oil producers.
The first was a strategy of confrontation designed to break OPEC and
cause a decline in the price of oil. The second was a strategy of consulta-
tion to help deal with the problems of the developing countries and
thereby to elicit a more responsible attitude from OPEC. Since 1973 the
countries of the Gulf, such as Saudia Arabia and the UAE, have taken a
relatively reasonable attitude. This is in part because of our policy of
consultations on energy and developing country problems. We should
continue in this way to encourage the moderate oil producers. If there
is a failure of the North-South dialogue, radical producers would gain
the upper hand. A first element in encouraging moderation is a Middle
East settlement. But the success or failure of the North-South dialogue
will also have an impact. We should recognize that if there is an in-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
of the Summit’s final session on the afternoon of May 8, which covered Summit
follow-up and the Summit declaration, is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
2 Robert Boulin was not the French Minister of Finance but the Minister Delegate to
the Prime Minister in Charge of Economy and Finance.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
crease in the oil price, the total sum involved will be far more than
would be channeled for development assistance.
On April 26 the ten co-chairmen will meet to plan the Ministerial
both optimism and for pessimism. I am optimistic because I believe we
can reach an agreement. I am pessimistic because Perez-Guerrero re-
cently said that the developing countries were disappointed and
anxious about the possibility of ultimate agreement. The European
Community has made progress and a number of points were agreed.
But it is essential to make two main decisions now—on raw materials
and aid to development. We need to establish a common fund to fi-
nance the organization of the commodity market. The EC has agreed
(with German reservations, which I understand) to establish a common
fund. Can we today say that we agree in principle to establish a
common fund with the details of the fund to be settled later?
Related to this we need an expression of political intent, of political
will, to conclude commodity agreements based on some criteria. Those
criteria should be that we choose commodities of most direct interest to
the poorest LDCs and accept periodic review of the reference prices of
those commodities. It is correct that we should reject indexation, but it
is only normal that the LDCs want a review of prices from time to time,
and we should agree.
On aid, the developing countries want a lightening of debt—an au-
tomatic relief of the debt burden. We agreed to reject this and instead
proposed special aid to these countries. There should be a better review
of the problems of those countries in debt, but we should provide help
on a case-by-case basis. We should respond, in this way, with better
procedures and at the same time accept the idea of exceptional addi-
tional aid for the poorest with the greatest debt burden. We should ex-
plore at this meeting the possibility of a $1 billion special fund with
contributions from the EC, the US and others, and should decide here
whether to confirm this or not. The American position is that they
prefer a bilateral channeling of this assistance and we should discuss
this. We are open-minded. The figure I am talking about for this excep-
tional aid is very low—$1 billion—when the oil deficit is $45 billion. So
$1 billion is not very generous.
But for what we do, we should ask what we should get in return. A
system should be set up for periodic consultations on energy (i.e., oil
prices) in a CIEC forum so that decisions are preceded by consultations.
There should also be principles to protect our investment in the LDCs.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
We also need to decide whether we should do or say anything
about the inadequacy of aid to development. Development aid is not
commensurate with LDC needs. I do not believe that .7% is an accept-
able level. I know that target is hard for some countries, but we all
should be prepared to step up our aid.
In the present situation, the Socialist countries make virtually no
contribution to development aid. They make only a small contribution
to the UN. Bilateral aid, contributions to the World Bank and to the Eu-
ropean Development Fund are done by Western industrialized states
alone. We should take a public stand, a principled stand, in view of the
scale of development problems and indicate that the Socialist countries
should finance more development aid. We should make proposals
along these lines. In Africa, for instance, we finance all development aid
and get little political results. The Socialists provide virtually all the
military aid with considerable political results. We should get the So-
cialist countries to contribute development aid. This will bring a reac-
tion from the Soviet Union, but we should not be the only peoples to
whom the finger of criticism is pointed.
Callaghan: We cannot make decisions on CIEC at this meeting. But
we can concert on national approaches to help in the development of
the G–8 position. In 1975 there was a confrontation atmosphere in the
UN. There could be another attempt at confrontation at the CIEC or an
attempt to drive wedges between us. We should adhere to the major
points. I would like to hear the attitudes of others on a common fund
and on debt relief.
President Carter: We are willing and eager to participate in the en-
dorsement of the principle of a common fund. We believe it is worth-
while. We feel that export earnings of nations should be stabilized.
With regard to the second point, our system makes it difficult for
us to make a contribution through multilateral groups but we will go
bilaterally. Also, we are willing to at least double aid between now and
and included military aid. We are prepared to contribute more through
lending institutions. On the inclusion of Socialist countries in the aid ef-
fort, this is a worthy idea. (I also personally think they should be in the
World Bank and IMF. I don’t know why they are not.) We should make
the proposal that they give more aid in a constructive, non-polemical
fashion, perhaps before the CIEC. President Giscard will be meeting
with Brezhnev in France. This is a worthy subject for discussion. We
should also welcome participation by OPEC. They feel excluded. We
have been too rigid in asking financial contributions without giving
them a role in the institutions.
Callaghan: We all know your difficulties about your bilateral aid.
We need something which looks like special action. If you diffuse it in a

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
bilateral way, it does not look like something is happening of the nature
of special action. Your doubling of aid by 1982 though is clearly
tangible.
Vance: We can do this easily bilaterally. We can put our share into
the fund. We can do it in a bilateral way so that it will be counted in the
total.
Schmidt: I must ask the gentlemen around this table not to lose
sight of one overriding principle. We should not have a bad conscience
vis-a-vis the LDCs. It is not good that some Westerners go around ex-
tolling their bad consciences. We have done well, much better than the
Communists. We will do more. We want it to be recognized that we
have a moral obligation. And I think we can do better than we are. Al-
though we must ensure that any additional commitments not jeop-
ardize the world economy as a whole.
We have been talking about structural crisis. The oil countries’
price increase has had a major impact on the terms of trade, which is
part of the structural crisis. What we do should not undermine the
world economy. I hold this view as a social democrat, but my liberal
friend Genscher also shares it. A smooth world economy is as impor-
tant to them as it is to us. With respect to aid, $17 billion worth is pro-
vided; 80% comes from OECD countries, 15% from the OPEC coun-
tries, and 5% from the COMECON. They provide a lot of military aid.
But their economic aid all together is only 50% of that of Germany.
They sponsor wars in Africa and we let them get away with it. We
should invite them today to participate in the aid effort—to take up
their part of the responsibility. The Soviet Union and the East Germans
are comparable to some industrialized countries.
In other fields I have the impression, as I said before, that we are
going to meetings with bad consciences. We have been willing to give,
but we are not asking all others to give as well. I am willing to go to my
nation to ask them to give more—to make additional sacrifices. But we
also want to get something. I want to get more stability and foresee-
ability in the system. I want guarantees for foreign investment in their
countries. If we do not have this, private investment will diminish and
aid requests will increase. This should be in the final act.
OPEC should also give certain pledges in the final act. They have
contributed to the structural mess of the world economy. Saudi Arabia
needs and deserves praise. It has been especially helpful. But there
ought to be a pledge on the quantity of oil to ensure adequate supplies.
We should not talk about a price mechanism. I don’t believe in a price
mechanism very much, but we should at least ask this of them. It is out-
rageous that they embargo us.
Thus the Declaration should refer to the Soviet Union, LDC invest-
ment guarantees, and OPEC assurances on supply. Returning to my
point about sacrifices, we should indicate that we will make some.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
In Puerto Rico, I gave some figures about what would happen if
we concluded commodity agreements for 25 commodities. It would
mean that we would not only misallocate resources, but would create
other economic mistakes. We would be enlarging the revenues and re-
ceipts of countries who do not need it. We would give the US and the
Soviet Union windfall price increases. The Soviets already charge
Eastern Europeans a lot. Commodity agreements will only raise the
price of the exports of Australia, Canada and the USSR. We want to
help the developing countries, not the developed countries.
I have made a proposal to help the developing countries. We must,
of course, have commodity agreements for a few tropical products.
But we should use a Stabex scheme4 to avoid regulating all of the
world’s market. This can help the developing countries without over-
regulation of most commodity markets. I do this not out of German in-
terests, but to maintain the continuity of the world economic system as
a whole. A solution is no good if it is simply a cheap gesture which will
hurt the world economy in 1978 and 1979.
We haven’t even seen the peak of the world structural problem.
We can’t stand more economic upheaval. This is true of all of our Euro-
pean partners. Italy, France, the UK, and Germany are all under serious
political strains because our people do not believe that our difficulties
are insurmountable. They feel we can surmount them. If not, they will
vote us out.
Our objective should not be to please, but to help, the LDCs. We
may want to please God, but we do not necessarily need to please the
LDCs. We should think of the consequences of fixing world commodity
prices. We should not repeat the situation of agriculture inside the EC.
Too much commodity price-fixing leads to over-production, the cost of
storage, buffer stocks, the breakdown of the system and too high costs
for our economies. I can go along with anything you decide. I am not
out to pursue German national interests. But I do not believe we should
please the developing countries for a short while, if in the long run we
suffer economically and politically.
Andreotti: We should have considerations that relate not only to
humanitarian and welfare concerns, but also to our interests. Without
participation of the developing countries, there can be no constant de-
velopment of the world economy. We should not have regulation of
commodities as in the EC. On this I agree with Chancellor Schmidt. I
believe we should move from a general statement to a concrete study
which Schmidt also referred to.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Next, as to aid, we should try to work in multilateral fora. An ex-
ample is what we are trying to do through the EC. We should create a
realization of the solidarity which exists. Like Truman’s Point 4 ac-
quired moral leadership in the developing world, if our coordination is
to establish more development aid, we should give it a political char-
acter. It would be extremely valuable to make this step together with
other steps, for instance the transfer of technologies. I also agree with
the point of Presidents Giscard and Carter. Public opinion should rec-
ognize how little aid the Soviets give. We should say, not only is it
scanty, but we do not consider it aid from the point of view of a con-
structive responsibility for the development effort. We should make
sure that our aid is given in relation to effective programs. As in the
IMF, we should use stabilization and growth as our criteria for giving
aid.
Fukuda: We live in a day of structural change. There are many
facets of this, and one is in recent North-South developments. Another
is the finiteness of resources in energy. We should have a sweeping re-
view of the situation. These matters are inter-related very closely.
Countries of the South should be allowed to participate in the growth
of the world economy. They should be given a role to play and be held
accountable for their role. CIEC is vital and its success or failure is of
vital concern to us all. We should think about how to ensure the success
of CIEC. If it fails, we throw the world into a chaotic state.
What can we do to ensure the success of CIEC? If we say some-
thing about the orientation of the Common Fund, it will be useful. Debt
is also an issue, and it will be useful for us to provide an orientation on
this.
President Giscard gave an effective inventory of the issues and
covered them very well in the Tokyo Round. We should give special
consideration to the developing countries and the matter of primary
commodities. When we discuss ways to aid the developing countries,
the most effective way is for our own economies to recover their health.
When we help increase LDC exports, we are doing something impor-
tant. When we reflate our economies, we help the LDCs.
Jenkins: CIEC should not be seen as a charitable operation. We
should go for better access to raw materials and stable investment. We
should see it as a two-way process. The developing countries should be
involved and their interests are wrapped up with ours. In many ways a
safer way to stimulate our economies is to strengthen demand in the
developing countries. We should make a success of CIEC, and I believe
we can do this without unwise actions. The preliminary meeting gave
us indications which were not too bad, but there still can be a confron-
tation. Our first need is for a united front vis-a-vis the G–8.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
On special action to help the poorest LDCs, we envisage a $1 bil-
contributions from others. We do attach great importance to its being
multilateral. We recognize the US problem, but the money should be
seen as additional. It should be money which can be used quickly and
not be tied to projects.
There is also a longer-term question of official development aid
over the next few years. We should discuss how we can improve our
contribution to get more money.
On the Common Fund, we are in agreement that this issue has sig-
nificant importance. We should accept the principle and approach this
cautiously so that it does not cover a wide range of commodities.
And we should consider the stabilization of export earnings as
well. There should be agreement to study Stabex at the Paris meeting.
The EC Stabex has worked well. The Common Fund and Stabex will
support each other. We hope for a study by the Development Com-
mittee of the IMF and the World Bank. This would be a good outcome
of the CIEC.
Fukuda: I met with the Secretary General of UNCTAD who dis-
cussed the Common Fund concept. I had heard about it as a bad con-
cept. I found his explanation made it seem like a more pragmatic
proposal.
MacDonald: I would like to discuss three points: politics, success
and commodities. The failure of CIEC will have major consequences.
OPEC will charge us economic rent one way or another. Saudi Arabia is
emerging in a positive way. A conference in which they have played a
positive role should be successful. On aid financing, progress has been
made in the Witteveen facility. But we should not be overwhelmed by
this success. There will be some shifting of resources from the devel-
oped to the developing countries.
On commodities, as a major primary producer and exporter,
Canada is not seeking a new CAP. We are prepared to compete on com-
mercial terms. We are prepared to participate in a Common Fund and
don’t want a cartel. The place to continue the discussions is in
UNCTAD.
Schmidt: Do you recognize the difference in international compe-
tence between the IMF and UNCTAD, and the difference between the
developed and the developing countries management?
MacDonald: You have to deal with the LDCs somewhere.
Giscard: The communique should say that the Seven expect a posi-
tive outcome to CIEC, accept the principle of the Common Fund and
exceptional aid. This will open up the road to a positive solution. And
we should invite the Socialists to play a constructive role.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Carter: I sense a concern about additional aid. There is a difficulty
in the US about different pockets of aid. We have confidence in the IMF
and the World Bank. But it will be hard to sell US participation of 37.5%
on a multilateral basis.
There is a proliferation of too many different institutions. We need
an analysis of the world development aid situation. We should get the
World Bank and the IMF to say what the developing countries need
most, and the objectives of aid which need to be assured. The devel-
oping countries would trust the World Bank and the IMF to do the
analysis. We need a structured sort of analysis to help get increased
support in the Congress and public opinion. There are a vast array of
different organizations. I am not trying to delay action here. In fact, we
are excited about it—but we must begin to develop a structured aid
program to pinpoint the needs.
I would like to see the Socialists join the effort. It might be an ap-
propriate time to get the Soviet Union to consider participating. If they
join with us in these discussions, we might use these discussions as a
mechanism to bring them into future aid programs. They might wel-
come some alleviation of tension.
I agree with Helmut on the requirement that LDCs agree not to
confiscate property without compensation. We could help more if in-
vestment could be protected.
I am willing to go the second mile in the US to sell these ideas. But
we need a comprehensive analysis and it would help to bring the Soviet
Union into the structure.
Jamieson: Roy, are you suggesting that the G–8 should all agree on
a CIEC package? How much will the package be affected by separate
contributions? You depend one way or another on others to make up
the $1 billion sum. The important thing is that it should be seen as
something distinct. But this means the US will have to make up the
other 37.5%.
Jenkins: A positive result is needed. We can put some things of a
bilateral nature into this particular area. We have to erect a package.
We will try to meet our target figure.
Giscard: We should be clear on the point that this must be an addi-
tional effort and we should not use existing aid programs. It is not
useful today to address how this should be organized. We should pay;
we will pay $1 billion by means suitable to each country. The US could
do it bilaterally and others multilaterally. We should be flexible on
ways and means. We should say we all agree on the principle, size, and
objectives.
Vance: The fact that we do that bilaterally rather than in a common
pot should not be a result inconsistent with the principle we are trying
to achieve.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
Callaghan: Our contribution will be part of our aid, taking advan-
tage of a marginal amount of funds we have left over for this purpose.
Jenkins: This is better than a debt moratorium.
Callaghan: This will help relieve the debt of the LDCs. It is not ad-
ditional in terms of our budget.
Healey: It is additional to that aid which we have already
committed.
Giscard: The idea is that we provide an additional effort. We all
have difficult budget positions. We can’t look at the budget and simply
say this is exceptional aid. The aid must be additional to what was an-
ticipated in behalf of the poorest countries. We should not say this was
an amount we were going to give anyway.
Callaghan: We should say we had some funds at the margin which
will be allocated for this purpose. They could have gone to some other
purpose.
Healey: We are reducing our public expenditures as a result of
pressure from the IMF. We salt a little away in our program as contin-
gency reserves. It appears as new money.
Fukuda: This is different from a routine case. It is an emergency sit-
uation. We need special measures with regard to the poorer coun-
tries—exceptional emergency measures.
Callaghan: I take it that the world development program sounds
o.k. to everyone here and should find its way into the Declaration.
Trudeau: We should help the billion people who go to bed hungry.
If we do not do it willingly, we will be made to do it unwillingly by
OPEC. We agree with Giscard if we are not forthcoming at CIEC, we
will be forced to do this through our self-interest. We will pay one way
or another. We will help the LDCs or be hurt by OPEC.
Jenkins: We should ensure that funds flow quickly to countries
who need it desperately.
Schmidt: We should not hide the fact that this is an additional
sacrifice.
Callaghan: As far as our people are concerned, our contribution
will be additional when it is published.
Trade
Callaghan: We should now take some time to discuss trade issues.
Carter: I would like to introduce Bob Strauss, our Special Trade
Representative.
Callaghan: I would like to ask Prime Minister Fukuda to open up
the discussion of trade.
Fukuda: I think it is important to keep in mind that any shrinkage
in trade will have an immediate impact on the employment situation

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
and affect the business climate everywhere. In the final analysis eco-
nomic recovery will be through trade expansion, not contraction. We
should adhere to the OECD pledge. And we should secure the earliest
possible conclusion of the Tokyo Round of trade negotiations. We need
to deal with these problems to put the minds of our people at rest.
Jenkins: The MTN developed as a result of the Nixon measures of
tual negotiations began after passage of the US Trade Act. There are
now six negotiating groups at work. The EC has made a number of pro-
posals for tariff harmonization on cereals, meats and agricultural
products. But the climate has worsened since the Tokyo meeting in
1973.
The EC feels that we should fight against the dangers of protec-
tionism. One way to do this is to go for a successful outcome of the
MTN. The Summit needs to give the political impetus. We are ready to
enter into vigorous negotiations. A successful outcome is more impor-
tant than the date of the conclusion. We should use the remainder of
1977 to make rapid progress and have the Ministerial after substantial
progress has been made.
On specifics, the EC has a relatively low, harmonious external
tariff. Most of our tariffs range between 3% to 17%—only one is above
25%. This is why we want harmonization to reduce the range of coun-
tries’ high and low tariffs. Also 90% of our tariffs are bound under the
GATT. Some partners here have a much lower percentage of their
tariffs bound, and we would like to see them bind them.
Agriculture is an important part of the negotiations, and special
considerations apply to it. What we want is an expansion of agricul-
tural trade around a background of stable markets. We have a $5 billion
deficit with the US in agricultural trade alone so that our markets are
quite open. We believe we can make progress in agriculture in the con-
text of reaching an overall balance at the end of the day. We believe
an impetus ford [forward?] is desirable. We are willing to participate
vigorously.
Carter: What can we do to expedite the MTN? Why is it bogging
down?
Jenkins: First there was the delay in getting the US Trade Act, and
then the change in Administrations caused certain hesitations. Then
there is the problem of the deteriorating world economic climate. But it
nomic Policy, whose measures included the suspension of the dollar’s gold convertibility
and the imposition of a 10 percent surcharge on dutiable imports. For the text of Nixon’s
announcement of the New Economic Policy, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
is my belief that the way to combat protectionism is to make progress in
the MTN.
Fukuda: There are three questions that must be addressed in the
Tokyo Round—tariffs, non-tariff barriers and farm products. They are
inseparably interlocked and we must proceed together on all three. On
tariffs there have been proposals by various parties. We need an agreed
formula for tariff reduction. We need not agree here, but we should
move forward on this. Once agreed, this will simplify the technical
work which will follow and give impetus to the Tokyo Round. We
should set a target date of say August or September for us to agree on a
formula for tariff reduction.
On non-tariff barriers we must also make progress. These are of a
bilateral as well as a multilateral nature. We should quicken the pace of
the progress. This is an important goal not only in itself but in the con-
text of broader concerns to avoid protectionism. We must also give con-
sideration to the developing countries in the MTN.
Stammati: There are two reasons to be favorable to the expansion
of international trade. Italy has always been favorable to free trade and
has gone to considerable efforts to remove protectionist measures.
Even though we have deficits, we have made attempts to be integrated
in the international trading system. We must fight tendencies in the
government and among outside protectionists. There are also dangers
in certain sectors or geographical areas who want restrictions. And we
must look at the range of restrictions which hinder international trade,
certain privileges that are part of legislation in a number of countries,
and examine administrative measures that certain countries impose
which are frequently less harmful than conventional protectionist
measures. We should renew the OECD trade pledge at the end of June.
I agree with Prime Minister Fukuda on the need to intensify the
MTN and we hope for substantial progress in the course of the year. We
should have balanced results. We should also create liberalization and
the safeguards for the nations concerned.
We stressed the importance of trade relations between East and
West in the Puerto Rico Declaration.6 The preparatory group expressed
the wish for the development of sound financial and trade relations on
a mutually beneficial basis. President Carter wants the Eastern Euro-
peans to be in the IMF and this would be desirable. President Carter’s
view of this is important.
Puerto Rico Summit, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Gerald R. Ford,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Callaghan: To our trade unions what matters is their not being put
out of jobs. In a slow economy, new jobs are not easily found. There is a
relationship between trade and the ability to create jobs.
Schmidt: I agree on the short-term economic problems that you
mention, but protectionism will adversely affect jobs. All who have
spoken here have supported free trade. All of us have agreed, however,
to measures which discriminate against others. Some have applied im-
port deposits, although we all knew that it was inevitable for Italy to do
this at the time.7 I, like the Prime Ministers of Italy and Japan, fully
favor free trade and we should be articulate about this in this part of the
communique. We ought to state the importance of avoiding any fall-
backs to protectionism. Why not say we recommend a renewed com-
mitment to the OECD trade pledge? We are all sinners from time to
time. It is good to put in a reference to the OECD trade pledge.
In the draft communique, which I have in front of me, it calls for
progress in agriculture, expansion and stabilization, increased coopera-
tion on grains and an agreed approach to grain stocks. It looks like
heaven on earth. Is there anything behind it, or is it merely a bureau-
cratic compromise?
Giscard: The kind of discussion we are having is getting away
from the purpose of this meeting. The communique is getting away
from the purpose of the meeting. It is getting longer than the meeting.
We should not repeat discussions. We need a synthesis on guidelines. It
is nonsense to publish a ten-page communique. A four-to-five page
communique is enough for our publics.
As regards the aims of the meeting, we should fight protectionism
which is linked to the crisis in which we find ourselves. To avoid pro-
tectionism, we must draw the consequences of it. In the MTN, we
should aim for a symmetrical solution. In trade, we must have a sym-
metrical solution. Access to markets should be comparable. We should
attempt to ensure a better balance in the system of freedom of trade.
On the matter of trade unions, if we merely recite 19th century lan-
guage of free trade, the unemployed will not understand. We should
say we are against protectionism but are aware of the new problems of
organizing our economies. We cannot change the market immediately,
but in order to fight inflation we need better organization of the free-
dom of exchange.
We all have moral views and are all aware of the idea of sin. It may
be noble to create a deficit but the result on trade is the same. Neither a
order to dampen the demand for imports, a measure intended to combat the declining
value of the lira.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
structural surplus nor a structural deficit is good. We need a maximum
of symmetry in rights and obligations.
Carter: I agree that we should have a briefer paper. We should en-
sure that people know that an increase in trade is a prerequisite for in-
ternal prosperity. We want to discourage protectionism and to expedite
the Tokyo Round by establishing its priorities. I am aware of the com-
plications which unemployment poses for trade negotiations. In the
US, the unions used to openly advocate free trade and now they advo-
cate protectionism. I have withstood their pressures and not without a
certain degree of pressure. Labor deplores my actions. We need to
avoid any evasion on this subject. I prefer the strongest possible lan-
guage. I have no objection to mention of the OECD pledge but it is im-
portant that it be seen as only one mechanism.
Blumenthal: I also want to stress the need to give impetus to the
trade negotiations. It is important to go beyond the mere affirmations
of the past. There are three key areas—a tariff-cutting plan, agriculture
and non-tariff barriers. In the first two the deadlock is on the rules of
the negotiation rather than on the negotiation itself. On agriculture
there is a need to break the deadlock and agree on how to negotiate—to
break the deadlock on the rules of the game. We can have a compro-
mise between expansion and stabilization. There should also be an ef-
fort to develop stocking arrangements.
MacDonald: We have to be concerned about balanced results,
which Mr. Stammati raised. We should convince people to expect ben-
efits through additional trade rather than just costs in terms of jobs. I
disagree with President Giscard that we should have a symmetrical
pattern of trade. We in Canada have a limited number of exports in pri-
mary problems [products?]. We must take account of the job issue and
the asymmetry of our economies.
We also agree on the need to stress non-tariff barriers, such as gov-
ernment procurement. Our problems are caused as much by non-tariff
barriers as by tariffs.
Giscard: The communique should express the content of our
discussions.
Callaghan: We should confront the realities of the problem. Free
trade and the removal of trade barriers are best for the Free World. Our
levels of unemployment are around 5%, but the men out of work are
100% unemployed. If we want to keep to a system which is in the best
interests for all of us, we will have to pay attention to adjusting workers
to new jobs.
Strauss: I understand that what goes on at the MTN is not likely to
reduce unemployment. But a failure to do something positive will add
to our unemployment problems. We need a positive and firm thrust in
behalf of movement in the MTN without prejudicing the positions of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
any of the parties here. We must, for instance, come to grips with issues
such as subsidies and other problems which affect our trade relations.
Callaghan: We want to see an expansion of world trade and be-
lieve that the present round of negotiations will contribute to this. We
also believe that protectionism will hurt jobs and the economic growth.
MacDonald: But we should also remember your point that
workers who are unemployed are 100% out of work.
Healey: While at the moment we are all fighting unemployment,
we should recognize that we cannot solve unemployment by allowing
inflation to revive. Also, a precondition of expansion is free trade and
unless you can diminish trade barriers, you cannot get expansion. Like-
wise, prosperity is a condition to moving toward free trade. We should
say we recognize this interdependence. This framework is valuable
when we get home.
Giscard: We need an organized and orderly expansion of trade
and organization of liberal trade.
Trudeau: We spent yesterday and today shooting down interde-
pendence and free trade. We talked about the need to deal with OPEC
and how to tamper with the market to help the LDCs. Now we ask how
to tamper with the market to increase employment.
Callaghan: Obviously nations must safeguard themselves when
their jugular is attacked on such matters as oil. But unless we can keep
barriers as low as possible, we cannot get the best distribution to con-
tribute constructively to the well-being of our peoples.
Healey: Clearly there are structural problems within countries and
between countries, and the problem of finite resources. We want the
market to regulate relations among us.
MacDonald: Free trade, yes, but free trade in manufactured
products? There should be a broad discussion of this and we should
discuss the social problems which emerge.
Carter: The text that we come up with should be specific. If it is
bland, it will say nothing. We should ask our drafters to be as specific as
possible. We want the Tokyo Round to be productive; it must equal the
results of the Kennedy Round. That will be an important achievement,
although perhaps the results could take different forms from the results
of the Kennedy Round.
Callaghan: We give one another strength by our collective commit-
ments. We have protectionist pressures from our industries; and we re-
sist these pressures by pointing to what is happening elsewhere.
Jenkins: I agree that we need a short communique. We should not
get into complicated GATT negotiations. At the same time, it would be
a pity if the communique contained nothing of substance. We should
put ourselves in a position where it is easier for governments to resist

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
pressure from protectionists. We should say we are not standing still
but are going ahead with the MTN.
Schmidt: The Declaration should be short and impressive. It
should stress our commitment toward open world trade in order to
supply ourselves with a weapon against protectionism.
Jenkins: If we try to stand still, we will go back.
Giscard: Mike Blumenthal and I have discussed these things be-
fore 1973, but today the situation is different. In Europe there are seven
million people unemployed. If we keep talking about open borders, we
will be accused of ignoring the situation. The firm stand against protec-
tionism is impressive. If we stand firm and open our frontiers, we must
take into account these problems. We must take into account the need
for social symmetry. We know there already have been agreements be-
tween Italy and Japan, and the UK and Japan. We must take social
problems into account. We should move ahead on an EC mandate to
achieve progress, but we should take care not to dis-stabilize the social
situation. This should be in the communique.
Carter: I disagree with the notion that our unemployment results
from the fact that we have, as President Giscard said, thrown our
borders open. Factories are not closing because of greater world trade,
although I sense that President Giscard feels this way. Factories close
because of constraints on world trade. I am trying to boost our
economy and I want growth. I want the opportunity to sell abroad and
to buy from you. But we can also survive on our own resources if there
were a move toward global protectionism. I am not for dropping all
barriers and totally throwing our frontiers open, but at the same time I
do not believe that our factories are closing because of trade.8
8 The Joint Declaration issued in London on May 8 at the conclusion of the Summit
and the accompanying appendix is printed in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
29.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Economic Policy
Group (Blumenthal) to President Carter1
Washington, May 11, 1977
SUBJECT
Review of Specialty Steel Quotas
The Economic Policy Group has reviewed the status of import
quotas on specialty steel products and unanimously agreed that you
should exercise your prerogative of asking the U.S. International Trade
Commission (USITC) to formally review the situation. However, EPG
developed two options concerning the timing of your action. You could
initiate a review immediately or you may wish to wait between 45–90
days to do so.
REASONS FOR USITC REVIEW
The need for an USITC review within the next few months stems
from two principal factors. First, there is an apparent economic case
against restricting several categories of specialty steel imports. Demand
is increasing for flat-rolled steels that are used in consumer durables
(although still sluggish for other steels that are more dependent on in-
vestment). Our overall assessment is for considerable improvement in
the industry as a whole as the recovery proceeds. Second, the European
Community has repeatedly protested curtailment of its specialty steel
shipments to the U.S., imposed by President Ford last June.2 On two re-
cent occasions it has formally requested that the U.S. Government ini-
tiate the procedures necessary to reduce or terminate import relief.3 In
response, we have stated that we could consider reviewing the quotas
reads: “The President has seen.” Carter wrote at the top of the page: “cc: To Strauss & Blu-
menthal. J.C.”
“Temporary Quantitative Limitation on the Importation into the United States of Certain
Articles of Stainless Steel or Alloy Tool Steel.” The restrictions were to take effect on June
3 No formal requests were found. On February 7, the EC “requested that the United
States begin a review of the specialty steel quotas and put into effect some immediate im-
provements.” On April 21, during steel consultations between the United States and the
EC, EC officials “urged we seek ITC review of specialty steel quotas.” (Telegram 1192
respectively)

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
after the USITC compiled data on the domestic specialty steel industry
for calendar year 1976.4 This data is now available.
PROCEDURES FOR INITIATING A REVIEW
The first step involved in any reduction or termination of the
quotas prior to its scheduled three year duration (from June 14, 1976 to
June 13, 1979) would be to request the USITC’s advice on the probable
economic effect on the domestic industry of such action. (By law, ad-
vice is also required of the Secretaries of Commerce and Labor.) It will
likely take the USITC at least three months to produce its advisory
report.
NATURE OF USITC ADVICE
The USITC’s recommendation is not binding, and you can sup-
port, reject, or simply not act on it. To give you maximum flexibility we
are recommending that your request for USITC advice pertain to all
product categories and that the advice be given on a product-by-
product basis.
TIMING OF A REQUEST TO THE USITC
If you agree to initiating USITC review, the major issue is timing.
Arguments for an immediate review are:
—It would be interpreted by the public as an anti-inflation meas-
ure. The U.S. steel companies would see it as a signal of strong Admin-
istration concern about price increases and it may inhibit further price
increases in the steel industry.5
—Our trade relations with the EC would be improved and imme-
diate impetus would be given to post-Summit momentum towards
trade liberalization. The EC would be more likely to again defer
seeking compensation or retaliation under international trading rules.
—An early USITC review would strengthen our hand in urging
the EC to resist protectionist measures in dealing with its own steel
problems. It would provide an improved environment for international
specialty steel quota situation (see footnote 3 above), the EPG decided “to proceed expe-
ditiously with shortfall reallocation,” as well as “to postpone decision on request to
USITC for advice on reducing or termination relief until 1976 annual survey results are
available in March.” (Telegram 36061 to USEC Brussels, February 17; National Archives,
5 In a May 17 memorandum to Carter, Eizenstat and Ginsburg urged an “imme-
diate review, primarily because that will clearly indicate to the steel industry (and the
general public) your concern over inflationary price increases and your willingness to
vigorously use international trade as a tool to keep domestic prices down.” (Carter Li-
brary, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files, Box 284, Steel/Chrome

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
discussions on world steel problems, which should be underway by
mid-June in the OECD with US, EC and Japanese participation.
—The USITC investigation will take at least three months—hence
an immediate request is really only an opportunity for you to make de-
cisions in the late summer or early fall, when the industry should be in
better economic condition.
Arguments for postponing a review until sometime this summer are:
—Considerable domestic political opposition would be evoked
from the domestic steel industry and unions, who would interpret a
USITC request as a prelude to removal of quotas. Some members of
Congress could be expected to vigorously oppose any move to relax or
eliminate the quotas. This adverse domestic reaction could be post-
poned until upcoming trade issues such as shoes, color TV’s and sugar,
including the threat of Congressional override, are settled.
—The longer the delay, the further along the industry will be in the
recovery; hence more product categories will likely be included in
USITC advice to relax quotas.
—The second year quotas should not begin to actually restrain im-
ports until the fall, thereby limiting the international and domestic eco-
nomic effects of a modest delay.
—If the request is delayed until late June, the ITC would be able to
base its advice on an entire year of import relief. The full year will ap-
pear publicly to be a more credible time period during which to assess
our experience under the quotas.
—If the request for USITC advice is delayed until mid-summer
OECD discussion on world steel problems will be underway, and this
might mitigate adverse industry and union reaction.
OPTIONS
Timing
1. Request ITC advice immediately. Treasury, State, CEA, NSC, OMB
support.6
2. Delay request for ITC advice. STR,7 Labor, Commerce support. (In
this case we would come back to you this summer when the time seems
right.)
6 Carter indicated his approval of this option.
7 In a May 13 memorandum to Carter, under cover of which he forwarded Blumen-
thal’s EPG memorandum, Watson noted that he had not forwarded to Carter a memo-
randum to him from Strauss on specialty steel, believing that “Bob’s view that the request
for I.T.C. advice should be deferred is fully and fairly presented in the EPG memo-
randum.” (Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files, Box

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
Procedure
If you choose to make an immediate request for USITC advice, you
may either make the request directly to the USITC, or indirectly, by di-
recting the Special Trade Representative (STR) to take such action on
your behalf. A request to the USITC made by the STR might draw less
adverse domestic union and industry attention to this study than
would a Presidential request.
1. President to sign letters.
2. Ambassador Strauss to sign.8
Bob Strauss has provided alternative draft letters (either for your
signature or Strauss’) to the Chairman of the USITC and letters re-
questing the advice of the Secretaries of Commerce and Labor (Tab 1).9
For your information a copy of the STR memorandum to the Eco-
nomic Policy Group on this subject is attached (Tab 2).10
8 Carter indicated his approval of this option.
9 Not attached.
10 Not attached and not further identified. In his May 13 memorandum to Carter
forwarding Blumenthal’s EPG memorandum, Watson noted that he had not forwarded
“a lengthy memorandum and statistical document prepared by the Trade Policy Staff
Committee, a copy of which was originally attached to the EPG memorandum.” How-
ever, reference may also be to an April 29 memorandum from Strauss to the EPG entitled
“Status Report on Specialty Steel Quotas and Steel Trade Issues,” a copy of which is in the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
30.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic
Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) to President Carter1
Washington, May 14, 1977
SUBJECT
Response to your request for possible Presidential action to show concern over
recent steel price hikes
At your request I have pulled together potential steps which you
might take to put pressure on the domestic steel industry to reduce
their recent price hikes.2 Memoranda for you, done at my request, are
attached from Chairman Schultze (Tab A) and Ambassador Strauss
(Tab B).3 Both of these memoranda make the following points:
—While your leverage as President on the steel industry (other
than through jawboning) is limited in the international trade area, there
are some actions which could be taken.
1) Tariff Reductions under The Trade Act must be negotiated.
Tariffs for major steel products are already very low and are not pres-
ently an effective barrier against imports even at this time. The United
States would receive little practical benefit in return.4 Nevertheless, an
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files,
reads: “The President has seen.” Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page and wrote
“Stu.”
2 On May 6, the Republic Steel Corporation and the Youngstown Sheet and Tube
On May 9, the United States Steel Corporation, the largest steel producer in the United
States, announced that it would raise selected prices by an average of 6 percent. The fol-
lowing day, the National Steel Corporation also announced a 6 percent average price in-
crease. On May 10 and 11, the Youngstown Sheet and Tube Company and the Republic
Steel Corporation, respectively, announced that they would reduce their price increases
to the 6 percent range. On May 12, three more companies, including the Bethlehem Steel
Corporation, announced that they too would raise selected steel prices by 6 percent.
(Gene Smith, “Two Steel Companies Lift Prices Sharply; U.S. Agency Critical,” The New
Rise Prevailing; ‘Voluntary’ Move Hailed by U.S.,” The New York Times, May 12, 1977,
3 Both tabs are attached but not printed. Tab A is a May 12 memorandum from
Schultze to Carter. Tab B is a May 13 memorandum from Strauss to Carter.
4 In his May 13 memorandum to Carter, attached at Tab B, Strauss asserted that
while it would “be relatively easy to negotiate” a trade agreement involving the reduc-
tion of U.S. steel tariffs, “unless there were reciprocal benefits to the United States we
would be under serious criticism by the Congress for giving up negotiating leverage in
the multilateral trade negotiations.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
indication of the fact you are looking into this area might send out some
chilling signals to the steel industry.
2) Quotas on specialty steel also have little impact on U.S. steel im-
ports since such quotas cover only 2 percent of the total. In order to fur-
ther reduce these quotas, you must ask for advice from the Interna-
tional Trade Commission. The EPG will recommend to you in a
memorandum you will shortly receive, that you ask the ITC to formally
review the import quotas.5 This will send a clear signal (one, I might
add, which both labor and industry will vigorously oppose), but the
impact on the major steel companies who have recently raised their
prices will be minimal since specialty steel accounts for such a small
percentage of total industry shipments and revenues and is produced
by such a relatively small and specialized group of firms. This would,
therefore, have little impact on the larger steel companies such as U.S.
Steel and Republic Steel Company, which recently raised their prices. It
might have an impact on the specialty steel producers who have an-
3) You could indicate that you are considering reducing the “Buy
America” preference which U.S. steel producers have in light of their
price increases. However, government purchases of steel mill products
are not a large portion of the U.S. steel market and, as Ambassador
Strauss points out, such reductions might reduce our negotiating lever-
age in the multilateral trade negotiations as well as with Congress.
4) One other potential action not mentioned in either memo-
randum is with respect to the 301 Case that the steel industry is pres-
ently arguing before the Special Trade Representative.7 Their argument
is that the steel agreement between Japan and the European commu-
nity is hurting the U.S. industry by directing Japanese steel exports
from the European community to the United States and that the U.S.
should therefore retaliate. There is some question as to whether the do-
mestic industry has proven its case. You might consider an indication
that the STR does not at this time look favorably on the industry’s peti-
tion and that recent inflationary price rises indicate that the industry
apparently is not really feeling the impact of increased Japanese
competition.
I would recommend that before you consider any of the potential
steps outlined herein and in the memoranda, that you have a meeting
with Secretary Blumenthal, Ambassador Strauss, Chairman Schultze
5 See Document 29.
6 Carter highlighted the final three lines of this paragraph, beginning with “raised
their prices” to the end of the paragraph. He also wrote “Sounds best” in the margin adja-
cent to this paragraph.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
and Director Lance. In addition, the Congressional leadership should
be informed before any such steps are taken.8
You should be certain that the 6 percent increase is not fully justi-
fied. According to Mr. Schultze’s memorandum, an analysis by the
Council on Wage and Price Stability indicates cost increases in recent
years have not been recovered by price increases and that a 6 percent or
higher price rise would be necessary to recover those costs. Of course,
the sacrifices which must be made in the fight against inflation must
begin somewhere, and price increases such as this in the steel industry
will have a ripple effect throughout the economy.
8 Carter wrote “I agree” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
31.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1
Washington, May 17, 1977
SUBJECT
Color Television Receiver Agreement with Japan
We have successfully negotiated an agreement with the Govern-
ment of Japan on color television receivers which I believe will alleviate
the problems of the domestic unions and industry while not impairing
Japanese participation or generating inflationary pressures in the U.S.
market.2
The agreement provides for exports of complete and incomplete
(meaning almost complete) color television receivers in the amount of
these levels appear to be a significant cutback from 1976 imports of
erage annual import levels and, in fact, there is very little restrictive ef-
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
2 A May 17 memorandum from Schultze to Carter entitled “Import Relief for the
Color Television Industry,” a May 18 memorandum from Blumenthal to Carter entitled
“Orderly Marketing Arrangement for Color TV’s,” and a May 19 memorandum from Ei-
zenstat and Ginsburg to Carter entitled “Orderly Marketing Agreement For Color TVs”
are all ibid.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
fect in terms of the impact on the U.S. market. The Japanese industry
has admitted on the public record that a significant part of the growth
of imports in 1976 was due to inventory buildup. Our estimates suggest
tories. Thus the impact of Japanese imports in the U.S. market in 1976
was on the order of two million receivers or less. The replacement of
complete set imports by sets assembled by Japanese subsidiaries in the
United States should be on the order of 400 thousand receivers in 1977
would have essentially the same impact as 1976.
We estimate that 1977 imports from Japan will be on the order of
two million receivers representing substantial growth in Japanese im-
ports in the market as compared with 1976 even if Japanese affiliate
production is not counted. Japanese participation will be even higher
than the import level suggests due to inventory buildup prior to the ef-
fectiveness of the agreement on July 1, 1977 and inventory drawdown
after that date. We believe several hundred thousand receivers have
been stocked at a minimum, in anticipation of restrictions.
Impact on Japan
The Japanese apparently feel that the agreed levels will be suffi-
cient to permit them to participate in an acceptable way in the U.S.
market. The Japanese predict that their own television industry will
move off shore over the next five years. There will be three incentives
for the Japanese to come into the United States to invest in assembly op-
erations: (1) quantitative restrictions in the agreement; (2) the potential
antidumping duty liability (now requiring posting of a 20 percent
bond); and (3) potential countervailing duty liability (now requiring
posting of a 15 percent bond). The Japanese were offered an option that
provided a slightly smaller first year restraint level than 1.75 million
but with growth in later years; however, they preferred the current
deal.
Three companies are already operating in the United States and
these firms will be expanding production in 1977 and 1978. Two other
Japanese companies are on the verge of starting production in the
United States and are likely to make substantial additions to domestic
production capacity in the United States.
As the definition used for the scope of the agreement will permit
importation of Japanese components and subassemblies without re-
striction, there will be no pressure on domestic U.S. capacity in these
areas and the Japanese firms will still realize substantial labor input in
their own country.
Impact on U.S. Industry and Unions
The level of restraint in the agreement is well above that requested
by the domestic industry and unions but can be sold to them on the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
grounds that they will enjoy the benefits of growth in the domestic
color television market. The unions will benefit even where such
growth is a result of the operation of Japanese affiliates since such affil-
iates will generate substantial labor content in the United States. The
risk for domestic producers will be that the market will not increase as
expected due either to economic problems (which seem unlikely) or
competition for the consumer dollar by other products such as video
recorders.
In addition to this problem, the risk for unions is that American
companies will continue to move their component and subassembly
operations off shore. This is an inevitable trend in the industry but its
effects will be moderated by the agreement because Japanese com-
panies will be locating assembly plants in the United States.
I believe this agreement can be successfully sold to the domestic in-
dustry and unions and I would expect only mild Congressional reac-
tion, if any.
The unions will privately be pleased and publicly say “while it’s a
good step in the right direction it should have gone farther in reducing
imports.”
Effect on Consumers
We would expect only minimal effects on the pricing and avail-
ability of color television receivers as the result of the orderly mar-
keting agreement for the following reasons:
1. There is considerable excess capacity domestically (e.g. about 30
percent in 1976).
2. We expect that capacity and production will be expanded by
Japanese firms in the United States in the near future and expansions
by domestic producers would also be likely. The lead time for such in-
vestments is relatively short because of the assembly nature of TV re-
ceiver production.
3. Imports from countries other than Japan will be permitted to in-
crease so long as Japanese producers are not disadvantaged. The
United States Government will determine if restrictions on such im-
ports are appropriate.
4. We estimate that there are substantial excessive inventories at
both wholesale and retail levels in the near term which will assure ade-
quate supplies under expected market conditions. There is also the one
million sets coming in prior to the effective date of the agreement (from
5. We will monitor prices and market conditions throughout the
period of the agreement and can liberalize or terminate the agreement
if conditions warrant such actions.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
Status
The Japanese are prepared to sign this agreement on May 20 fol-
lowing authorization by their cabinet and by you to proceed. I am con-
vinced that this is a fair and balanced agreement which can be accepted
by the Japanese and our domestic interests.
Attached is a description of the elements of the draft agreement
which has been initialed on an ad referendum basis (Attachment A).3
Your decision is required by May 21, 1977 and I would need your
authorization to sign the agreement by the 19th of May. A directive to
me implementing this recommendation is provided in Attachment B.4
3 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Elements of Color
TV Agreement with Japan.”
4 Tab B, attached but not printed, is an undated memorandum entitled “Decision
Memorandum on Television Receivers.” The Decision Memorandum, May 19, is printed
32.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1
Washington, May 23, 1977
SUBJECT
Footwear Agreements
Pursuant to your directive of April 1,2 we have negotiated orderly
marketing agreements with the Republic of China and the Republic of
Korea to moderate the problems caused to our domestic footwear man-
ufacturers, workers, and communities by rapid shifts in foreign exports
to this country of non-rubber footwear. Since practically all of the in-
crease in imports was attributable to Taiwan (which increased its ex-
1976) and to Korea (which increased its exports to the United States
limited to these two countries.
June 1 memorandum from Watson. (Ibid.)
2 See Document 17.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Under the law, your decision of April 1 to grant import relief must
be made effective by having trade measures in place no later than June
30. If you approve, I plan to sign agreements with these two countries
prior to June 1, if possible.
Both agreements cover a four-year period, starting June 28, 1977.
Under the agreements, exports from Taiwan will be limited to 122, 125,
128, and 131 million pairs per year for the next four years, and from
growth may be provided after the second year if the domestic industry
recovers sufficiently.
All footwear on which the U.S. International Trade Commission
(USITC) found injury is covered by the agreements except felt boot
liners, a non-footwear item that is restricted under the bilateral textile
agreements. Subceilings, by type of material in the case of Taiwan and
mainly by type of footwear in the case of Korea, are provided in order
to prevent shifts into higher-priced shoes or disruptive bunching in
particular categories.
In general, the agreements are viewed favorably by the shoe man-
ufacturers, shoe unions (which are small) and workers, and by the Hill.
Some concern has been expressed about their effective implementation
and about the possibility of disruptive imports from other countries.
Concern has also been voiced by importers and retailers about infla-
tionary effects, which we think will be moderate. Although none of the
domestic interests are completely satisfied, I think that all can live with
these agreements.
Additional background information is contained in Tab A. The
principal provisions of the agreements are summarized in Tab B.3
ACTION REQUESTED
Representatives of Taiwan and Korea will seek authorization to
sign the agreements as soon as they are advised that we are prepared to
proceed. They have indicated that they believe such authorization
could be obtained within a few days.
I believe the agreements provide a fair and balanced solution to
our footwear problems, consistent with the guidelines in your direc-
tive. I have requested an Economic Policy Group meeting on this sub-
ject for Wednesday4 afternoon so that interested agencies will have an
opportunity to raise any concerns that they may have prior to your de-
cision. Overall, I believe there will only be mild objection from any
3 Tabs A and B are attached but not printed. Tab A is an undated background
paper. Tab B is an undated paper entitled “Principal Provisions of the Agreements with
the Republic of China (ROC) and the Republic of Korea (ROK).”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
source. Moreover, the European Community (EC), Brazil, Spain and
other nations are exceedingly pleased that we have dealt with this
problem in this limited fashion.
A Presidential Proclamation implementing the import relief is also
being prepared for your signature. The Proclamation will be submitted
to you after we have obtained Justice Department clearance.
Proceed to sign the agreements as indicated above:5
5 Carter indicated his approval of this option and initialed “JC.” See footnote 4, Doc-
ument 33.
33.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Economic Policy
Group (Blumenthal) to President Carter1
Washington, May 31, 1977
SUBJECT
Footwear Agreements
Ambassador Strauss has negotiated orderly marketing agreements
(OMA) with Taiwan and Korea on non-rubber footwear. In a separate
memorandum he has described the details of these OMAs.2 Both agree-
ments cover a four-year period starting June 28, 1977. Over these four
years the average monthly exports of non-rubber footwear from the
level.
Concerning economic impact, STR estimates that these agreements
consumer costs or an average of around 44 cents per pair of shoes at the
retail level. CEA estimates of the inflationary impact are considerably
higher. However, both agencies emphasize that these estimates involve
assumptions that are subject to a wide range of error.
The OMAs have been reviewed by the EPG members and all support
them.
under cover of a June 1 memorandum from Watson. (Ibid.)
2 See Document 32.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
One issue has been raised, however, concerning the proclamation
of import relief. Treasury, CEA and OMB recommend that as part of your
proclamation, you request U.S. International Trade Commission advice on lib-
eralization of import relief by March 1979, in time for possible action at the
end of the second year. They argue that since a USITC study is required
by law before you can liberalize an OMA, it is important that the USITC
advice is delivered before April 1979, when U.S. consultations with
Korea and Taiwan will take place as specified in the OMAs. The infor-
mation and advice provided by the ITC may then be drawn upon in de-
termining what, if any, liberalization is warranted at that time. These
agencies believe that calling now for a USITC investigation may be po-
litically more feasible than doing so in the spring of 1979 and would
therefore insure that a review does take place. They also argue that in
conjunction with the announcement of an OMA, a call now for USITC
review would demonstrate your determination to closely monitor the
impact of trade restrictions on consumers and inflation.3
STR, State, Commerce and Labor oppose your making a commitment
now on a future USITC review. They believe it would prejudge economic
conditions in 1979; that it would therefore be inconsistent with the Con-
gressional intent that such reports only be made when it appears that
modification or termination of relief may be warranted; and that it
could commit you to a course of action you might not want to take in
1979. They argue that the announcement now to seek USITC review
later would be interpreted as an indication that you do not intend to
maintain a meaningful level of import relief for more than two years;
hence, they consider it likely that this action will lose industry and
labor support and lead to a Congressional override. Furthermore, they
are skeptical that investment for needed structural adjustment would
be forthcoming if it appeared that imports would again threaten the in-
dustry within two years.
Decisions
1. That you approve the agreements with Taiwan and Korea negotiated by
Strauss. (All EPG members support.)4
3 In a May 31 memorandum to Carter, Blumenthal discussed his support, as Secre-
tary of the Treasury, for an immediate USITC review request in greater detail; Watson
sent Blumenthal’s memorandum to Carter under cover of his June 1 memorandum (see
footnote 1 above).
4 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation. The White House an-
nounced on June 14 the signing of a 4-year Orderly Marketing Arrangement between the
United States and the Republic of China on shoe imports. See Public Papers of the Presi-
the “Implementation of Orderly Marketing Agreements—and the Temporary Quantita-
tive Limitation on the Importation Into the United States of Certain Footwear,” see Public

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
2. That the proclamation for import relief call for USITC review and ad-
vice by March 1979. (Treasury, CEA and OMB support; STR, State, Labor
and Commerce oppose.)5
5 Carter indicated his disapproval of this recommendation.
34.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1
Washington, June 24, 1977
SUBJECT
Cargo Preference Legislation2
Stu Eizenstat and I have met at length with Senator Long on this
issue. I have taken indirect soundings of the leadership of the unions,
and talked with others on the Hill. Blackwell of the Maritime Adminis-
tration believes our labor soundings are accurate.
Politically, something in the way of a Cargo Preference is going to
be very hard to resist. Other options don’t serve or satisfy the political
need, and might even be counterproductive. The unions certainly feel
that the Administration is committed to a Cargo Preference Policy.
The Maritime unions claim that a Cargo Preference Act is essential
to the future of the U.S. Merchant Fleet and the security of the United
States. Other remedies such as those proposed in the several option
papers which have been circulated,3 in their view, do not suit this pur-
pose and are seen either as entirely insufficient or a policy action con-
trary to their interests. They believe that the Cargo Preference policy
will protect seafaring jobs for U.S. sailors and provide substantial
on-shore employment in shipyards around America. (They point to the
substantial numbers of minority employment in today’s shipyards as
evidence that the jobs created on-shore would go where the need is
greatest.)
Strauss and Wolff. A typed note on the last page reads: “By hand to White House
3 Not further identified.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
What we have determined is that establishing the concept of Cargo Prefer-
ences is more important than the percentage. When Eizenstat and I met
with Russell Long, we finally convinced him of this and left him in the
political posture of “anything you fellows can satisfy Jesse Calhoun4
with, I will take and support.” I believe we can successfully sell less
than ten percent preferences stretched out over five or six years and try
to get the Hill and the Union committed to this if you desire to go the
Cargo Preference route. In short, what we have accomplished is deter-
mining that the concept is far more important than the percentage.
This memorandum is not an attempt to justify Cargo Preferences
over other options. It is intended to provide you with a least possible
option at an initial, relatively modest cost. There are other memoranda
presently before you relating to inflationary and trade aspects.5 I would
be glad to discuss these options with you personally if you desire. It is
my personal opinion that we have a day or two “bad story” situation
following any available option.
4 Jesse Calhoun was the President of the Marine Engineers Beneficial Association.
5 Not further identified.
35.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, June 29, 1977
SUBJECT
Summit Follow-Up and Chancellor Schmidt
Some issues loom on Summit follow-up. I am writing you about
them now, since you may want to raise them during Chancellor
Schmidt’s visit.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 63, PRC
clude items on Schmidt agenda. J.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
1. Growth Targets. At the Summit weaker countries committed
themselves to effective stabilization policies, and they seem to be ful-
filling this commitment. The US, Japan, and Germany committed them-
selves to achieve their growth targets for 1977, and to adopt further pol-
icies, if needed, to this end and to correct trade imbalances. This meant
The US is likely to hit its target, or close to it. German government
that there may be a significantly lower growth rate for 1978 unless ad-
ditional measures are taken by Germany well before the end of this
year. Japanese officials still talk of achieving close to 6.7% growth in
1977. Japan is running a large trade surplus, however, and recent
figures on the German trade surplus are also disquieting.
At the recent OECD meeting,2 the German and Japanese gov-
ernments indicated that they took their Summit commitments seriously
and were seeking to achieve their targets. We have some influence with
both and we should use it to reinforce their willingness to adopt
needed policies, which would have an effect in 1978, if not before. It is
important that we do this in order to:
—Create an economic environment in which worldwide economic
growth can proceed and the US trade deficit can be reduced.
—Meet concerns of the UK, France, and Italy, which have kept
their part of the bargain and are relying on the stronger economies to
keep theirs.
—Maintain our credibility with the US media, to which the impor-
tance of these Summit growth commitments was stressed in high-level
London briefings.
On the other hand, we do not want to go back to the situation that
existed earlier this year, when German officials, from the Chancellor on
down, felt that they were being subjected to undue US public pressure
on economic policy. A tactful approach might be for you to tell the
Chancellor about the measures that the US is taking to ensure fulfill-
ment of the US Summit growth target (5% in 1977), and indicate why
you think it is important to achieve this target. This would set the stage
for asking what the prospects are for fulfillment of the German target,
what additional measures the Chancellor has in mind if German
by Vance and Blumenthal at the meeting and at a joint press conference after the meeting,
June 24, and a Declaration on Relations With Developing Countries, June 23, are ibid., pp.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
pects to reduce the German trade surplus in order to fulfill the Summit
commitment “to contribute to the adjustment of trade imbalances”.
2. Trade. The Summit Declaration says that “We will seek this year
to achieve substantive progress in such key areas as:
“(i) A tariff reduction plan of broadest possible application . . .
“(ii) Codes, agreements, and other measures that will facilitate a
significant reduction of non-tariff barriers . . .
“(iii) A mutually acceptable approach to agriculture . . .”
Bob Strauss is about to initiate discussions with the European
Community, Japan, and Canada about means of achieving these goals.
The outcome will depend critically on the European reaction. Jenkins
has asked me to let you know that he is prepared to play a personal role
in this matter.3 Whether he can achieve a European Community con-
sensus in favor of progress will depend partly on how much pressure
the Federal Republic exerts on its weaker and more reluctant Commu-
nity partners, particularly France.
You may want to remind Schmidt of the concern which you voiced
at the Summit that if progress is not achieved in trade negotiations, pro-
tectionist pressures will grow in this country as well as abroad. You
might express your hope that he will exert his personal leadership in
the European Community to achieve that progress—just as you have
exerted your leadership to restrain protectionist pressures in the US.
I doubt that the Chancellor will resent the approaches proposed
above. He is strongly interested in economic problems; US officials
have spoken recently to German officials of our concerns about growth
and trade; he will expect the same issues to be discussed with him.
I gather Schmidt may propose another Summit for February. From
the standpoint of substance (and weather) April and May would be
better, but he and Giscard may figure that a meeting just before the
French election would be politically helpful.4 We should go along.
Meanwhile, we are making progress on other aspects of Summit
follow-up:
The recent OECD Ministerial Meeting agreed that a high-level con-
ference on youth unemployment should be held by the end of the year.
3 In a June 20 memorandum to Carter, Owen noted that Jenkins had asked him to
thank Carter for supporting EC participation at the London G–7 Summit; Jenkins also
wanted Carter to “know that he will take a personal interest in the Tokyo Round.” Owen
reported that he had requested that Jenkins “do just this—since only his leadership could
persuade the Community bureaucracy to cooperate with us in trying to get the trade ne-
gotiations moving. His agreement to do this is partly a response to your support for Com-
munity representation at the Downing Street Summit.” (Carter Library, National Security

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
—Negotiations regarding the IMF expansion are going forward.
—We are now trying to get ECOSOC to convene a diplomatic con-
ference this fall to conclude an agreement banning illicit payments in
1978.5 In the pre-Summit ECOSOC working group, some of our Euro-
pean partners—especially the Germans—were lukewarm. We will
need their support, and you may want to mention this to Schmidt. At the
recent OECD meeting French opposition was evident.
—The international agreement on guidelines for export credits was
renewed for another six months, and we will use this period to try to
strengthen and extend these guidelines.
—A ministerial meeting of the International Energy Agency will be
held this fall,6 at which the US will seek (i) concrete commitments to
hold total oil import demand by member countries to not more than 26
million barrels per day by 1985; (ii) agreement on means of eliminating
wasteful use of energy, greater coal utilization, expansion of nuclear
power and appropriate controls, and increased research energy and de-
velopment; (iii) agreement to review annually these group objectives
and the contribution of each country toward achieving them. (State and
ERDA are presently working with an IEA committee to develop spe-
cific joint projects in the areas of coal refining and solar and wind en-
ergy, and it is expected that these projects will be ready for approval at
the fall Ministerial meeting.)
—You are familiar with the situation on the nuclear study.
—The North-South Summit items are moving forward, and you
might want to mention to Schmidt your hope that the key industrial na-
tions will continue to concert closely in this field. The World Bank gen-
eral capital increase negotiations will probably begin in September. The
substantial increase in US aid hinges on the inside and outside reviews of
US aid now underway. The World Development Program to examine
what is being done and needs to be done to spur development is now
being launched by the World Bank staff. Work within the USG on the
common fund proposal is being completed. The study of export price sta-
bilization will probably be launched by the International Development
5 On the afternoon of May 8, during the Summit’s final session, Carter said in refer-
ence to the Joint Declaration: “I think we need something on irregular practices in trade to
avoid bribery. I would like to have your support.” Giscard replied: “I have had problems
with the questions of Swiss secrecy on foreign assets. This is also an irregular practice. Is
this referred to?” Carter responded: “I was referring to an international effort now taking
place in the US [UN].” Schmidt commented: “I think we should have this here. I have a lot
of headaches with banks in the Caribbean and Lipinstein [Lichtenstein?].” (Minutes of the
London Economic Summit, May 8; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Mate-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Committee, which is chaired by the World Bank and IMF, in Sep-
tember. This study will consider a possible increase in IMF compensa-
tory financing, as well as Chancellor Schmidt’s favorite STABEX
scheme, of which State and Treasury take a dim view.
In all of this follow-up, Tony Solomon in Treasury, Dick Cooper at
State, and Bob Strauss have been extremely helpful, as has Bob
Hormats of the NSC staff. Each of these agencies takes its responsibil-
ities for follow-up seriously and is working hard at it. Treasury is now
putting together estimates of growth and trade imbalances for each of
the Summit nations, which we will be sending you later.
Effective follow-up requires comparable action by the other gov-
ernments, as well. I am proposing to my colleagues in the other six
Summit governments that we meet at the end of September in Wash-
ington to review Summit implementation. Whether we have a good
story to tell them will depend, in part, on what the strongest non-US
country, Germany, does about some of the items indicated above. We
cannot compel the Germans to do anything that they do not want to do.
But they share with us an interest in a strong world economy and in
maintaining the integrity of the Summit process; they know people will
not take the next Summit, which they will host, seriously if progress
has not been made in fulfilling decisions of the last Summit. The em-
phasis that you placed at London on effective follow-up was justified.
Your conversations with Schmidt could be an important part of this
process.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
36.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs (Bergsten) to Secretary of the
Treasury Blumenthal1
Washington, June 30, 1977
SUBJECT
Steel Industry’s Request for Import Quotas
The presidents of 8 steel companies lunched with Bob Strauss
today, and laid on the table their specific proposals for resolving their
complaint under Section 301 of the Trade Act.2
Their primary demand was for immediate imposition of import
quotas against all major and minor suppliers. Specifically, they want to
roll back Japanese sales from the current level of 8 million tons per year
to 5 million tons.
The industries claimed that 3 steel firms will fail in the absence of
such action. As far as I am aware, there was no discussion of pricing
policy.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
1977. Confidential; Nodis. Reviewed by Hessler and the Executive Secretariat on July 1.
Copies were sent to Solomon and Brill. A typed notation at the top of the page reads:
“Noted by W.M.B.”
2 No memorandum of conversation of this meeting was found, but see Document

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
37.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, July 1, 1977
SUBJECT
The U.S. Trade Balance
Our analysis of the U.S. trade balance indicates the following:
A. The Facts
The U.S. trade balance will be in deficit by at least $25 billion in
may be as high or higher. Since we will be paying some $45 billion for
fuel imports this year, we will have a surplus of $20 billion on all other
trade. The reasons for this large deficit are several. Major factors
include:
1. A substantial increase in our oil import bill. About 40% of the in-
crease in the deficit between 1976 and 1977 is accounted for by our
trade with the OPEC nations.
2. Differential rates of growth in the U.S. compared with many of
our traditional markets. As we grow faster, we import more. Since our
markets abroad are showing only sluggish growth, our exports also
will increase less rapidly.
3. Higher food prices and slower growth in the developing coun-
tries, particularly those in Latin America, account for 40% of the deteri-
oration in the U.S. trade account between 1976 and 1977. Mexico and
Brazil, both of whom have embarked on stabilization programs, ac-
count for 20% of the swing.
There is no evidence that our basic export competitive position has
declined. The swings are on the import side. In addition, the U.S. has a
large and growing surplus on international services, primarily due to
large receipts of income from our foreign investments. This surplus
offsets part of the trade deficit—thus the current account balance,
which includes both trade and services, is expected to show a deficit of
about $12 billion this year.
B. Am I concerned about this situation? There is reason to be con-
cerned—but more for political and psychological reasons than for eco-
nomical ones.
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 88, Trade Deficit [1]. No classification marking. Watson for-
warded the memorandum to Carter, with copies to Lance, Schultze, and Cooper, under
cover of a July 6 memorandum. (Ibid.)

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
1. Such large imbalances may “weaken” the dollar. While a fall in
the exchange rate in the dollar strengthens U.S. competitiveness and
thus reduces excessive trade and current account deficits, this down-
ward movement of the exchange rate is disturbing to some.
2. It gives ammunition to protectionists and special interest
groups.
3. To some observers such a large deficit just plain looks bad. This
view of trade deficits is deeply ingrained in the conventional wisdom.
The purely economic effects—on U.S. output and employment—ap-
pear to be negligible and thus not worrisome, at least in the short run.
C. What Should We Do?
1. We should indicate concern and watchful alertness, avoiding
any appearance of complacency or inaction. At the same time, we
should take every public opportunity to put the situation into proper
perspective.
2. We should stress export promotion and financing even though
this is unlikely to have significant effects. We should look into possibil-
ities for stimulating exports of agricultural products.
3. We should encourage the strong countries to take action to re-
duce their current account surpluses, by appropriate exchange rate pol-
icies and domestic economic expansion—as was agreed at the Summit.
In this respect, recent statements by Prime Minister Fukuda have been
encouraging2—but this will not have a big impact on our deficit in the
short run. Also we should seek to promote sustainable expansion in the
LDCs to maintain or increase their import capacity.
There are several things we should not do:
1. We should not implement protectionist measures.
2. We should not attempt to artificially depreciate the exchange
rate, in violation of international agreements we have taken the lead in
negotiating. This probably would not work in any case since others
would merely follow suit.
In the final analysis, the basis of our trade “problem” is energy.
There is a world oil trade deficit that must be shared until it is elimi-
nated. An effective U.S. energy policy is the key to reducing this deficit,
among other indications, Japanese press reports on “Fukuda’s consultations with his eco-
nomic ministers on how to achieve Japan’s GNP growth goals and how to cope with per-
sistent criticism from abroad of Japan’s trade and current account surpluses,” and sug-
gested that “a consensus for a more responsible Japanese trade policy appears to be

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
and reasonable expansion by our partners abroad will contribute to a
better sharing of the deficit.
W. Michael Blumenthal3
3 Blumenthal signed “Mike” above this typed signature.
38.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, July 5, 1977
SUBJECT
Cargo Preferences
I have just received Stu Eizenstat’s memo (Tab A) on which you
approved a scaled-down version of cargo preferences.2 Obviously,
there are important domestic policy considerations at stake. But, your
decision will also have significant foreign repercussions which I do not
believe were adequately spelled out in the Eizenstat memo:
—Our trading partners, particularly the Europeans, will see cargo
preferences as a protectionist device. It will raise doubts about your
commitment to an open world trading system and to the London
Summit Declaration. As you may recall, Prime Minister Nordli told
you in London of the serious impact cargo preferences would have on
Norway.3
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 89, Economic Policy Group: 1977. Confidential.
Hormats sent the memorandum to Brzezinski for his signature under cover of a July 1
memorandum. (Ibid.)
2 Tab A is not attached. In his July 1 cover memorandum to Brzezinski (see footnote
1 above), Hormats wrote: “The President has decided to go ahead with a modified cargo
preference scheme recommended by Stu Eizenstat. His note on Eizenstat’s memo (Tab
A), which we have never received (we had to obtain this from the EPG), indicates that Bob
Strauss should work with the unions and Congress to obtain agreement on the ‘min-
imum’ acceptable level of preference.” A June 23 memorandum from Eizenstat and Bill
Johnston to Carter entitled “Cargo Preference” is in the Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 89, Economic
Policy Group: 1977.
brary, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
—Unemployment and inflation in Europe remain very high; gov-
ernments in power are weak. Leaders are under increasing pressure to
adopt trade restrictions to protect jobs at home. The heads of state of the
EC Nine last week issued a statement expressing concern about high
unemployment and asked for a study recommending measures to deal
with five sensitive industries, including shipbuilding.4 Adoption of
cargo preferences by the US will further weaken their resolve to resist
demands for protection. Instead, they may emulate our actions. The re-
sult would be disastrous for world trade.
—As Bob Strauss indicates, the concept of preferences is more im-
portant than the actual percentage offered.5 From the standpoint of US
trade policy, a 10% preference is as damaging as 25%. It breaches
treaties with 30 countries. Moreover, once we have started down the
preference road, it will become increasingly difficult to draw the line.
The maritime industry will push for more. A 10% preference will
merely open the door.
—Commerce and Labor recommend that you defend this action on
national security grounds—i. e. that US flag ships will be more reliable
than foreign ships in emergencies. State, Defense and I disagree. We be-
lieve that it is more probable that in an emergency foreign ports would
be closed to US flag ships.
I urge you to reexamine your decision in light of these consider-
ations; my concern is shared by State, Treasury, OMB and CEA.
contains the text of the statement on growth, inflation, and employment issued at the
conclusion of the meeting. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
5 See Document 34.
39.
Editorial Note
In his July 7, 1977, Evening Report to President Jimmy Carter, Sec-
retary of State Cyrus Vance discussed the oil cargo preference issue:
“We have called in officials from the embassies of the major shipping
nations this afternoon and informed them of our decision to support an
oil cargo preference. We told them that their representations had been
carefully considered but that because of domestic employment consid-
erations it is necessary for us to support a limited oil cargo preference.
We emphasized that given current projections of US oil imports and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
other demands for US-flag tankers, the proposed level of cargo prefer-
ence would not create a demand for new US tanker tonnage which
would adversely affect the current world tanker surplus. Embassy rep-
resentatives were unhappy and recalled our London summit pledge to
reject protectionist measures. We have undertaken an urgent review of
how to deal with the problems which the preference measure poses for
our Treaties of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation.” In the margin
adjacent to this portion of Vance’s report, Carter wrote: “This is my de-
cision. We’ll just have to make the best of it.” (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 18, Evening Re-
ports (State): 7/77)
On July 11, the administration announced that it would support
the introduction of cargo preferences. The preferences were to be
phased in over a 5-year period, increasing 1 percent per year from an
ports were to be carried in U.S. ships. (“Carter Would Ship More Im-
ported Oil On Tankers of U.S.,” The New York Times, July 12, 1977, page
39) Carter’s support for cargo preferences proved controversial. Re-
publicans charged that the decision was motivated more by politics
than by the national interest and that it represented “a blatant political
payoff” for the political and financial support Carter received from the
maritime sector during the 1976 Presidential election campaign. On Oc-
tober 19, the House of Representatives voted against the cargo prefer-
ences bill; many contemporary observers attributed the bill’s defeat at
least in part to the allegations of political payback lodged against the
Carter administration, as well as Congressional supporters of the bill.
Miller, “Republicans Attack Cargo Preference,” The New York Times,
Martin Tolchin, “House Defeats Bill to Give U.S. Tankers Cargo Prefer-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
40.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic
Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) and Robert Ginsburg of the
Domestic Policy Staff to President Carter1
Washington, July 7, 1977
SUBJECT
Adjustment Assistance Program for the Shoe Industry
General Outline of the Program
The Commerce Department has developed an adjustment assist-
ance program for the shoe industry which has the following principal
components:
1. Commerce will encourage the major domestic retailers (Sears,
K Mart, etc.) to increase their purchases from the trade impacted shoe
manufacturers. Commerce reports that the retailers have indicated
their willingness to participate actively in such a program.
2. Approximately 20 specialist teams will be formed, drawn princi-
pally from the private sector, to assist the affected companies in
modernization.
3. Financial support would be provided for education and training
courses for prospective managers of shoe companies.
4. Financial support would be provided for increased advertising
by the domestic industry.
5. Approximately $40 million in loans and loan guarantees would
be made available for increased capital investment in the affected com-
panies and for the purpose of facilitating the sale or merger of affected
companies.
The program is more fully described in the attached memorandum
from Under Secretary Harman.2 The total cost for the three-year pro-
gram would be approximately $60 million. No new legislation would
be required. The general outline of the program has been approved by
the EPG.
There can never be certainty that any adjustment assistance pro-
gram will work—it is extremely difficult to achieve a turnaround for a
single company let alone a large number of companies in a declining in-
dustry. Nevertheless, against that background, we think that Com-
merce has designed a good program. Both the industry and the shoe
unions support the program.
initial the memorandum. A stamped notation reads: “The President has seen.”
2 Not attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Subject to your separate decision on the advertising component,
we recommend that you approve the general outline of the program.
Approve3
Disapprove
Let’s discuss this further
Advertising Component of the Program
Commerce proposes to spend about $1 million per year ($3 million
total) to provide financial support for increased advertising by the do-
mestic industry. Commerce argues that there is precedent for U.S. Gov-
ernment financial support for advertising (tourism and certain agricul-
tural products) and that such advertising will be helpful in securing
retailer support of the program.
Charlie Schultze argues that subsidized advertising is a question-
able Government activity and sets a bad precedent for other industries
that may seek similar assistance.
On balance, we do not think it would be good policy for the Ad-
ministration to spend money for domestic advertising.
Approve advertising component of the program
(Recommended by Commerce)
Disapprove (Recommended by Charlie Schultze and us)4
Presidential Announcement of the Program
Ambassador Strauss believes that you should not personally an-
nounce the program. He is skeptical about the viability of the program
and thinks there is insufficient reason for you to undertake what he re-
gards as risky personal exposure.
Under Secretary Harman believes it is important that you person-
ally announce the program. He thinks that your personal involvement
will increase the chances that the program will work, particularly in
solidifying the moral obligation of the major retailers to increase their
purchases from the affected shoe companies. We agree and would add
the following points:
(1) your personal involvement will demonstrate your commitment
to developing good trade adjustment assistance programs and enhance
the Administration’s credibility in this area generally;
3 Carter checked this option and wrote in the adjacent margin: “Kreps announce—
not much fanfare. Emphasize ‘one-time trial’ basis. No precedent being established. No
extra budget requests. J.C.”
4 Carter checked this option.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
(2) if the program works, you will have personally associated
yourself with what will be a significant accomplishment for the Admin-
istration; and
(3) the industry and the unions support the program and would be
appreciative of your personal involvement.
We recommend that you personally announce the program with a
very brief statement at the White House; Under Secretary Harman
would conduct the press briefing to follow.
Approve personal announcement
Disapprove5
5 Carter checked this option and initialed “J” at the bottom of the page.
41.
Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Economic
Affairs (Cooper) to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, July 7, 1977
Dear Zbig:
You may have seen recent alarmist reports of a huge U.S. trade def-
icit, running an estimated $25 billion for 1977. I write to try to put this
trade deficit in perspective and to alert you to the dangers of trying to
do something about it in the short term.
Three major factors contribute to the enlarged deficit:
(1) Zooming growth of fuel imports, now running around $45 bil-
lion a year, up from $37 billion in 1976. Rapid economic growth, rising
oil prices, and the cold winter have all been significant factors. (We
have a $20 billion trade surplus if oil is excluded.)
(2) Rapidly rising non-oil imports, due to our economic expansion
and rising import prices.
(3) Slack demand abroad for our exports, which are expected to be
up over 1976 only a bit more than 1% in real terms due to slow eco-
nomic growth abroad.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980: Lot

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Our large and growing surplus income from net investments
abroad and the sale of other services leads to a current account deficit of
is the amount which must be financed by net lending to the United
States from foreigners.
The estimated U.S. current account deficit of $12 billion amounts to
about 30% of the total estimated OPEC current surplus of $40 billion in
1977. The key analytical point is that so long as OPEC has substantial
trade surpluses, the rest of the world must have substantial trade def-
icits. As the world’s largest economy and oil importing country, the
U.S. should share in these deficits, and indeed must do so if we are to
avoid putting unbearable pressure on other oil importing countries.
We have no problem financing our deficit, as many other countries
do. So far the financing has been readily supplied to the United States
by Arab members of OPEC, as well as by residents of a large number of
other countries. Both sources of funds are secure, as long as no radical
changes in United States economic policy are contemplated. The fact is
that they do not have many other places to go, since both Switzerland
and Germany discriminate against incoming funds in various ways.
Since we easily obtain more than 30% of OPEC’s funds placed in
Western financial markets, our objective is to permit the relending of
those excess funds to other deficit countries in OECD and the less de-
veloped world.
Serious domestic political and economic problems arise from
two sources: (1) continuing growing dependence on OPEC oil, and
(2) rising import competition for a substantial number of domestic
firms, particularly in manufacturing. Vigorous pursuit of the Presi-
dent’s Energy Program is an appropriate response to the first of these
problems. New proposals for expanded Trade Adjustment Assistance
will be a major part of the Administration response to the second
problem. In addition, we continue to put pressure on our Japanese and
German friends to do more for the cause of global economic expansion
to help provide alternative markets for the imports which have sought
out our buoyant markets.
A serious danger lies in the fact that if the United States deficit is
identified as a “problem”, Congress and the public will demand a “so-
lution”. The long run solution, as noted above, lies in our domestic en-
ergy policy as well as in the rising imports from OPEC countries. We
should avoid at all costs the kind of balance-of-payments programs
which we had in the 1960s, designed variously to stimulate exports, re-
strict imports, and discourage capital flows. They do not represent a so-
lution under the current circumstances (except for discouragement to
the importation of oil), and on the contrary would weaken the eco-
nomic condition of many other countries that are already too weak.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
Thus the United States trade deficit, while large in absolute terms,
is small in comparison both to our ability to finance it and in compar-
ison to other countries’ foreign economic difficulties. Over-emphasis
on our trade deficit is only likely to raise additional counter-productive
protectionist sentiments in various domestic circles.
The medium-term development of our trade balance will be pri-
marily affected by (1) return to full employment in our major trading
partners, (2) our energy policy, and (3) any tendency of our exchange
rate to depreciate or appreciate, which in turn is influenced by our con-
tinued ability to attract foreign funds. There is no reason for pessimism,
although the first two factors will probably take longer to have effect
than we might like.2
Sincerely yours,
Richard N. Cooper3
2 In a July 14 memorandum to Brzezinski, written in response to a request for his
comments on a July 8 Department of Commerce paper on the trade deficit, Hormats
reached similar conclusions as to the reasons behind the deficit. Like Cooper, Hormats
asserted that “there is no quick remedy for this deficit, nor should we try to decrease it
quickly;” rather, the solution lay in “an effective domestic energy program,” as well as
foreign economic growth and market-driven currency appreciations. Hormats stressed
the importance of not “portraying this as a major problem,” so as not to risk encouraging
the forces of protectionism; instead, he suggested that “any criticism should be turned
around to indicate that the sooner the Congress legislates a tough energy program, the
sooner the deficit can be reduced.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
42.
Memorandum From Robert Hormats of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, July 8, 1977
SUBJECT
PRC Meeting on Economic Aspects of the Schmidt Visit2
This meeting has two aspects: the first substantive, the second
bureaucratic.
From a substantive point of view, it provides an excellent opportunity
to ensure that (a) economic issues are put to Schmidt in a political con-
text, and there is a consistent approach among the various officials who
will be seeing Schmidt. The results of the meeting will also be incorpo-
rated in the overview memo for the President.3 At Tab A is a paper I
have prepared for these discussions. It provides background on the
various issues and puts them in a political context. It also identifies the
specific economic problems which are likely to be discussed during the
Schmidt meeting. At Tab B are papers prepared primarily by Treasury
with State input, except for the paper on EC enlargement which was
prepared by State.4 Blumenthal will lead off on most issues; Vance on
EC enlargement; and Strauss on MTN.
From a procedural point of view, this meeting puts the NSC mecha-
nism into the international economic picture on a key subject. I have
prepared the background paper with this very much in mind—specifi-
cally to demonstrate the linkage between economics and politics.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
action.
2 In a July 2 memorandum to Carter, Brzezinski indicated that he was “increasingly
concerned about the erosion of political confidence in Europe, which is both resulting
from and contributing to serious economic difficulties.” Noting that “the Schmidt visit
provides an excellent opportunity to review these issues and consider possible actions
that can be taken,” Brzezinski proposed a PRC meeting “on how to approach Schmidt on
the economic issues.” Carter indicated his approval of the recommendation. (Carter Li-
Visit) No minutes of this PRC meeting were found.
3 Not found.
4 Attached but not printed are papers entitled “The Adequacy of International Fi-
nancing Mechanisms,” “Estimate of Supply of IMF Resources Through Remainder of
1977,” “Follow-up to the Summit,” “Increased Protectionism,” “The Future of the Inter-
national Monetary System,” “Adequacy of German Growth,” “EC Enlargement,” “Portu-
guese Economic Situation,” “Turkey,” “Spain—Economic Prospects,” and “Revitalizing
the MTN.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
Tab A5
Paper Prepared in the National Security Council
Washington, undated
PRC DISCUSSION ON APPROACH TO SCHMIDT ON
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC COOPERATION
Background
A deep sense of apprehension today characterizes European eco-
nomic and political life. On the economic side, this results not so much
from a single dramatic crisis, although conditions have worsened in
some cases, but from a prolonged period of serious difficulties and the like-
lihood that they will continue. The EC expects growth in 1977 to be 3%
investment rates are low, and savings are high.
This unsatisfactory economic climate has both contributed to, and
resulted from, major political problems. Continuing economic troubles are
seriously eroding popular confidence in the ability of Europe’s leaders and its
economic and political systems to bring about solutions. If unabated, they risk
profound changes in, and perhaps radicalization of, many of Europe’s funda-
mental social, political, and economic institutions. The prospects of gov-
ernments with Communist participation coming to power in France
and Italy are enhanced by these countries’ serious economic problems
The possibility of Communist participation (which at the extreme im-
plies a dramatic transformation of both countries from market-oriented
to state-run economies) in turn contributes to a loss of economic confi-
dence in the rest of Europe. The Germans are particularly concerned
about the economic, as well as the enormous political and security, im-
plications of Communists gaining or sharing power in either country,
but particularly in France.
The Mediterranean countries face special problems. Portugal, Spain,
Italy, Greece and Turkey have large current account deficits which are
difficult to finance. Spain and Turkey, in particular, could, in the near
future, suffer acute financial problems (inability to repay debts, the
need for massive borrowings) which would disrupt their societies, fur-
ther shake confidence in Northern Europe, and raise new concerns
about the stability of international financial banking systems.
5 Secret.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
In Northern Europe the political problems resulting from an unsat-
isfactory economic situation are further complicated by a lack of popu-
larly perceived national “purpose”. The post-war period has seen vast
economic progress, particularly for Europe’s middle classes. But the
ethic of “reconstruction” and “economic growth” is no longer seen as a
driving force in European societies. Less easily achieved social and distri-
butional demands are now levied on governments. Traditional party
politics no longer seem to touch the lives, or inspire, the average man.
Governments are neither strong enough to resolve the major problems
these nations confront nor small enough to address specific “local” or
“special interest” problems. They frequently cannot, simultaneously,
meet the competing needs of domestic interest groups while achieving
traditional goals of economic growth and price stability.
In such circumstances, governments can be out-flanked on the left by
parties promoting radical social improvements and those on the right who crit-
icize the high expenditures and government interventionism to support the so-
cial and distributional progress which has already taken place. Leaders in the
middle are often paralyzed—fearing that reduced unemployment and
further social progress, which they need for political credibility, cannot
be cured except through additional expenditures which would turn
their more conservative allies against them, erode trade positions, or
risk inflation. The left promises reduced unemployment and more so-
cial benefits, along with more efficient government, but avoids an-
nouncing a “price tag” which the more conservative parties can shoot
down. Unless the moderate leadership can achieve an economic
success, either reducing unemployment or inflation, or hopefully both,
voters may come to believe that they have little to lose by turning to a
more extreme alternative—which at least holds out the promise of an
improvement.
Schmidt’s Concerns
The continuing political and economic malaise in Europe is of
enormous concern to Schmidt in its own right and because it has had a
major psychological and economic impact on Germany (eroding the
confidence of consumers and investors, and in part contributing to the
slowdown in German exports, investment and growth). He will be par-
ticularly concerned about the risk of Communists gaining or sharing
power in France and Italy, the potential for deterioration in the Medi-
terranean, and prospects for the longer-term recovery of economies
and confidence in Western Europe. He will explore possibilities for bol-
stering the prospects of Giscard, Andreotti and the democratic forces in
the Mediterranean, and perhaps convey ideas discussed at last week’s
London meeting of the leaders of the EC Nine.6

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
US-German Cooperation in a Political/Economic Framework
While a supporter of European unity, Schmidt recognizes that
many of the answers to the West’s problems require strong cooperation
between his country and the US. All of the problems on the agenda
below require, more than any other single factor, a common approach
and effort by the US and Germany.
It would be well to underline to Schmidt at the outset both the pos-
itive results of cooperation between our countries in recent months and
the objectives we share, stressing:
—Common support for the Witteveen facility;
—Cooperation in assisting Portugal (Germany providing $200 mil-
lion; US, $300 million);
—Common enthusiasm for the multilateral trade negotiations and
resolve to resist protectionism (the President and Schmidt were the
strongest spokesmen for free trade at the Summit);
—Effective management of our domestic economies; and
—Similar views on North-South issues.
The over-arching consideration which should guide US-German eco-
nomic thinking and cooperation is the relationship between economic progress
and political moderation and stability in Europe—particularly efforts to
strengthen the Majority in the March elections in France, help An-
dreotti in Italy, and strengthen democratic forces in other parts of Eu-
rope. The US and Germany must play the primary roles in this effort.
To the extent possible, we must agree on common objectives and how
to achieve them, bearing in mind that the political future of much of Eu-
rope hangs in the balance. Cooperation requires especially close con-
sultations between the leaders of the two countries in order to establish
the political directions necessary to ensure that our officials work to-
gether with a sense of common purpose.
The Agenda
Within this framework several key issues should be explored with
Schmidt:
—The adequacy of international financing. Availability of adequate
international financial resources would both instill greater confidence
in Europe and encourage deficit countries to take necessary adjustment
measures. The Germans prefer to help member Europeans through
multilateral institutions to avoid bilateral pressures and to ensure inter-
nationally imposed conditionality. The Witteveen facility ($10 billion
expected) is less than the $16 billion we had hoped for. Is it adequate? If
not, should we augment IMF resources through other means, move
ahead with the Financial Support Fund, or consider some other
vehicle?
A special situation may exist with respect to France. If prospects of
a Socialist/Communist victory lead to a further deterioration of confi-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
dence and trigger a capital outflow, might the French require financial
support from other nations? If so, should we begin to plan now for such
an eventuality? When might it be announced for maximum political
impact, or would premature announcement merely lead to the panic
we hope to avoid?
Are there any other ways we should consider bringing the Arab
OPEC nations into a more active financing role, either directly or
indirectly?
—Trade. Protectionist pressure is growing. The latest evidence of
concern about “sensitive industries” and hint of consideration of pro-
tectionist measures was reflected in the London meeting of the “Euro-
pean Council” (the nine EC heads of state and government), which ex-
pressed its concern at the unemployment situation in certain sectors
that are adversely affected by structural changes in the economy. And
it invited the EC commission to study “all factors involved”. Callaghan
afterwards explained that “we are all aware that there are sensitive
areas in our economies where strict application of an open and liberal
commercial policy can produce results which were really not antici-
pated in a period of world recession”. We should express our strong
concern about any movement toward protectionism in these areas.
Further, the US and Germany need to work together, as the two
countries most interested in progress in the Multilateral Trade Negotia-
tions and in avoiding protectionism, to reverse what appears to be a
gradual slide toward protectionism and to achieve progress in the
MTN. We want Germany to use its influence in the EC in support of a
forthcoming position in the MTN and attainment of the Summit objec-
tive of substantive progress this year in key areas such as: a tariff reduc-
tion plan; codes, agreements and other measures that will facilitate a
significant reduction of non-tariff barriers; and a mutually acceptable
approach for agriculture. For our part, we have worked out a compre-
hensive approach to the MTN which avoids threatening European eco-
nomic institutions, which is flexible, and which suggests objectives on
which the EC and US can agree on to ensure a more open and well-
managed international trading system. Bob Strauss will shortly present
our position to the EC Commission. We should also stress that we are
doing everything possible to avoid an outcome to the Zenith and US
Steel Customs Court cases which disrupts trade; that we are hopeful of
winning a reversal of the Zenith decision;7 and that if not, we will
assess other options, including that of seeking new legislation.
7 On April 12, the United States Customs Court ruled in favor of the Zenith Radio
Corporation’s contention that the Secretary of the Treasury was required to levy counter-
vailing duties on imported Japanese consumer electronics exempted from taxes normally
imposed within Japan. (Robert Cole, “Court Orders Duties on Electronic Goods Coming

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
—Growth. The central factor in dealing with the political/economic
issues facing Europe, and indeed other nations, is the ability of the US
and FRG, plus Japan, to achieve stable growth, and to stimulate sub-
stantial amounts of new exports from weaker economies. The political
situation in countries like Italy, France, Spain and Portugal limit the se-
verity of the stabilization programs they can implement. Stronger input
demand by the stronger economies is therefore essential.
The US and Germany have made important commitments at the
London Summit with respect to achievement of growth targets. Ger-
many has made efforts to stimulate its economy, but will fall below its
5% target—perhaps to 4%. In part, the problem has been the lack of re-
sponse by the German economy to earlier stimulus and in part the re-
luctance to introduce new stimulus for fear of triggering new inflation,
despite the expectation of only 4% inflation in 1977. We want Schmidt
and his economic officials to see adequate growth and increasing imports as key
international economic and political objectives (essential to moderate out-
comes in France, Italy, and elsewhere in Europe) and to pay extremely
close attention to this problem in the months ahead. Even if targets
cannot be precisely met in 1977, and we hope the Germans will come as
close as possible, we must be certain that actions are taken to ensure
maximum non-inflationary growth in 1978.
Regarding current account imbalances, the Germans, Japanese,
Dutch and Swiss surpluses may add up to $12 billion, added to a
roughly $40 billion OPEC surplus. This puts undue financial stress on
those countries which we have the greatest interest in helping—France,
Italy, (as well as poor countries). The US deficit of roughly $12 billion
makes economic sense, since it results from growing oil imports, a
growth rate in the US that is higher than most other countries, our
highly elastic demand for imports, and stabilization policies in some of
our more important markets. We can sustain this level for a time, but
unless Germany and Japan reduce their surpluses, we will be subject to in-
creased protectionist pressures from those people here who say that it is unfair
for the US to have a deficit while Germany and Japan and others maintain
surpluses.
Is there anything further we can do together to strengthen con-
sumer and investor confidence in Europe?
Enlargement of the European Community
Enlargement of the EC (to include Portugal, Spain and Greece)
contains positive as well as negative factors. First and foremost, it
should help stabilize the governments in those countries
and
strengthen their democratic forces. And over the long run, enlargement
will contribute to growth in Western Europe through the addition of
economies with a potential to achieve high growth rates and act as new
markets.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
But there are enormous problems in the short-run. Without a sub-
stantial transitional period, the three economies will be unable to com-
pete in most manufactured goods with the present EC members. In the
agricultural area, however, they will be extremely competitive and thus
pose a threat to the agricultural interests in Southern France and Italy.
Schmidt is also understood to have expressed concern at the London
meeting of the EC Heads of State that admission of these three coun-
tries would pose special difficulties for the EC’s policy of free move-
ment of labor—i.e. he does not want these countries to send their la-
borers to Germany and undercut the jobs of more highly-paid German
workers.
Because this issue will become increasingly important in the
months ahead, both to the EC and to the three applicant nations who
regard admission as the European seal of approval of their democratic
directions, we have an interest in doing what we can to avoid a break-
down in negotiations between them and Europe and smoothing their
way into Europe. We should probe with Schmidt whether there is any-
thing we can do to help these countries assume the responsibilities of
Community membership.
North-South
Continued momentum on North-South issues is important in its
own right and because close coordination among industrialized coun-
tries, and a cooperative framework with OPEC and other LDCs, can
help to reduce tensions in the event of Arab pressures, or threats, re-
garding the Middle East.
The CIEC Ministerial Meeting, fell short of the expectations of both
developed and developing nations, but it did provide the developing
countries with a better understanding of the points of view of the de-
veloped nations and of the reasons why we cannot do certain things the
developing countries want.8
The thrust of US policy is to be forthcoming toward the developing
countries through measures which we believe to be economically
workable. We want to continue a dialogue that concentrates on specific
issues in forums most conducive to substantive progress—e.g. World
Bank, GATT, UNCTAD commodity groups. We also want to make the
UN General Assembly’s overview role more productive, perhaps
through a new economic committee. We want to build on the improved
industrial country coordination and solidarity which worked well in
CIEC; based on this we should attempt to develop a constructive
counter-proposal to the UNCTAD Common Fund. The idea of a contin-
uing energy dialogue should be reexamined and played low key. We

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
want the North-South dialogue to give more attention to basic human
needs, and have suggested that OECD countries come up with a plan
on this.
The Germans, at CIEC, took a slightly harder position than the US
on a number of issues, and are particularly concerned about com-
modity agreements, which they see as having the potential to distort
markets. Beyond this, the Germans are somewhat more reluctant than
the US to go along with any sort of “common fund”—although they
grudgingly agree to a pooling arrangement among the funds of indi-
vidual buffer stocks. Schmidt has pushed a global scheme to stabilize
commodity export earnings as an alternative to extensive new interna-
tional commodity arrangements, but we believe this comes too close to
duplicating the IMF’s compensatory finance facility.
This meeting provides an opportunity to convey our position on
the above issues and probe the German position. This might also be a
useful occasion to determine whether Schmidt has given any further
thought to how to induce the Soviet Union to play a more constructive
role in the development process—a desire he expressed at the Downing
Street Summit. And, given the domestic political benefits which Gis-
card
seems
to
derive
from
French-sponsored
progress
in
the
North-South dialogue, are there any new measures for which we
should let him take partial credit—e.g. co-sponsoring the idea of a new
economic committee in the UNGA framework?
43.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Japan1
163810. For Ambassador Mansfield. Subject: U.S./EC Consulta-
tions on MTN. From: Ambassador Strauss for Ambassador Mansfield.
1. In discussions between myself and EC Commission President
Roy Jenkins, on Monday, July 11, we have reached agreement on an
ambitious timetable for putting together the major elements of an MTN
Limited Official Use; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Feketekuty (STR), cleared by Deputy As-
sistant Secretary of State for International Trade Policy William Barraclough and Thomas
G. Martin (S/S–O), and approved by Strauss.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
package before the end of the year.2 I would appreciate it if you could
do me the personal favor of explaining the results of my meeting in
Brussels to Prime Minister Fukuda, Foreign Minister Ichiro Hatayama
and Finance Minister Hideo Bo.
2. On July 11, I met with EC Commission President Roy Jenkins,
and Vice President Haferkamp, and Commissioners Gundelach, and
Davignon to discuss how we could best implement the Summit com-
mitment to achieve substantial progress in the multilateral trade nego-
tiations in 1977. As you know, both President Carter and Prime Min-
ister Fukuda were quite firm on this goal.
3. I found President Jenkins and his colleagues extremely positive
and pragmatic, and very eager to infuse the multilateral trade negotia-
tions with a sense of purpose and urgency. They recognize that an am-
bitious effort is needed if current protectionist pressures in Europe, the
U.S. and elsewhere are to be overcome. Roy Jenkins and his colleagues
assured me that they would assume personal responsibility for
achieving agreement on the main elements of a substantial MTN
package before the end of the year.
4. We also agreed that achievement of our goal would require a set
of interim steps, and that we needed to set dates for each of these in-
terim tasks. We agreed to seek the agreement of other MTN partici-
pants to a plan along the following lines, though we delayed announce-
ment of the details until the Commission has had a chance to consult all
the member states.
A. Agreement during July on procedures for handling negotia-
tions of agricultural issues and non-tariff issues not covered by multi-
lateral codes or agreements.
B. Agreement by October 1 on a tariff plan, including a tariff for-
mula, language covering the treatment of agricultural tariffs, and pro-
cedures for negotiating tariff concessions with developing countries,
and developed countries not applying the formula.
C. By November 1 all countries would table requests for agricul-
tural commitments and for commitments on non-tariff measures not
covered by multilateral codes or agreements.
D. Agreement by December 15 on draft texts for all multilateral
codes and agreements to be included in an MTN package.
E. By January 15, all countries would table offers in all areas of the
negotiations.
2 Memoranda of conversation of Strauss’ July 11 meetings with EC officials in

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
5. In setting these goals, I recognized, and the EC Commission rec-
ognizes, that a very intensive effort would be required by all our staffs.
However, we and the EC agreed that such an effort is required if we are
to succeed in these negotiations and avoid the dangerous consequences
of a slide into protectionism.
6. I also stated to the EC officials the confidence that President
Carter and I as his STR had that we could count on the full cooperation
of the Fukuda government on this entire program.
7. I and Ambassador Wolff hope to travel to Japan at an early date
to consult with the Japanese Government on the MTN timetable and on
the substantive issues which must be resolved if we are to succeed.
8. In the interim, I would like to urge Prime Minister Fukuda and
his Cabinet colleagues to instruct their staffs to accelerate the work of
their staffs in order that we may achieve the goals established at the
Summit.3
9. Please extend to Prime Minister Fukuda and his Cabinet col-
leagues my congratulations for their victory in the Upper House elec-
tions,4 and my very best wishes. I also send you and Mrs. Mansfield my
warmest affection.
Vance
4 After losing seats in a July 10 election, the Fukuda government reestablished a ma-
jority in the Upper House with the support of three independent members. (Andrew H.
Malcolm, “Fukuda Party Keeps Upper House Control,” The New York Times, July 12, 1977,
p. 1)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
44.
Memorandum of Conversation1
PARTICIPANTS
The President
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of the Treasury
Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski
Ambassador Walter Stoessel
Ambassador Henry Owen
Assistant Secretary of State George Vest
Gregory F. Treverton, NSC Staff Member, Notetaker
Harry Obst, State Department Interpreter
The Chancellor
Foreign Minister Hans Dietrich Genscher
Ambassador Berndt von Staden
State Secretary Manfred Schueler
State Secretary Klaus Boelling
Assistant Secretary for Political Affairs Juergen Ruhfus
Assistant Secretary Dieter Hiss
Director, Political Office, Klaus Blech
Mrs. Gisela Niederste-Ostholt, Interpreter for Minister Genscher
[Omitted here are opening remarks and discussion of MBFR and
SALT.]
General Economic Issues
Secretary Blumenthal commented that there was total agreement in
his discussions with the Chancellor the previous day on the nature of
the economic problems facing the developed countries and on the need
for full cooperation between the FRG and the U.S., and among the de-
veloped countries, although there were some differences of emphasis
on particular measures which should be applied.2 The rise in oil prices
has caused large imbalances on current account in many countries, ac-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
inet Room. Schmidt paid an official visit to Washington July 13–15. During a meeting on
July 13, Carter and Schmidt discussed, among other issues, the multilateral trade negotia-
tions. Noting the importance of “rapid movement in MTN,” Carter asked for Schmidt’s
help in encouraging French movement in the negotiations. Carter and Schmidt also dis-
cussed the problems posed by Japanese trading practices. (Memorandum of conversa-
tion, July 13; ibid.)
p.m. at Blair House. A memorandum of conversation of the meeting is in the Department

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
companied by inflation and unemployment. Periodically, there are se-
rious balance of payments crises, particularly among the Mediterra-
nean states and some LDCs. The OPEC surplus will total some $45–50
billion this year, while Japan will run a $7 billion payments surplus and
a current account deficit of $12 billion and a trade deficit of $25 billion.
These deficits are unlikely to diminish for some time.
Secretary Blumenthal then suggested strategies with which we can
deal with these problems.
—Progress on energy is vital, but will take time and the economic
effects of the U.S. program will not be felt until 1980 or 1982.
—Non-OPEC countries in surplus or close to payments balance
can encourage imports from the deficit countries by meeting the
London growth targets. The U.S. will continue to emphasize exports.
Surplus countries should let their currencies appreciate. The Japanese
have not been completely cooperative on this issue, although there has
been improvement lately; they have considerable administrative con-
trol over the value of the yen. Our aim is the gradual reduction of the
U.S. deficit; that is important because the continued outflow of dollars
could be inflationary, although this is less of a problem if currencies are
floating, because exchange values accommodate.
—Secretary Blumenthal stressed cooperation to make available fi-
nancial reserves—through the Witteveen facility and increases in IMF
quotas—noting that such assistance can be very effective, as in the case
of Britain.
—Finally, Secretary Blumenthal urged that the Chancellor do
whatever possible to achieve German growth of at least 4.5%, indi-
cating that he and the Chancellor had discussed Germany’s problems
and possibilities.
The President said that the U.S. will not interfere with the goals
various nations set, or with changes that they deem necessary. If they
want to change their goals, fine. The Japanese will be close to meeting
though growth will drop off in the second half of this year. If the FRG
cannot attain its goal, the U.S. will understand. But there is an im-
pending problem for the U.S.: with 7% unemployment it is difficult to
explain a $25 billion trade deficit to Congress, especially while the
Germans have a $9–10 billion surplus. But the U.S. and the FRG will not
impose policies on each other.
The Chancellor commended Blumenthal’s summary, as fair and ac-
curate. He stressed the importance of regular, quiet meetings between
the Finance Ministers of the U.S., Britain, France and the FRG. The Japa-
nese should be included periodically. Meetings are easier without them
because they are not fluent in English or comfortable in such meetings,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
but it is important to reduce their intellectual isolation from European
and American experience.
The Chancellor noted that the Deutschemark had been permitted to
preciation had been 1% per month. That had been the German contri-
bution to recovery. But this has been difficult on the steel and ship-
building sectors. The FRG will have a growth rate of 4.5% this year
Dr. Brzezinski questioned whether FRG unemployment figures in-
cluded foreign workers who do not leave Germany, and the Chancellor
said they do. One million are unemployed. The German labor force in-
cludes 4 million foreigners, who stay in the FRG and collect welfare
when they are unemployed.
The Chancellor said that there had been a change in the structure of
demand. It is now satisfied. There will be no new housing construction,
only replacement, but demand for cars is high and demand for hol-
idays overseas is very high (60% of German workers vacation abroad).
He noted that 14% of disposable income is saved. Interest rates are very
low and there is more money to lend than demand for it. He had de-
cided to raise the VAT by only 1%, not 2%, and to offset that hike by
other measures. There will thus be a net tax relief. That has been hard
on Finance Minister Apel because of the resulting government deficit.
Since private investors will not invest, the government must. A 60 bil-
lion DM investment program is underway, despite unenthusiastic re-
sponse and red-tape delays in the states. The Chancellor wondered
what the FRG can do about its surplus on current account but allow the
Mark to float.
Secretary Blumenthal said that if growth could reach 4.5% and the
Mark were permitted to float, that would be enough.
The Chancellor said that was a difficult answer for Parliament to ac-
cept; they wanted more growth.
Specific Country Situations
The President asked for the Chancellor’s opinion of other nations’
economic situations.
The Chancellor responded:
—Britain: the “social contract” is breaking down; North Sea oil will
resolve British difficulties in 2–3 years, but that the interim will be
trying.
—France: is financially more solid than any other Western state,
but suffers from structural problems. The unemployment (5%) is very
sensitive politically; if the government can cut it by 100,000–200,000,
then it can win the elections; if unemployment rises, it is sure to lose.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
The Chancellor had spoken with Giscard and Barre; neither thought the
government should do more than it is doing at present.
—Italy: growth is not the problem; it is the social differences—
North v. South, rich v. poor, etc.
—Holland is in good shape; Belgium is not. Austria is very
healthy, but too small to affect general Western recovery. Switzerland
is economically strong after expelling its foreign workers. While
Norway is fine, Denmark has problems and the Swedish situation is
deteriorating.
The Chancellor concluded that while there are difficulties, he
did not think that there will be further economic decay. He noted
that
growing
productivity
complicates
German
efforts
to
cut
unemployment.
The President responded that U.S. productivity is falling.
The Chancellor suggested that good labor relations are responsible
for the rise in German productivity. Much of the unemployment is a re-
sult of women entering the work force.
The President said that women also account for much of the
problem here; there is also a huge illegal alien population, as many as
several million Mexicans.
The Chancellor complimented the President on U.S. economic per-
formance in the first two quarters, saying that he thought the change
was less one of economics than of mood, a good part of it brought on by
the President’s arrival in the White House.
The President said the low 6% savings rate was the cause of U.S.
growth. If the confidence reflected in polls continued, so would the
growth.
[Omitted here is discussion of Turkey, Portugal, and Spain.]
The President said that both he and the Chancellor were concerned
at the public impression of discord between the U.S. and the FRG. He
said that they had decided the previous night that should occasional
disagreements arise, they would call each other. An image of US–FRG
tension is difficult for the weaker states.
The President noted that disagreements are always exaggerated by
the press and instructed U.S. officials present to inform him of any
hints of trouble in the relationship so that he could call the Chancellor.
The Chancellor fully endorsed the President’s statement. He said
that some of the sources of such exaggeration were in his country—
those who want a return to the Cold War. Also, there are those in the
EC who do not view German economic growth with pleasure and are
willing to play up any US–FRG disagreement. Some of the sources are
also in the U.S. The Chancellor felt that he and the President should

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
fight against any discord in US–FRG relations by maintaining personal
contact.
The President instructed Powell to inform the press that the U.S. is
very pleased with Germany’s economic performance and attitude
toward the nuclear fuel cycle evaluation. We are pursuing the same
goals, and the U.S. and European publics should know that. The Presi-
dent joked that agreement between the two leaders is so broad that
they needed to find an area of disagreement.
The Chancellor suggested one: on the phone the President should
speak more slowly.
[Omitted here is discussion of the Law of the Sea negotiations.]
The Chancellor said he hoped that the President would come to Ger-
many soon. He understood the President’s schedule problems and did
not expect an immediate answer, but said that a Carter visit would be
received enthusiastically. After Germany itself, Germans look to the
U.S. for leadership. All Germans would see a Presidential visit as indic-
ative of the close relations between the two countries.
The President was grateful for the invitation as well as for Schmidt’s
visit to the U.S. He and the Chancellor spoke briefly about a “Friend-
ship Force” visit to West Berlin. The President agreed in principle to
visit the FRG in the near future.3
3 In a July 16 memorandum to Carter, Brzezinski relayed a report from Hiss that
Schmidt was “delighted by his visit here. It confirmed him in the impression, which he
had formed at London, that you and he could work well together.” Schmidt also
“profited from the economic discussions with Blumenthal and then with you” and “was
comfortable with the way you discussed the growth targets.” After discussing Hiss’
thoughts on the date for the next economic summit, Brzezinski noted Hiss’s confidence
“that the Chancellor will press his subordinates and his allies to fulfill the ambitious
schedule on trade negotiations that Bob Strauss and Jenkins agreed to last week, to fulfill
his summit pledge.” Carter wrote “Good” on the memorandum. (Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 24, German Federal Re-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
45.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs (Bergsten) to Secretary of the
Treasury Blumenthal1
Washington, July 21, 1977
SUBJECT
Strauss Briefing on MTN Development
In this morning’s meeting of the Trade Policy Committee, Bob
Strauss gave an optimistic reading on MTN moves.2 He recounted the
recent flurry of activity including his own meetings in Brussels,3 a
quick trip by Alan Wolff to the key European capitals,4 a long discus-
sion between Ambassador Mansfield and Prime Minister Fukuda,5 and
a sharp increase in press coverage in Europe.
Strauss believes that the other countries now fully understand that
the United States is serious, and that we will not accept a mini package.
He and the EC Commissioners have agreed to conclude the deal by the
Spring of 1978; Strauss feels that our package must go to the Congress
by May 1978 if it is to be voted by them next year. An important date is
the next Summit meeting, which Owen is now planning for June or July
1978; the EC Commissioners clearly hope to finish the MTN prior to
that time, to avoid losing control of the issue.
Alan Wolff reports, from his quick trip to Europe, that:
—The Germans are fully supportive of our position, and will push
for maximum liberalization though they foresee an eventual tariff cut
halfway between our proposal and that of the EC.
—The British want a “medium-size” package, but seem less pro-
tectionist than six months ago.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
classification marking. Sent for action. Reviewed by Hessler and the Executive
Secretariat.
2 No other record of this meeting was found.
3 See Document 43.
meetings with British officials. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
multilateral trade negotiations with Fukuda during their first meeting, which took place
gram 10787 from Tokyo, July 19, contains a fuller description of Mansfield’s first meeting

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—The French remain the most hostile; their goal is “organized lib-
eralization”. They are following the old pattern of linking trade negoti-
ations to every conceivable issue (Concorde, the VAT case, “dollar de-
valuation”). However, the Patronat6 has backed off its opposition to the
whole exercise.
One possibly disruptive issue has crept into the picture. You will
recall that the Tokyo Declaration promised “special and differential”
trade for the LDCs.7 The British and particularly the French have in
mind a new kind of “differential treatment”: differentially discrimina-
tory against all “low wage countries”. At today’s meeting, Cooper sug-
gested that we seek partial reciprocity from the LDCs via their cutting
tariffs half as much as the DCs.
Strauss mentioned two operational issues:
—He would like you to meet with the TPC for an hour or two, to
discuss the Kennedy Round experience,8 as a guide for this round; I
gather he has discussed that with you personally.
—He wants designation of an official from each agency as his reg-
ular contact on MTN issues; I assume that I should fill that role.
Recommendations:
(1) That you agree to meet with the TPC to discuss the Kennedy
Round experience, in the next week or two.9
(2) That I be the designated Treasury contact for MTN issues.10
6 Reference is to the Conseil national du patronat franc¸ais (National Council of
French Employers), known as the Patronat.
7 For the text of the Tokyo Declaration, issued at the end of the September 1973
GATT Ministerial meeting, see the Department of State Bulletin, October 8, 1973,
8 Blumenthal served as the Deputy Special Representative for Trade Negotiations
from 1963 until 1967, as well as the head of the U.S. delegation to the Kennedy Round of
GATT negotiations.
9 Blumenthal initialed his approval of this recommendation on July 22.
10 Blumenthal initialed his approval of this recommendation on July 22 and wrote,
“if OK with Solomon.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
Attachment
Paper11
Washington, undated
MTN Timetable
On July 11 the United States and the European Community
reached agreement on a four-phase timetable to be completed by Jan-
uary 15, 1978. The work done within this timetable will establish the
framework for the final stage of the multilateral trade negotiations
(MTN) next year. The four phases of the timetable (with target comple-
tion dates in parentheses), what each phase entails, and a brief descrip-
tion of the current status of negotiations on the subjects covered by the
timetable are given below.
I. Agreement on a Tariff Plan (October 1)
—Elements to be included in the tariff plan include a tariff-cutting
formula, language concerning the treatment of agriculture, procedures
for tariff negotiations with non-formula countries, and an agreed basis
for special and differential treatment of developing countries.
—Currently, there are four formula proposals on the table. The EC
proposal provides for an average tariff cut of around 38 percent before
exceptions and for a large element of tariff harmonization. The U.S.
proposal provides for an average tariff cut of almost 60 percent before
exceptions. In the US–EC bilateral discussions on July 11, and subse-
quently, the EC has backed away from its earlier proposal and is now
proposing a less ambitious tariff cut of around 20 to 25 percent but with
no exceptions.
—It is anticipated that the United States, the European Commu-
nity, Japan, Canada, the Nordic countries, Switzerland, and Austria
will apply the tariff-cutting formula.
—The United States has proposed a cross-notification procedure
with developing countries, whereby the developing countries would
notify the developed countries of those products on which they desire
tariff cuts and the developed countries would notify the developing
countries of those products on which the developing countries might
make some tariff concessions.
11 No classification marking.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
II. Tabling of Requests (November 1)
—Requests would be made on agricultural tariffs, industrial tariffs
of non-formula developed countries and of developing countries, and
nontariff measures relating to agricultural and industrial products.
Countries would use restraint in making requests on those nontariff
measures that would be subject to codes agreed in the MTN (i.e.,
subsidies/countervailing duties, government procurement, standards,
customs valuation).
—A notification/consultation procedure is underway in Group
Agriculture that covers both tariffs and nontariff measures. Similarly,
notification/consultation procedures are underway for nontariff meas-
ures not being addressed in codes, including quantitative restrictions
and customs matters other than valuation. The information being gath-
ered in these consultations will aid countries in determining what re-
quests to make of their negotiating partners.
III. Tabling of Draft Codes (December 15)
—Draft codes that could be used as a basis for negotiation would
be tabled for those subjects for which no acceptable draft code has yet
been tabled. These draft codes would contain bracketed language for
those issues on which disagreement still exists. We expect to have draft
codes for standards, government procurement, subsidies/counter-
vailing duties, safeguards, and customs valuation. The current status of
these codes is as follows:
—An acceptable draft product standards code is already on the
table and has been under consideration in the MTN for several years.
—The OECD considered a draft government procurement code for
several years and this draft was tabled in the MTN this year. This draft
proved unacceptable and a new draft must be written.
—The Canadians have tabled a draft text on subsidies/counter-
vailing duties. This text has encountered considerable opposition, espe-
cially by the EC, and a new text will be needed.
—The United States will table a draft safeguards code this fall that
should be an acceptable basis for negotiation.
—The European Community will table a draft customs valuation
code this fall that should be an acceptable basis for negotiation.
IV. Tabling of Offers (January 15)
—All MTN participants will table offers on tariffs and nontariff
measures. Offers on those nontariff measures that will be subject to
general codes may not be necessary. Most industrial countries are ex-
pected to table tariff offers on industrial products on the basis of an
agreed tariff-cutting formula. Tariff offers on agricultural products will

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
be tabled on an item-by-item basis, taking into account the tariff
formula.
—Developing countries may refuse to make any offers until they
have a better understanding of what they will receive in the
negotiations.
V. Implementation of Timetable
—Considerable work has been done internally for determining
what requests and offers to make. However, a tremendous amount of
work, especially in the area of exceptions to a tariff-cutting formula, re-
mains to be done.
—Much work also remains to be done on the draft codes.
46.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of the Treasury for
Monetary Affairs (Solomon) to Secretary of the Treasury
Blumenthal1
Washington, July 26, 1977
SUBJECT
Exchange Rates and U.S. Exchange Market Policy
I thought it would be useful to place recent exchange market de-
velopments in a historical context.
1. The recent movements in exchange rates are by no means un-
precedented: since early 1973, while there have been long periods of
relative stability, there have also been times when the dollar exchange
rate—against individual currencies and on a trade-weighted basis—
has gone through swings much wider than those of the past month.
—The dollar rate against the DM, to take a key example, has
percent on several occasions.
—The weighted average rate for the dollar has moved by 4–10 per-
cent on six occasions.
by Leddy and Springborn and reviewed by Cross. Solomon did not initial the memo-
randum. Attached is an undated note that reads: “Noted by the Secretary & returned.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—These figures compare with changes in the rate against the DM
and the trade-weighted rate of 4½ percent and 1½ percent respectively
in the past month.
—For the period of floating as a whole (since March 1973), the DM
Again for the period as a whole, the dollar itself has appreciated by about
5 percentage points on a trade-weighted average basis.
2. U.S. policy throughout this period has been to rely on the
markets to determine the exchange rate and to limit U.S. intervention to
that needed to counter disorderly market conditions. The largest U.S.
market operations during the period have been to acquire foreign cur-
rency needed to liquidate swap debt, to repay the IMF, and to pay
down Treasury foreign currency issues accumulated prior to the elimi-
nation of gold convertibility in 1971. These operations are not designed
to influence the market.
3. The one episode of “substantial” U.S. intervention to influence
the market was during the six month period October 1974–March 1975.
The DM appreciated by about 17 percent against the dollar, and the
dollar depreciated by about 4 percent on average. Markets were fre-
quently disorderly, as the U.S. slid into recession with no clear correc-
tive policy. U.S. intervention amounted to $1.4 billion in this period, fi-
nanced largely through U.S. drawings on the swap lines. When U.S.
economic indicators improved and the market turned, the U.S. inter-
vened on the other side and repaid the swap debt.
4. Recent movements in rates and market uncertainty are not diffi-
cult to understand. Our trade and current account positions have
moved into heavy deficit. There are doubts that we will solve our en-
ergy problem or control inflation. And there is a general perception
that we are “talking the dollar down,” at least against the DM and the
yen.
5. We do not need to change our intervention policy. The market
has been speculative at times, but on the whole has been orderly. The
Fed has intervened modestly at times to counter disorderly conditions.
An effort to stop the movements—through massive intervention or
statements that rate movements have gone “far enough”—would be
tested by the market and would run a high risk of failure. It would also
represent a failure not only of exchange rate policy but also of our
policy to bring about an orderly adjustment of imbalances. We have ad-
vocated flexibility in exchange rates to bring about adjustment—and
we should not be surprised when rates move.
6. On the other hand, we can contribute to a calmer market
atmosphere:
—by refraining for the time being from statements that unsettle the
market;

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
—by pointing to the fundamental strength and improvement of
the U.S. economy; and
—by persisting in the effort to deal with energy and control infla-
tion as the only effective way of assuring a strong dollar.
Attached are:
a) A summary table on periods of dollar depreciation and U.S. in-
tervention in support of the dollar.2
b) The table on foreign intervention and rate movements you re-
quested this morning.3
c) The talking points on the exchange rate I sent you last week.4
2 The attachments are attached but not printed. Attachment a is a table entitled “De-
preciation of Dollar: Rates and U.S. Intervention in “Support” of Dollar (Selected Period,
March 1973–Present).”
3 Attachment b includes an undated note on “Exchange Market Intervention by
Major Foreign Countries” and a table entitled “Official Market Intervention in Dollars by
Major Foreign Central Banks.”
4 Attachment c is an undated paper entitled “Suggested Talking Points” and a July
20 cover memorandum from Solomon to Blumenthal in which Solomon noted that “the
markets continue to be unsettled. If the situation continues, it may become desirable or
necessary for us to comment in order to try to calm the situation, though without
changing our substantive position. (For the moment, I continue to think it best that we
minimize public statements to the extent possible and that it is preferable to make any
moments that are necessary on a background basis.)”
47.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic
Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) and Robert Ginsburg of the
Domestic Policy Staff to President Carter1
Washington, July 30, 1977
SUBJECT
Administration Response to Steel Price Increases
You asked me to coordinate the development of possible options
for your Administration’s potential response to the steel price increases
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files,
Box 284, Steel (O/A 6343). No classification marking. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the
page.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
by U.S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel.2 I have asked Charlie Schultze, Barry
Bosworth (your Director-designate of the Council on Wage and Price
Stability) and the Special Trade Representative’s office to prepare
options.3
These options are as follows:
1. Tariff Reductions. Strauss and Schultze agree that this would be
an inappropriate action since it would have little impact on the in-
dustry, would appear to be a punitive response, and might reduce our
negotiating leverage in the Multilateral Trade Negotiations. We agree
with their conclusion that this option should not be exercised.
2. Reduction of the “Buy America” Preference. We agree with
Schultze and Strauss that there is little utility in attempting to reduce
this preference since it has little impact on the industry, particularly the
type of steel product involved here, and, likewise, would appear puni-
tive. (Under this preference U.S. producers have a 6% price prefer-
ence—and in some cases, a 12% price preference—in general gov-
ernment procurement, and a 50% preference in procurement by the
Department of Defense.
3. Direct GSA and the Department of Defense to remind gov-
ernment purchasing agents of their obligation to make steel purchases
from the lowest priced American suppliers. Charlie Schultze feels that
this action will have little impact unless a split market price develops,
and that government purchases do not constitute a large enough share
of the structural steel and tin mill market to force such a result.4 Never-
theless, we believe that this would be an appropriate action and might
have some actual impact in encouraging the development of a split
market. At the very least, it would be a positive action in the right direc-
tion and certainly, in and of itself, is appropriate since it re-emphasizes
an obligation which government purchasing agents should be fol-
lowing in any event. This action could put the steel companies which
percent and its tin mill products by 7 percent. The following day, Bethlehem Steel an-
nounced that it too would raise structural steel prices by 6 percent and tin mill product
prices by 7 percent. (Gene Smith, “U.S. Steel Planning Increases in Prices to Ease Labor
3 Schultze offered his recommendations in a July 27 memorandum to Carter.
(Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files, Box 284, Steel
(O/A 6343)) Strauss discussed the role of trade policy in a July 25 memorandum to
Carter. (Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles L.
Schultze Subject Files, Box 81, [Steel] [7]) Bosworth’s recommendations were not found.
above), Schultze noted: “This requirement is supposed to be followed in any case. The ac-
tion will have little impact unless a split market price develops for a particular steel
product. Emphasis on the requirement would reinforce our earlier statements, however.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
have not yet followed the lead of U.S. Steel and Bethlehem under anti-
trust and shareholder pressure not to do so—they will be hard put to
explain why they are following the prices of the Big Two if they are
foregoing increased government business in the process. If this action is
to be taken, it should be done very quickly before other steel companies
join U.S. Steel and Bethlehem.5
4. You could meet personally with the chief executive officers of
U.S. Steel and Bethlehem. We agree with Charlie that this action is not
warranted for the reasons he mentions.6
5. Antitrust Investigations. Although this is not mentioned in
Charlie’s memo, you might call for an antitrust investigation of these
price increases. We would not recommend this, however, because it
would appear punitive and because the Justice Department is already
investigating the last round of price increases in the steel industry.
6. Schultze’s Recommendations: Charlie recommends that you
(a) direct the Council on Wage and Price Stability (CWPS) to initiate a
study of the increases7 and (b) have CWPS call in the automobile manu-
facturers and urge them to exercise restraint in pricing on the 1978
models.8 For the longer term, Charlie recommends that we (i) continue
our efforts in the Meany–Jones Labor-Management Committee9 to de-
velop mechanisms for dealing with private wage and price decisions
5 Carter wrote “ok—Proceed” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
above), Schultze noted: “The steel companies have acted already, and they are unlikely to
respond positively to requests to rescind or reduce their increases. A direct request from
you would create an atmosphere of confrontation that would leave the companies no
graceful way to back down. Even if you did not directly urge a rollback, the press
would interpret the meeting as though it were pressure for a rollback, and play up the
confrontation.” Carter wrote “no” in the margin adjacent to this section of Schultze’s
memorandum.
above), Schultze noted that “CWPS could, using existing authority, obtain data from the
steel companies on production costs, order backlogs and available capacity in specific
product lines. CWPS could supply you with a report on the conditions in the industry
that could provide the basis for further comments about the industry’s pricing policies.
(If you approve, we will immediately draft a directive to CWPS from you.)” Carter wrote
“ok” in the margin adjacent to this section of Schultze’s memorandum. No directive from
Carter to CWPS was found.
above), Schultze suggested that meetings with the automobile industry “could be initi-
ated by Barry Bosworth at CWPS. If necessary, the meetings could later be escalated to
higher levels. Auto prices are the next big area of action, and, in any event we should do
this.” Carter wrote “ok for Bosworth, no for me” in the margin adjacent to this section of
Schultze’s memorandum.
9 On April 15, Carter proposed a series of measures to fight inflation, including the
encouragement of labor-management cooperation; this effort was to be led by AFL–CIO
President George Meany and General Electric Company Chairman Reginald Jones. For
the text of Carter’s statement on his anti-inflation program, see Public Papers of the Presi-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
and (ii) be prepared to speak out publicly against egregiously infla-
tionary price or wage actions.
We have no objection to any of these recommendations, but would
add the following:
1. Direct Contact with the Steel Companies. Charlie indicates that he
has talked with the chief executives of several of the steel companies
which have not yet raised their prices. You might make a private, un-
publicized call to one or two of these executives to indicate your per-
sonal concern and strong hope that they will not follow the U.S.
Steel–Bethlehem lead.10
2. CWPS Hearings. You could direct CWPS to not only undertake a
study but conduct public hearings on the price increases. We believe
that both Barry Bosworth and Charlie are concerned that this would be
too confrontational and with little to gain. It is, nevertheless, a viable
option you might use if you wish to take high visibility action.11
3. Link to Auto Manufacturers. We think that any Administration
discussion with the automobile manufacturers should not be publicly
linked to these steel price increases. The public might regard calling in
the automobile companies as a rather strange and indirect response to
price increases by steel companies.
4. Meet with Labor-Management Committee. If you want to make a
strong personal response to the steel price increases, and if Charlie
thinks it advisable, you could call a special meeting of the Labor-
Management Committee and lay down in general terms the need for
price restraint by business if we are ever to get inflation under control.
You could make it clear that you expect business to raise prices less this
year than last and that continued attempts to improve profit margins
by raising prices more than costs (apparently the case for tin mill
products) mean a never-ending cost-price spiral. Jody could brief the
press afterward on this meeting.
5. Forestalling Future Steel Price Increases. If it appears that these
price increases will stick, one of your principal economic advisers
should quietly tell U.S. Steel and Bethlehem that we expect that this
will be the last increase for some time to come (at least January 1, 1978)
and that any further increases may well cause a major confrontation
with the Administration. This could at least, in a non-public way, help
to forestall further steel price increases for some time.
10 Carter wrote “no” in the margin adjacent to this recommendation.
11 Carter wrote “What are likely results?” in the margin adjacent to this
recommendation.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
48.
Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Economic
Affairs (Cooper) to Vice President Mondale1
Washington, August 1, 1977
Dear Fritz:
You asked me recently about the role of monetary policy in dealing
with our balance of payments problem.2 As you know, the U.S. mer-
chandise trade deficit has increased sharply to a projected $25 billion in
1977, due to higher oil imports, sustained economic expansion at home,
and weak economic growth abroad. Our $11 billion surplus on service
transactions has offset a sizable portion of the trade deficit. Voluntary
capital inflows, largely from the placement of OPEC surplus funds,
have provided financing for the rest of the deficit.
Administration strategy to deal with this problem has two major
components: (1) press for the energy program to deal with the high cost
of oil imports; (2) wait for changes in the business cycle at home and
abroad to improve our exports relative to our imports, while pressing
OECD countries to meet their growth targets. To the extent that these
factors do not achieve a satisfactory result, the dollar will tend to fall in
exchange markets and slowly produce a further improvement in our
current account.
A key component of this strategy is continued reliance on volun-
tary capital inflows to finance the deficit. So far this year, these flows
have been forthcoming in sufficient volume to finance the deficit
without much decline in the value of the dollar. Obviously, the level of
interest rates in the United States relative to those abroad can influence
those capital flows. And foreign interest rates have been declining this
year while U.S. rates have remained steady or risen somewhat, re-
flecting the differences in economic activity here and abroad. Thus the
present course of monetary policy appears adequate to deal with the
problem of assuring that our current account deficit will be financed.
Over the longer run, the rate of inflation in the United States rela-
tive to foreign inflation is a prime determinant of the value of the
dollar. Clearly, monetary policy has a role to play in this area as well.
Both our present and projected inflation rates and our monetary
growth targets are on the low side of foreign experience at present.
Thus monetary policy is already making its appropriate contribution to
the longer-run stability of the dollar.
1 Source: Carter Library, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, National Security Issues,
marking. A handwritten notation reads: “Seen. File.”
2 Not further identified.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Moreover, further tightening of money at this time would certainly
brake and might bring to a stop the economic recovery. Slowing down
the recovery would be a serious error, both domestically and in terms
of badly needed buoyancy it provides to the world economy. Even if
we had an overall balance of payments problem, which we do not, the
U.S. should not halt the recovery of its economy, which is still far from
fully employing our resources. Such waste of human skills and capital
is not an appropriate answer to a weak balance of payments.
In sum, there is no reason, in today’s circumstances, to recommend
tighter monetary policy for balance of payments reasons. Such a recom-
mendation would only become appropriate if it became apparent that:
(a) our energy policy was doomed to failure; (b) normal cyclical
changes would not improve our current account; (c) adequate capital
inflows did not appear to be forthcoming. Under such circumstances
the dollar might begin to drop for a prolonged period. Then it might be
judged that external factors required a tightening of monetary policy,
but only after examining carefully the state of domestic production, un-
employment, and inflation. Fortunately, the day when such choices
must be faced is not imminent.3
Sincerely,
Richard Cooper4
3 Mondale also requested the Department of the Treasury’s view on the link be-
tween monetary policy and the trade deficit. Bergsten and Brill forwarded a draft re-
sponse to Blumenthal for his signature under cover of a July 29 memorandum. The draft
asserts that the best way to address the deficit would be through “an effective energy pro-
gram” and “continued vigorous growth and relative price stability for the American
economy.” Asserting that “there is little justification on domestic grounds for a tight-
ening of monetary policy,” the draft cautions against monetary contraction “purely for
currency reasons,” unless, perhaps, “the dollar were to weaken so sharply as to cause
(1) significant inflationary effects here and (2) important psychological effects interna-
tionally.” Blumenthal did not sign the draft memorandum. (National Archives, RG 56,
Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs C. Fred Bergsten,
4 Cooper signed “Dick” above this typed signature.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
49.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs (Bergsten) to Secretary of the
Treasury Blumenthal1
Washington, August 5, 1977
SUBJECT
GATT for Investment
Per your urging at the EPG meeting on July 18,2 I have already met
with Cooper and others from State to consider a GATT for investment. I
will subsequently convene a meeting of my EPG Deputies Group, to
develop a paper on the subject over the next few weeks for policy con-
sideration in September.
Because of your interest in the subject I attach an early but well-
done draft on the subject (Tab B),3 and a summary thereof (Tab A).
It was prepared by my staff, and has only now been floated outside
Treasury. However, any reaction from you even at this early stage would be
of great value to our work.
On the substance, there is already underway the rudimentary be-
ginning of a sort of “GATT for Investment” through efforts on different
parts of the issue in different forums: discrimination in the “national
treatment” section of the OECD code, international arbitration in
ICSID,4 multilateral insurance via cooperation among the national
OPICs, transfer pricing via an OECD working group, tax harmoniza-
tion via a series of bilateral treaties, antitrust via bilateral under-
standings between the United States and several other industrial coun-
tries, corrupt practices in the ECOSOC negotiations, etc. But these are
only a very tentative start:
—Some issues are not covered at all (e.g., tax incentives to foreign
investors and “performance requirements”).
—Many which are covered have no enforcement teeth.
—There is no coordination among the many parts of the overall
issue.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
Organizations, Panels, Working Groups 1977. No classification marking. Sent for infor-
mation. Reviewed by Hessler on August 8. A typed notation reads: “Noted by W.M.B.”
2 No minutes of this meeting were found.
3 Tab B, attached but not printed, is a July 26 paper entitled “A GATT for
Investment.”
4 The International Center for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID),
founded in 1966 as a part of the World Bank Group, provides a forum in which disputes
between member states and private investors can be settled by arbitration or conciliation.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Hence there is clearly room for a major initiative, or series of initia-
tives, in this area. I will forward further material to you next month.
Tab A
Paper Prepared in the Department of the Treasury5
Washington, July 29, 1977
A GATT For Investment
SUMMARY
Despite the fact that it has become a major vehicle for the transfer
of resources between countries, international investment is not effec-
tively governed by multilateral rules. As a consequence, national gov-
ernments intervene to tilt the benefits of investment in their favor, thus
producing harmful competition and a progressive erosion of the free
market system.
Against this background, it is useful to review the possibilities for
international cooperation through a “GATT for Investment.”
Current Situation
There are a few international agreements aimed at regulating gov-
ernment intervention in the investment process. The U.S. has a wide
network of treaties of friendship, commerce, and navigation (FCN
treaties) which prohibit discrimination against American investors and
have been negotiated principally with developed countries. The effec-
tiveness of the few multilateral agreements such as the OECD Code of
Capital Movements, the International Center for the Settlement of In-
ternational Disputes, and the OECD Declaration on International In-
vestment and MNEs, is quite limited.
U.S. Interests
The U.S. has traditionally not taken an active role with respect to
foreign investment, in accordance with our general free market philos-
ophy. This philosophy is not shared, however, by other governments
which often intervene in investment to and from the United States. The
interventions which have the most conspicuous effect on our national
interests are the performance requirements imposed on firms by host
governments, including quantitative and qualitative job quotas, min-
imum export quotas, “local content” requirements, and limitation of
5 No classification marking.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
capital and local ownership. The United States is not necessarily worse
off as a result of such intervention than it would be in the absence of
foreign investment, but it is very likely worse off with foreign interven-
tion than without it.
Interests of Other Governments
Cooperation of other governments in pursuing a GATT for Invest-
ment would depend on the specific contents of our proposal and the
force with which we pursued our objective. Our case should be based
on the general proposition that unregulated competition among gov-
ernments in the investment area is just as detrimental as it would be
with respect to trade, and on the proposition that we will no longer pas-
sively accept the interventionist policies of other nations. No explicit
threats would be necessary, but we would have to make it clear that we
are ready to take measures such as regulating the outflow of invest-
ment and technology in accordance with our national interests.6
Substance of Negotiations
The various possibilities for topics which could be included in the
GATT for Investment fall into three general categories: investor protec-
tion, government intervention, and regulation of MNE activities. The
specific topics include the following:
1. Investor Protection
—A judicial remedies convention could be negotiated which
would be designed to ensure that goods produced from expropriated
mines and factories can be judicially seized if shipped to the markets of
the signatory countries.
—We can strengthen the International Center for the Settlement of
Investment Disputes or other similar panels.
—We would face the question of to what extent and in what form
we should press for inclusion of the principles of national and most fa-
vored nation treatment and treatment according to the minimum
standards of international law. These are sticking points particularly
with the IDCs [LDCs?], who argue that only local remedies should be
available to a foreign investor.
—Consideration could be given to several possible approaches for
establishing investment insurance on a multilateral basis, but the his-
tory of negotiations on such proposals does not give grounds for
optimism.
6 An unknown hand placed checkmarks adjacent to the second and third sentences
of this paragraph and wrote “Necessary?” at the end of the paragraph.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
2. Government Intervention
—The United States managed to get only a weak agreement with
respect to incentives and disincentives for investment in the OECD.
However, a binding agreement might conceivably be negotiated in this
area that was similar to the GATT arrangements with respect to trade.
—GATT-type remedies might also be appropriately applied to per-
formance requirements placed on foreign investors by governments.
—In the tax area we might negotiate a multilateral tax treaty or
agreements to extend the range of issues addressed in bilateral treaties.
—The United States might have to respond to demands by other
countries that we refrain from imposing requirements on the foreign
affiliates of U.S. corporations to further our political goals.
3. Regulation of MNE Activities
—The developing countries are particularly anxious to require
subsidiaries to act independently of parental direction on such ques-
tions as pricing, market sharing, and sourcing of inputs. The United
States and other developed countries have argued that restrictive
business practice limitations should not be extended to intracompany
affairs.
—Tax avoidance problems have been met by the extensive interna-
tional network of bilateral treaties. A GATT for Investment could be
useful to national governments in providing a centralized pool of infor-
mation for national tax authorities.
—Increased disclosure of information by MNEs concerning their
activities would be a basic objective of host governments in negotiation
of any new agreements.
—In the event that the U.N. negotiations on an anti-bribery agree-
ment are unsuccessful, we could tackle the issue again in the new
forum.
Forum of Negotiations
The five basic questions we should have to address in making the
complex decision as to which forum or forums we should use to pursue
our investment objectives are as follows:
1. Should we rely on a single forum or pursue our objectives in a
coordinated fashion in several forums at one time? A single new or ex-
isting forum would focus public attention on the negotiating process
and facilitate bargaining across issues; multiple forums would result in
less politicized negotiations.
2. Should we propose establishment of a new organization for the
purpose of negotiating and eventually administering the proposed
agreement or rely on existing institution or institutions? Creation of a
large new organization would give investment issues a greater promi-
nence in international economic affairs approaching that of the mone-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
tary, trade, and development areas. On the other hand, we could expect
to encounter resistance from other countries on the grounds that a new
initiative in the investment area would undermine ongoing codes of
conduct negotiations in the U.N. and in the OECD. The relationship be-
tween these exercises and the new initiative might be handled either by
keeping them separate or by folding both into a new forum.
3. Should participation in the agreement be universal or limited to
a core group of like-minded countries? Universal participation would
result in greater coverage of the agreement but might produce a tend-
ency for the negotiations to become politicized and for the agreements
to reflect the least common denominator. A “core group” of countries
would probably be able to arrive at a stronger agreement, but a number
of host countries would be excluded. Under either option agreement
would have to be reached on the basis for decision-making, with the
two principal models being the OECD procedures under which each
country has an equal voice and all decisions must be unanimous, or the
IMF, which has weighted representation.
4. If we decide to use an existing forum, which should we choose?
If we propose the establishment of a new organization, what form
should it take? The OECD has a staff with experience in the investment
area, but its membership is limited and its procedures are slow. The
United Nations also has some expertise in investment matters and
wide membership, but it is highly political. The GATT has a heteroge-
neous membership and existing mechanisms and procedures which we
might use as a model; however, it has not dealt extensively with invest-
ment issues.
5. Should we fall back from the bilateral treaty vehicle, rather than
rely exclusively on lengthy multilateral negotiations? The United States
and other developing countries have a number of FCN treaties and
other countries have actively pursued narrower bilateral investment
treaties. The major advantage is that they can be concluded with a min-
imum of difficulty; their fundamental disadvantage is that the public
visibility of the effort will be low. Two options we have within the bilat-
eral framework would be to negotiate narrow treaties with LDCs or to
negotiate comprehensive treaties which would have the contents of
and lay the groundwork for the GATT for Investment.
Sanctions
Sanctions could be used to enforce new agreements in this area
which could range from moral opprobrium to private legal action to
state retaliation. The appropriate kind of sanction would differ as be-
tween the offender and the offense. MNEs would be subject to the local
law and sanctions in host countries, but home governments would also
play a role, as could some recognized international body. Among the
options for enforcing standards on governments are withholding eco-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
nomic benefits, imposing countervailing duties, discrimination by host
governments against investors of a violating country, and discrimina-
tion by home governments against investments in a violating country.
50.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, August 9, 1977
SUBJECT
Results of My Paris Trip (August 5–7)
I went to Paris last Friday and Saturday2 for two purposes: 1) for a
meeting with German Finance Minister Apel to clear the air about recent ex-
change rate movements and to explain U.S. exchange rate policy, and
2) for a meeting with other industrial country and OPEC repre-
sentatives to try to work out arrangements for supplementing the resources of
the International Monetary Fund through the so-called “Witteveen
Facility.”
Meeting on Exchange Rates
The meeting with the Germans on the exchange rate issue went ex-
tremely well. Over the past several weeks the dollar-DM rate has moved
noticeably—though not as sharply as on a number of other occasions
during the period of floating exchange rates since 1973. The German
press had made a major issue of recent rate movements, claiming that the
U.S. was acting irresponsibly, “manipulating” the exchange rate and
trying to “talk the dollar down” for competitive and other reasons, and
charging that the U.S. should intervene on the exchange markets to re-
verse the rate movement. The German official reaction to the rate move-
ments had been much more restrained, though there was suspicion that the
press comments were stimulated by government spokesmen.
I explained and reaffirmed our exchange rate policy to Minister Apel—
that we support a floating exchange rate system; that our policy is that
the dollar’s value should be determined by underlying economic and
stamped notation reads: “The President has seen,” and Carter wrote at the top of the
page: “Mike—good job. J.C.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
financial conditions; that we intervene in exchange markets only to
counter disorderly exchange market conditions. I reiterated our view
that a strong dollar is of major importance to the United States and the
rest of the world; that the way to maintain a strong dollar is through a
strong and non-inflationary economy; and that recent indicators show
progress toward that objective.
Minister Apel agreed with everything I said, stressed that Germany fully
supported the floating exchange rate system, and expressed regret for the
German press comment. (The Germans also told us privately that they are
now convinced they should take additional stimulus measures to in-
crease their real growth rate, which is running at a very disappointing
level. They will be telephoning us this week to tell us what the specific
measures will be.)
Apel and I held a joint press conference to make clear that we under-
stood and were in full agreement on these matters.3 I believe this will lay
to rest the uncertainties and press speculation.
Witteveen Facility
We also succeeded in reaching agreement among the major industrial and
OPEC countries on the main issues relating to establishing the “Witteveen Fa-
cility”, to supplement the resources of the IMF for the next two years or so.
This reflects the successful culmination of follow-up to one of the most
important items at the London Summit. The usable resources of the
IMF are extremely low at present, and—given the large payments im-
balances in a number of countries associated with increased oil costs
and other factors—there is a need to supplement these resources and
provide the needed assurance that official financing will be available in
adequate amounts to assist countries while they implement needed ad-
justment programs and eliminate the need for financing.
While no one can be certain exactly how much is needed for the
new facility, it has been our view that about $10 billion or more is required to
assure the necessary credibility and confidence. The Paris meeting was de-
signed to raise that amount, and to set financial terms and conditions.
While a couple of participants were unable to say precisely how
much they might pledge until they return to their capitals, it looks as
though the $10 billion or an amount very close to it will be raised. In Paris
seven industrial countries pledged about $5.2 billion. Five OPEC countries
pledged about $4.2 billion, and two others (Kuwait and Nigeria) are expected
lion. If the total falls slightly below $10 billion, there are other possibil-
ities for “topping-up” the total.
3 A report on the joint press conference appeared in the The New York Times on
August 7. (“U.S. and Bonn Call Strong Dollar Economically Vital,” The New York Times,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
I regard this as a successful outcome. The total amount is adequate, and
the balance between the industrial country group and the OPEC is reasonable.
I believe Congress will react favorably to the rough equality between
OPEC and industrial country participation—OPEC is providing almost
half—since the lack of OPEC participation was one of the major objec-
tions to the financing proposal put forward by the previous Adminis-
tration. The U.S. share (approximately $1.7 billion) is reasonable, and in
line with that of other participants (for example, Saudi Arabia’s share is
fair—we will receive the amount it costs Treasury to borrow for compa-
rable maturities, which is an adequate return without being too severe
on the borrowers. And the facility will help strengthen the international
monetary system by encouraging those countries with large balance of
payments problems to adopt the needed adjustment programs. Tony
Solomon, my Under Secretary for Monetary Affairs, did most of the
ground work in putting this arrangement together.
Assuming no further hitches develop, the IMF Executive Board
will finalize the facility in the weeks ahead. We are planning to submit the
necessary authorizing legislation to the Congress in the present session.
W. Michael Blumenthal4
4 Blumenthal signed “Mike” above this typed signature.
51.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, August 12, 1977
SUBJECT
Highlights of Treasury Activities
1. GERMANY
As I indicated in my report on my discussions with Finance Min-
ister Apel last weekend,2 the Germans are now convinced that additional
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
President has seen,” and Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Mike. J.”
2 See Document 50.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
stimulus is needed to raise their real growth rate—now running about 1
point below the 4½–5 percent target they accepted at the London
Summit. They have now committed themselves publicly to taking action,3
and have told us privately that on August 31 they will announce (1) a combi-
nation of revenue and expenditure measures to increase the fiscal deficit
With these measures, they expect real GNP growth of 4½ percent in 1978—
though because of the long lead times involved the 1977 result is likely to
be very disappointing.
Incidentally, I have told Apel that I will be happy to accept his in-
vitation to visit Germany at the beginning of November.
2. STEEL INDUSTRY PROBLEMS
On August 8 I met with a group of steel company executives, led by
Speer of U.S. Steel, who were anxious to press their problems with me
as they had done previously with Bob Strauss.4 They stressed that the in-
creasing volume of imports (recently about 18 percent of apparent con-
sumption) was just the beginning of Japanese and EEC producers’ efforts to
penetrate our markets. Although they did not say so directly, it was clear
that they wanted some sort of import relief. I told them that Treasury would
enforce the anti-dumping laws vigorously, and urged them to bring such
cases to our attention. At the same time I asked them why they did not emu-
late the Japanese, who reduce rather than raise prices in times of slack demand.
They replied that this would not be effective for U.S. producers, since they do
not have access to a free global market and only the U.S. market is free
to world competition. Moreover, they said, they could not afford to lower
prices in periods of slack demand because public pressure kept them from
increasing profit margins in periods of increased demand. I told them
that we would give their problems further study, but at the same time I
asked them whether higher labor costs here might have undermined
their ability to compete. (Another problem is the technological superi-
ority of some of the newer foreign plants.)5
[Omitted here is discussion of New York City and domestic
finance.]
W. Michael Blumenthal6
3 On August 11, for example, The New York Times printed a story entitled “West Ger-
many, to Offset a Surge In Joblessness, Raises Spending.” (Ellen Lentz, The New York
4 Possibly a reference to the June 30 meeting between Strauss and representatives of
eight steel companies. See Document 36.
5 Carter wrote “I find their frequent & excessive price increases incompatible with
pleas for import restraints. J.C.” in the margin adjacent to this section.
6 Blumenthal signed “Mike” above this typed signature.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
52.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic
Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) and Robert Ginsburg of the
Domestic Policy Staff to President Carter1
Washington, August 12, 1977
SUBJECT
The Trade Deficit (At Your Request)2
This memorandum summarizes the accompanying papers on the
trade deficit prepared by Treasury and Commerce.3
DIMENSIONS OF THE TRADE DEFICIT
are projected at approximately $149 billion, with oil accounting for 30%
of the total, and exports at $122 billion.
2. Trade Account and Current Account. The current account balance
includes the merchandise, agricultural products, and raw materials of
the trade account as well as “invisible” items such as tourism, freight
and transportation, investment income, and unilateral transfer pay-
ments; it measures a country’s net balance in international transactions
in goods, services, investment income, and transfer payments. Invis-
lion in 1976). Accordingly, the current account should be in deficit by
Although less inclusive, the trade account is often given greater
popular and political attention than the current account because in
measuring the export and import of tangible products it is viewed by
some as a better guide to the net impact of international trade on U.S.
jobs. (That view is somewhat overdrawn because: (i) there is consider-
able labor content in such invisible items as tourism, freight, and
banking and insurance services; (ii) there is relatively limited labor con-
tent in U.S. agricultural products, which account for roughly 20% of
our exports; and (iii) about 50% of our imports are themselves neces-
sary inputs for the production of goods in the U.S.)
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
classification marking. Ginsburg did not initial the memorandum. A stamped notation
reads: “The President has seen,” and Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page.
2 Not further identified.
3 Not attached.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
3. Geographical Distribution. All the projected 1977 trade deficit can
be accounted for by deficits the U.S. will be running with OPEC coun-
tries. The U.S. will be in rough balance with the non-OPEC world as a
whole. However, the deterioration in the U.S. trade balance between
1976 and 1977 is accounted for partly by a deficit in our trade balance
with Mexico and Brazil, our fourth and tenth largest export markets
(we normally run surpluses with these countries but they are currently
embarked on domestic stabilization policies), and a somewhat larger
than usual deficit with Hong Kong, Korea, Taiwan, Japan and Canada
(we normally run trade deficits with all these countries).
billion in imports, $5 billion in exports) in fuels (oil, gas, coal, nuclear
$13 billion in all other products. In assessing the $18 billion deteriora-
tion in our trade account between 1976 and 1977 on a product by
product basis, the $8 billion increase in fuels accounts for over 40% of
the total and a decline in our surplus in manufactured goods from
pected to increase by another 20% this year, exports increased only 7%
changes include price increases, the real volume of U.S. exports will be
essentially flat for 1976 and 1977. Treasury attributes the imbalance be-
tween imports and exports basically to the oil situation and slower
rates of economic growth abroad than in the U.S. Commerce is con-
cerned that the lag in exports may also reflect some decline in interna-
tional competitiveness of U.S. goods.
6. Prospects for the Future. The 1978 trade deficit is expected to be as
large or larger than that for 1977. Although long-term projections must
be considered with caution, Commerce expects a substantial trade im-
balance to continue at least through 1980.
CAUSES OF THE TRADE DEFICIT
important factor in the trade deficit. The oil export revenues of the
OPEC countries as a group are so huge that, even with large percentage
increases in imports, they are running current account surpluses in the
range of $40–$45 billion.
In a global context in which the oil-importing countries as a group
must run deficits to absorb the $40–$45 billion OPEC surplus, the U.S.
movement from current account surplus in 1975 to rough balance in
that movement, the financially weaker countries (both developed and
LDCs) might be running unsustainable deficits which could be handled

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
only by sharp and destabilizing changes in their domestic economic
policies. However, of the financially stronger countries (U.S., Japan,
West Germany, Switzerland, and The Netherlands), only the U.S. is
doing its part in assisting adjustment to the international consequences
of the OPEC surplus. (To be sure, some of our “strong” allies might
argue that we are not doing our part where it counts most—cutting
back substantially on imported oil.)
The slow growth and current account surpluses in West Germany,
Switzerland, and The Netherlands are particularly damaging to the
“weak” countries of Scandinavia, France, the U.K., and Southern Eu-
rope. Only expanding markets in all the strong countries will allow the
world economy to achieve a steady, sustainable growth path.
2. Favorable Economic Growth in the U.S. and Slow Growth Abroad.
lion decline in our surplus in manufactured goods). This is a function
primarily of the relatively strong U.S. economic recovery, which has
led to substantial increases in imports, and relatively slow growth
abroad, which has constrained our exports.
The impact of differential growth rates on our trade balance is
heightened by the fact that U.S. imports respond more sharply to
changes in U.S. income than our exports respond to changes in foreign
crease in our imports while a 1% increase in foreign income will only
imports a large amount of consumer goods, which are more heavily de-
pendent upon changes in income than the agricultural products and
capital goods which we export and (ii) imports constitute a smaller
share of our consumption pattern than they do for our trading partners
and, accordingly, are more flexible upward.)
It is not only West Germany and Japan that are growing slowly but
virtually all of Europe and a number of non-oil LDCs. Some of the
“weak” countries of Europe and the non-oil LDCs are embarked on do-
mestic stabilization policies to reduce their debt and get their econo-
mies in balance and also have to pay an increasing part of their foreign
exchange for oil. U.S. exports to non-oil LDCs, even in inflated dollars,
have been virtually flat for the past two years.
3. U.S. Competitiveness. Any judgments about changes in competi-
tiveness over relatively short time periods must be inherently conjec-
tural because the conclusions reached will depend crucially on the base
period chosen. Commerce points out that the export prices of U.S. man-
ufactured goods increased relative to those of our trading partners
normal lag in the impact of changes in relative prices on manufacturing

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
exports, this “decline” in “competitiveness” may presently be having
some adverse effect on manufacturing exports and may continue to do
so for the next year or so.
However, Treasury points out that since early 1976 U.S. inflation
has been lower than the average inflation rates experienced by our
major trading partners and, therefore, in terms of relative prices the
U.S. has probably made some small gains in “competitiveness” re-
cently. Commerce also notes that most foreign governments do consid-
erably more to promote and even subsidize exports than does the U.S.
IMPLICATIONS OF THE TRADE DEFICIT
1. Economic Implications. Lagging exports have an obvious adverse
effect on economic growth, jobs, and Federal tax revenues. To the ex-
tent that the sharp increase in imports (at a time when U.S. unemploy-
ment and excess capacity are high) is due to unfair competition from
abroad, U.S. industry is being hurt and domestic production impaired.
Beyond these truisms, there is general agreement that it is appropriate in-
ternational economic policy for the U.S. to be running a current account def-
icit at this time. The questions relate to the causes, size, and persistence
of the deficit and our ability to sustain it over time, if necessary,
without adverse economic or political fallout.
Commerce believes that “persistent, excessive” U.S. trade deficits
would tend to create uncertainty and instability in the world and U.S.
economies, with attendant political risks.
Treasury notes that the ratio of the present current account deficit
to U.S. GNP is about the same as that for the OECD as a whole (about
1% in each case) and that the U.S., with its strong economy and capital
markets and stable political system, is better able to finance and
manage a deficit than almost all other countries. Treasury believes that
our focus should be on reducing the oil problem and urging the other
“strong” countries to expand their economies, that the U.S. competitive
position remains strong, and that the U.S. should not take measures
which would attempt to improve our trade balance at the expense of
our trading partners.
2. Political-Psychological Implications. To some, a trade deficit and a
depreciating dollar are inherent signs of weakness. To others, they are
potent arguments for import restraints (which, in turn, could severely
jeopardize our efforts to control inflation). Although these views may
have to be met in the political arena with public education, they are
without economic merit. Short run “fixes” for the trade deficit (e.g., im-
port restrictions or slowing down economic growth through monetary

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
and fiscal policy or through import quotas on oil) would be worse than
the problem itself.
POSSIBLE RESPONSES TO THE TRADE DEFICIT
1. Short Run. There is little we can do which will substantially re-
duce the trade deficit over the next year or two. Those policies which
would work—such as import restrictions or cutting back on domestic
economic growth—are inherently undesirable.
2. Recommendations. Treasury and Commerce are in basic agree-
ment on the following set of responses to the trade deficit:
(a) an energy program which will reduce oil imports;4
(b) encouraging the “strong” countries (Japan, West Germany,
Switzerland, and The Netherlands) to expand their economies, thereby
increasing their imports;
(c) encouraging the “strong” countries to allow their exchange
rates to rise, thereby reducing the price competitiveness of their exports
(that kind of automatic adjustment is a basic purpose of floating ex-
change rates but it can be thwarted by government intervention in the
exchange markets);
(d) acting against specific cases of dumping or unfair foreign trade
practices;
(e) increasing official IMF resources to enable other countries to
adjust to their oil problems at reasonable paces without forcing destabi-
lizing cutbacks in their domestic economic policies;
(f) pursuing the reduction of barriers to U.S. exports in the MTN
and in direct consultation with countries like Japan;
(g) increasing the export awareness of U.S. producers and in-
creasing the promotion of U.S. exports;
(h) adequate export financing (Commerce supports an expansion
of the Export-Import Bank and DISC;5 Treasury, believing that U.S.
goods have not lost their competitiveness and that export subsidization
would both undermine our efforts to reduce these practices by others
and provoke retaliation, would not go as far in expanding the ExIm
Bank and thinks DISC contributes virtually nothing and should be
eliminated);6 and
(i) educating the U.S. public on the problem in order to reduce the
possibility of ill-advised political reactions.
4 Carter wrote “good” in the margin adjacent to recommendations (a)–(g) and (i).
5 Carter underlined the abbreviation “DISC” and wrote “no” in the margin.
6 Carter wrote “I agree” in the margin adjacent to this section of the paragraph.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
3. Additional Responses. Although not mentioned in the Treasury or
Commerce papers, we would add the following to the list of possible
responses:
(a) If the trade deficit persists and you determine that more vig-
orous action needs to be taken, you should seek advice from Secretary
Vance and Dr. Brzezinski on possible diplomatic/political responses to
encourage more equitable policies by the “strong” countries. The
Treasury and Commerce papers are concerned mainly with economic
responses. We know that we are pushing Japan and West Germany
fairly hard already and would not recommend any additional pressure
for now, but there may come a time when we need to take a broader
look at our options for dealing with the underlying problem of unbal-
anced economic policies among our allies (probably less for reasons of
our own trade deficit than to protect the stability of the “weak” coun-
tries of Europe).
(b) The IMF will meet in Washington in late September. All of the
leading finance ministers, private bankers, etc. will be here. Normally
the President makes brief, non-substantive welcoming remarks. You
might use the occasion for a major substantive speech on international
economic policy, describing the contribution the U.S. has made to
world economic stability in the past few years and indicating that it is
time for more equitable sharing of the burden of the oil deficit by all the
strong economies.7
The speech could have the positive international consequences of
(i) putting all nations squarely on notice that the U.S. should not be ex-
pected to absorb the oil deficit alone and (ii) actually galvanizing our
strong allies to adopt more equitable economic policies. It could also
have the major domestic benefits of educating the American people
and getting out in front in a leadership role on this issue.
7 The annual joint meeting of the IMF and World Bank took place in Washington
remarks, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1977, Book II,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
53.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council of
Economic Advisers (Schultze) to President Carter1
Washington, September 12, 1977
SUBJECT
Oil Imports, Trade Deficit, etc.
SUMMARY
The swing in our balance of trade has been very large and projec-
tions for the future take it outside the range of “benign neglect.” Inter-
national financial markets are resilient, however, and we can afford a
careful and orderly response.
As Mike Blumenthal suggests, we ought to organize our efforts.2
But we should not restrict our examination to oil. I suggest a PRM led by
Treasury, which has two goals:
A. An assessment of the severity of our deficit problem under
various scenarios.
B. A review of the costs and benefits of alternative responses, both
oil and non-oil.
BACKGROUND
1. Secretary Blumenthal’s projections of the trade deficit ($30 billion,
current account (subtracting U.S. earnings on investment abroad and
some other items) would be about $12 billion a year lower. This is the
amount that has to be financed by foreign investment in the U.S.
2. Even with a successful energy program, U.S. oil imports will
continue to rise for awhile. An $80 billion oil import bill in 1981 is a
good bit higher than a “quickie” estimate which we have just made. But
it is not out of the question.
3. Since we are growing faster than most other nations, our exports
may continue for awhile to grow more slowly than our non-oil imports.
4. So long as the U.S. economy is perceived to remain healthy, and
particularly so long as our rate of inflation is favorable compared to
most other nations (as it now is), we should be able to attract OPEC and
other investment to finance large current account deficits.
1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Subject File, Box 36, Schultze (Charles) Memos,
1977. No classification marking. Schultze did not initial the memorandum.
2 Not further identified. In his October 18 memorandum to Carter (see Document
66), Blumenthal referred to a report that he made to Carter on September 10 suggesting
“that the sharp decline in the U.S. balance of trade and payments requires our immediate
attention.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
5. Some depreciation in the value of the dollar may occur if our
current account deficit continues to grow. If the depreciation is moderate
and orderly, the bad consequences (increased prices for imports) would
be outweighed by the good consequences (promotion of exports).
6. We cannot, however, rule out the possibility that growing trade
and current account deficits would have two highly undesirable
consequences:
(a) substantially increase protectionist pressure here;
(b) a psychological impact on holders of dollars, leading to a sharp
and disorderly decline in the dollar, which in turn might lead to com-
petitive devaluation or protectionist measures in other countries.
We think the probability of (b) is quite small, but not zero.
7. Almost any action to reduce the trade deficit substantially will
have budgetary, economic, or other costs. But some possible actions
would have far less costs than others.
8. There is a list of items we could explore, not all of which relate to
oil. (In each category I have tried to list the items in order of least cost.)
A. Oil imports
(i) Rescind the plan to cut back Elk Hills petroleum reserves pro-
duction3 (up to $1½ billion lower imports).
(ii) Speed up repairs to Alaskan pipeline and accelerate second
phase (can it be done, and at what cost?). The potential national savings
on oil imports are very large.
(iii) Stretch out oil acquisition for the strategic petroleum reserves
(we think current plans call for about $4 billion in purchases in 1978).
(iv) Work closely with Saudis, Iranians, and others to see what we
can do to encourage increased production, smaller price increases, and
willingness to hold dollars (e.g., should we develop special kinds of in-
vestment instruments for them?).
(v) Institute additional voluntary gasoline and other energy con-
servation measures (substantial question if they can have a lasting ef-
fect, but could be explored).
(vi) Surcharge on oil imports. Hard to sell to the public; would also
raise price of domestic energy and add to inflation.
3 Among the measures included in Carter’s national energy plan, which he sub-
mitted to Congress on April 20, was a proposal to limit production at the Federally-
owned Elk Hills Naval Petroleum Reserve in California. See footnote 7, Document 25.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
B. Other measures
$1 billion a year in exports).
(ii) Increase export promotion efforts by Department of Commerce
(cheap, but of questionable effectiveness).
(iii) Increase funds for Ex-Im bank. (Effective, but may induce
competitive response by other exporting nations).
(iv) Promote orderly depreciation of the dollar (takes effect slowly
but could have large effect on trade balance; adds to inflationary
pressure).
C. Steps we should not take
(i) Deliberately slow down growth in economy to reduce imports.
(ii) Higher interest rates to attract more foreign investment. (This
would, among other things, also slow the economy.)
(iii) New protectionist measures.
4 In an article printed in the August 18 edition of The New York Times, Clyde Farns-
worth noted: “Ever since his election campaign President Carter has been calling the
DISC—essentially an incentive that defers taxes on profits from exports—one of the most
expendable of tax advantages for business.” (Clyde H. Farnsworth, “Washington &
Business: Carter vs. Industry on DISC Benefits,” The New York Times, August 18, 1977, p.
D1) In an August 26 memorandum to Eizenstat, Strauss discussed the utility of the DISC
posed a tax reform plan to Congress that included, among other measures, the phased
elimination of the DISC. For the text of Carter’s January 20, 1978, message transmitting
the tax reduction and reform package to Congress, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
54.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting with French Prime Minister Raymond Barre
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Vice President Walter F. Mondale
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Secretary of the Treasury Michael Blumenthal
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Arthur A. Hartman, U.S. Ambassador to France
George Vest, Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs
Henry Owen, NSC Staff Member
Robert Hormats, NSC Staff Member
Robert Hunter, NSC Staff Member (Notetaker)
Alec Toumayan, Department of State Interpreter
Raymond Barre, Prime Minister of the French Republic
Louis de Guiringaud, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Jacques Kosciusko-Morizet, Ambassador of France to the United States
Francois de Laboulaye, Under Secretary for Political Affairs
Henri Froment-Meurice, Under Secretary for Economic Affairs
Jean-Claude Paye, Advisor to the Prime Minister on International Affairs
Gabriel de Bellescize, Counselor, French Embassy
The President began by saying that he had phoned Chancellor
Schmidt.2
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to economic policy.]
The President said he understood that Barre and Secretary Vance
had discussed some items.3 If Barre liked, he would go into SALT,
MBFR, the UN disarmament conference, or to economics. He is at their
disposal.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Cabinet Room. Carter and Barre also met on September 15; a memorandum of conversa-
tion is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Of-
fice File, Country Chron File, Box 12, France: 1977.
summary of their telephone conversation is in the Carter Library, National Security Af-
3 Vance and Barre met on September 15; a memorandum of conversation is in the
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West,
French Defense Minister: 11/77.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
(Following some French discussions), the Prime Minister said he
would begin with economics. (The President said fine.) Yesterday, he
had defined with Secretary Vance (the President said “he told me”) the
importance of talking about world economics. (The President said: “It
would be very valuable to me, sir.”) There are two points: general eco-
nomic activity in the world and the main problems; and what Giscard
and he had said on commercial negotiations—“organized freedom of
trade.”
General economic activity will be dull in the next two or three
years. If three countries—the U.S., Germany, and Japan—are unable to
sustain economic activity, then others will suffer, who have no margin
of maneuver. The economies of Europe will go through a difficult pe-
riod, with much psychological uncertainty. This is an inhibition on
both economic partners and on governments. He has talked with
Schmidt and his Government on this point. They are cautiously trying
to avoid a relapse into inflation; but they understand the need to stimu-
late economic activity both to help Germany, and to benefit others. Ger-
many’s new program is good, but it is important that the measures be
implemented rapidly. Schmidt and Apel gave indications of their
policy. But they have to discuss them with the L&auml;nder and the
Bundestag to see if measures can be taken at once. If Germany takes
measures that will only be effective in 1978, then this will be bad for
Germany and for others. It would be better for Germany to take modest
steps now, than more ambitious efforts that are hedged and work too
late.
The Japanese program is a good one. But its economy more di-
rectly affects the U.S. than Europe, though it can indirectly help induce
economic activity in Europe. For France, the situation now provides a
greater possibility to intervene. For one year now, there has been an ef-
fort to stabilize the franc, improve the balance of trade, and improve the
current account balance of payments—with encouraging results. If in-
flation remains high, it is not because of a basic inflationary tendency,
but rather because of the need for adjustment in public utility rates, and
in prices charged by firms. Before, there were strong wage price rises,
and rises in the prices of imported raw materials. These repercussions
were included in the price rises of the first six months of this year.
To the end of 1977, there will be a continued deceleration in price
rises. They adopted measures at the end of August, to support eco-
nomic activity: in housing, in building, in public works. They hope to
avoid any recession this year. The rate of growth will be slightly more
than 3%. The main problem is unemployment, deriving mainly from
structural factors. This includes the growing number of women in the
labor force, looking for part-time jobs. It is difficult to adjust this de-
mand to jobs which are “firm.” There is also the problem of young

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
people, where the issue is inadequate skills. They have specific pro-
grams to help them get more skills and qualifications. But this will re-
main a problem for France and for all other industrial economies for
years to come.
A quick reduction of unemployment is very difficult to achieve,
and it will be necessary to have social measures to offset the social and
political consequences of unemployment for years to come. There are
some conditions to be fulfilled. First, there needs to be better coordina-
tion of economic policies, with freedom of maneuver, and there needs
to be an improvement of the basic economic situation. He hopes the
Summit follow-up, with the seven nations, will help. Second, there
needs to be stability at a realistic level of exchange rates, to avoid world
monetary uncertainties. The soundness of the dollar would make a de-
cisive contribution to an improved international monetary situation.
Third, there is the need for the orderly development of international
trade. We must fight protectionism. Our countries are so much in-
volved in trade that if they back down, it would be damaging to all.
Fourth, there is a need to adopt (mainly in the U.S.) vigorous energy
policies to stabilize the international oil market, and to avoid pressure
on oil prices. If the oil-importing countries face in the future regular
and large price increases, how can they cope? We have adjusted—but
this has not been fully implemented. We benefit from credits. We need
to realize (Note: complete) the process of adjustment. Therefore, the
stabilizing of international oil markets is fundamental. Thus, in France,
they are reducing in all ways their dependence on oil imports.
On trade, Giscard told the heads of state and government in
London that France favors the “organized freedom of trade.” Some say
that this means France is moving to protectionism. This is absolutely ri-
diculous. For more than a year, as Minister of Finance, he has fought
strongly against protectionism in France, against vigorous assaults in
Parliament from some of France’s most distinguished leaders. He has
succeeded in avoiding protectionism: why? It is not because of a theo-
retical position—like being for free trade. It is rather because of the
growth of French trade in the last 10 years, so that it is now the number-
four exporter in the world. It would be foolish for France to isolate it-
self, or reduce systematically its imports. This would lead only to retali-
ation, to rising unemployment, and falling exports. France depends on
freedom of trade. It only asks for an orderly growth of trade.
In textiles, for example, they have signed the multifiber agreement,
and will respect all their commitments. In the first half of 1977, for some
textile products, the rise in French imports had been from 60 to 100%.
This is destroying some medium-sized and little firms, in relatively
non-industrialized parts of France. This creates big unemployment—
maybe only a thousand people, but in regions that cannot sustain it.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
They had to invoke Article 19 of the GATT,4 since they could not tol-
erate this. But he has told visiting ministers from developing countries
that France is not against the orderly growth of textile imports. If they
could agree on an annual increase of textile imports of 10–12%—or
something—that would be all right. Imports, after all, are good for
fighting inflation, and for the international economy. But France cannot
accept an “invasion”, with its disruptive social consequences. In the in-
dustrial countries—and in relations between the industrial and devel-
oping countries—there is benefit from know-how, technology, capital,
low labor costs. But we need to find collective rules of the game,
leading to an orderly growth of trade. They will give up this precise for-
mula “Orderly freedom of trade” if this is seen as protectionist: that is
not the object. The object is to discuss problems coming after the oil
crisis, linked to nations’ eager competition to improve their balance of
payments. We must get conditions for regular and orderly growth of
trade. He hopes that collective rules of the game can be collectively ac-
cepted and implemented. This is absolutely necessary to maintain a sat-
isfactory rate of growth of international trade.
He is ready to answer questions.
The President said that in his call to Schmidt, they had discussed the
tax cuts, and $2.0 billion in public works—which depend on the re-
gional governments. Getting them to go along would be difficult. After
all, it is only possible to issue an order and have it done, in the United
States!! It is important for this to be implemented in Germany—but he
has doubts about it. The Opposition wants more stimulus—$6–7 bil-
lion. How it will come out, he doesn’t know.
On Japan, this proposal for stimulus was at the middle of those
suggested. He hopes they will do more to reduce their surplus. They
have a favorable balance of trade, and we are trying to work more with
them on a bilateral basis without protectionism. There has been a
growth of Japanese exports as in TVs; and we have sought voluntary
restraints. They were dumping in the U.S. market, which was against
On French growth, Barre’s figures are encouraging: 3% or so. We
had thought it would be only 2.5%. This is good news. We have similar
problems with high unemployment, although in the U.S. it will go
down about 1% this year. There are pockets of high unemployment—
among blacks and the young—where unemployment is extremely
high. Economic growth will be less in the second half of 1977 than in the
first half—but will be about 5% for the year; and not too much lower
4 Article 19 of the GATT deals with “Emergency Action on Imports of Particular
Products.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
next year. We have an economic package of $21 billion. His economic
advisers tell him that in the final quarter, we will see about $3 billion
being felt, since we need time to implement it. In the first quarter of
1978, about $8 billion will be felt, and it will take the next two quarters
to feel the rest. He thinks this is adequate, with tax reform and a low-
ering of tax rates, which will be effective over the years. There is also
the trade balance, unemployment, and inflation. He believes that un-
employment will continue to go down. But on the inflation question, he
is not sure. The year in agriculture has been one of our best ever. This
will mean lower prices for food, which will affect the overall rate of in-
flation. On labor contracts (with coal still to come), we have more or
less managed to get by; and will have one to two years without a re-
newal of major negotiations, since many labor contracts are for three
years.
Mike Blumenthal can talk on trade negotiations. Our assessment is
for the need for quick and substantial progress at the MTN. His impres-
sion is that the French don’t want to see major action, quickly, or as
much as do we. Is this erroneous? As a farmer, he can understand
France’s problems with agriculture. This is difficult to handle. We are
trying to work out a formula, with worldwide grain reserves and a
sugar agreement. These are difficult problems. We are eager for
progress at the MTN. Bob Strauss is a very vigorous negotiator; he will
be no impediment to progress! Maybe he will even want to move fur-
ther than France prefers.
Secretary Blumenthal said he has one comment, on the first part of
Barre’s comments. We see the overall situation of most developed
countries in the same way. He would add on freedom of maneuver: it is
narrow for any nation, now, including the U.S. There are several objec-
tives: getting inflation and unemployment down, handling energy, get-
ting order in our international accounts and having a strong dollar—
and these are not totally consistent with one another. For example, vig-
orous action to restrict imports of energy, if done too fast, would slow
down the U.S. economy, and lead to unemployment and other actions.
We do not have much elbow room. There is the problem of high im-
ports on our balance of trade; a high current account deficit; the energy
situation. These cannot be corrected quickly, but we are trying.
Progress at MTN is of considerable importance. There is pressure
on the President because of the imbalance. Domestic groups seek re-
straints (it is not just the French feeling these pressures). Therefore the
timetable—an ambitious one—is important. It will finally show some
progress, and itself is a major accomplishment. We will do all that we
can; and hope that France will help MTN keep on its calendar. There
are ways to agree to a formula while leaving some things open. One can

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
put in a “working hypothesis”, or some form of words. We could use
French help in keeping to the October and November dates.
On orderly arrangements, the word “orderly” has a history. “Or-
derly marketing” (used by the U.S.) sounds good, but it really means
quotas. The word, therefore, causes some concern; and it should not be
seen as leading to protectionism. Safeguards are needed—we need
them, too—as in textiles, steel, shoes (the Prime Minister said “ship-
building”)—where all countries have some concerns. Therefore, we
should go forward with the MTN timetable, so that there can be some
significant cuts, no doubt with some exceptions, while negotiating min-
imal safeguards to protect against undue social consequences of too
rapid growth. If the MTN calendar slips, it would be unfortunate. That
would encourage protectionism in the U.S.—people will say we want
our own measures to deal with the problem.
The President asked what political pressures are on Barre as the
election approaches—for greater stimulation and more jobs? Are they
significant?
The Prime Minister said that the election process had been going on
since last October. He used to say there were no such pressures. They
pursued cautious policies, while sustaining economic activity. They
tried and succeeded in preventing a recession. But it is not possible to
protect the franc, improve the balance of payments, and stimulate the
economy vigorously. At the end of August, they contributed to growth
(i.e. stimulus). If this can be consolidated, then next year’s growth
firms. Ambassador Strauss will be in Paris next week, and he will see
him. France is not against the good evolution of the MTN. They are not
sure that the ambitious calendar can be fully respected—this could be
the fault of other governments, too. They must consider proposals—
and are not clear on them. It is important to discuss these issues
efficiently.
For the other, he did not use the form “orderly market agree-
ments”, since here this means cartels. The form implies orderly growth,
and collective rules in international trade. It is not a definite idea. We
need to discuss problems and do it by sectors. Textiles would have one
arrangement; shipbuilding another. But they should be discussed to
avoid difficulties: this is the meaning of the concept. But if these
problems are not discussed, then the United States and other countries
will move to protectionism under the pressure of public opinion.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to economic policy.]

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
55.
Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of
State1
14287. Dept please pass all OECD capitals. Geneva also for MTN.
Bangkok for Heginbotham. Subject: U.S.–Japan Subcabinet Talks.
1. Summary: U.S.-Japan Subcabinet talks were friendly, construc-
tive and frank. Both sides agreed A) that OPEC surplus likely to persist
for some years and adjustment to it is major impediment to world re-
covery that requires industrial restructuring efforts, and B) that in face
of sluggish world demand, protectionism poses grave danger to liberal
trade system. We welcomed Japan’s efforts to stimulate domestic de-
mand2 and pressed Japanese to open market to imports in order to
bring current account into deficit at an early date,3 thereby shouldering
greater share of burden of deficit with OPEC. The Japanese identified
U.S. energy policy as also needing improvement and forecast that re-
cently announced stimulative measures would reverse current account
new measures but remained skeptical that they would do the job espe-
cially on current account. Japanese agreed to our proposals to set up an
informal, technical-level joint forecasting group and a joint steering
committee to identify obstacles to and means by which U.S. exports to
Japan would be expanded. Views on North-South issues and aid pro-
grams were essentially similar. End summary.
2. Although bilateral issues were not ignored, the emphasis at the
U.S.-Japan Subcabinet talks September 12–13 was on the macro-
economic responsibilities of the world’s two largest market-oriented
economies. The Japanese were in full accord with Under Secretary
Cooper’s description of the sorry current state of the world economy,
his identification of the OPEC surplus as the paramount immediate
problem, and the danger of protectionism tearing apart the interna-
tional trade framework that has served Japan above all so well. The Jap-
anese likewise recognized that the present imbalance in the pattern of
D770336–0716. Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Geneva and Bangkok.
2 On September 3, the Japanese Government announced a program designed to
spur domestic economic expansion and curb the country’s current account surplus.
(“Japan Announces Plans To Stimulate Economy And Cut Trade Surplus,” The New York
3 In the September 23 Evening Report to Carter, Christopher noted that Carter, re-
sponding to “reports of Japanese foot-dragging,” had directed U.S. officials “to push
Japan to reduce its current account and trade surpluses.” (Carter Library, National Secu-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
current account deficits—especially that of the U.S.—is unsustainable
in the face of protectionist pressures ultimately engendered by stub-
bornly weak global demand. But despite our persistent, if polite, ex-
pressions of doubt, and admitting that previous forecasts had been
very wide of the mark, the Japanese (Deputy Foreign Minister Yoshino
and EPA Director General for Coordination Miyazaki) stuck to his fore-
cast that the recently announced package of stimulative measures will
reverse the trend in Japan’s current account and hold the surplus to
1978).
3. The Japanese called on the weaker economies to place their own
houses in order and asserted that by stimulating Japanese domestic de-
mand without igniting the fires of inflation, Japan would make a major
contribution to world recovery. Miyazaki identified the lack of Japa-
nese investor and consumer confidence as the toughest impediments to
full recovery. Yet further government expenditures would, he asserted,
risk inflation.
4. Matsukawa (MOF) noted that the rise in the value of the yen had
begun to cut into Japan’s exports quantitively but that a “J curve” effect
could be observed. Matsukawa declined to offer an estimate as to when
the exchange rate effects would begin to show up in the trade account,
but asserted that, on a yen basis, the role of exports in recovery had al-
ready begun to diminish. Recognizing that there had been some re-
markably large errors in previous forecasting, Miyazaki and Matsu-
kawa agreed to the establishment of an informal joint working group
on the technical level to monitor forecasts.4
5. Assuming a characteristically aggressive stance, Masuda of
MITI5 asserted that the dramatic rise in the importation of oil accounts
in the main for the U.S. current account deficit and this deficit had in
turn led to a weakening of confidence in the dollar. Cooper replied that
increases in U.S. energy consumption were below historical trends, that
imports reflected the decline in domestic oil production as well as in-
creased consumption and that the President’s energy package will at-
4 Bergsten and Matsukawa discussed Japan’s policy on foreign exchange market in-
tervention on September 13. (Memorandum of conversation, September 13; National Ar-
chives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs
menthal and Solomon that he had “made clear our concerns re heavy intervention April
and July which braked steady appreciations. MOF pointed with pride to relative infre-
quency of recent intervention but retreated ultimately to view that appreciation was ‘too
fast.’ They indicated plan to check any significant yen depreciation might occur in near
future thereby reducing net dollar accumulation.” (Telegram 14116 from Tokyo, Sep-
5 Minoru Masuda was a MITI Vice Minister.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
even current levels. Furthermore, increases in the U.S. trade deficit in
recent months were due to the faster pace of U.S. economic recovery
and to changes in our trade patterns with LDCs. Bergsten also noted
that on a trade weighted basis the dollar had actually strengthened in
last two years.
6. In response to Bergsten’s question on official export financing,
the Japanese denied that official export credit was major factor in ex-
pansion of plant exports. Noting that Japanese plant exports remain far
behind those of the U.S. and West Germany, Matsukawa (MOF) as-
serted that while Japanese plant exports had risen 42 percent in last
three years, EXIM Bank financing of such exports had only climbed
10.4 percent. Matsukawa also restated that despite rumors to the con-
trary, Japan still adheres to the Washington agreement on official ex-
port financing.
7. Japan’s import structure was defended on the grounds that
(A) no nearby industrial centers exist in Asia; (B) the huge Japanese do-
mestic market permits economies of scale that account for Japanese
competitiveness both at home and abroad; (C) the Japanese distribu-
tion system is too complicated to rationalize overnight; and (D) foreign
firms have not expended the necessary effort, time and resources to
carry out successful marketing strategies. Japanese further asserted
volume of manufactured imports is rising, but nevertheless, agreed to
our proposal to establish a joint steering committee to study, inter alia,
where impediments exist to the importation of U.S. products and how
they may be eliminated, which U.S. products might have the highest
sales potential in Japan and how MITI might be of more assistance to
U.S. exporters.
8. Views on North-South problems tended to converge. The Japa-
nese reiterated their intention to “more than double” ODA in five
years, but admitted that they had yet to decide whether it would be on
an absolute or portion of GNP basis. The Japanese questioned us
closely on our intention to emphasize aid for basic human needs and
suggested that not too sharp distinction need be made between aid to
infrastructure, where the Japanese plan to lay stress, and aid for basic
human needs. The Japanese also revealed they are considering an
“equipment loan” category to fall between project and commodity
assistance.
9. The Japanese expressed a desire for a follow-on forum to CIEC
limited to energy if possible but possibly encompassing other topics as
well. Cooper stated the U.S. is relaxed on this issue but would be happy
to consider any suggestions.
10. On outstanding U.S.-Japan bilateral trade questions such as
sweet cherries, citrus, frozen juices, computers and peripherals, and
color film, Cooper noted on two occasions that we are not unconcerned

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
and would continue to work on those issues, even though they were
not our primary reason for coming to Japan.
months hence.
12. Press coverage (see septel)6 was extensive and fair, highlighting
our call to bring Japan’s current account into deficit at an early date. (In
joint press conference Yoshino stated that in accordance with Japan’s
responsibilities as strong economy, GOJ policy is to work to bring cur-
rent account into deficit but he doubted this goal could be achieved
soon).7
13. Not cleared by USDel.8
Mansfield
7 In a report to Blumenthal and Solomon on the Subcabinet talks, Bergsten sug-
gested that the Japanese “current account surplus may remain excessive.” Accordingly,
the U.S. delegation had focused “on winning GOJ agreement to publicly adopt policy ob-
jective of ‘moving Japan into current account deficit as soon as possible.’ In response,
Matsukawa indicated at plenary that GOJ prepared accept current deficit and Yoshino
told closing press conference that GOJ policy objective was current account deficit.”
Policy File, D770331–0584)
8 In his report to Blumenthal and Solomon, transmitted in telegram 14116 from
Tokyo (see footnote 7 above), Bergsten asserted that the “Japanese clearly got our mes-
sage. We repeatedly stressed broad array of dangers inherent in present situation in-
cluding but going well beyond protectionism. Whether sufficient actions will result is
much less clear.” Characterizing the tone of the talks as “excellent,” Bergsten com-
mented, “Perennial problem of getting adequate action remains, but Japanese seemed
genuinely willing and even eager discuss all relevant issues.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
56.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, September 22, 1977
SUBJECT
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) and “Conditionality”
We have been getting requests to use our influence to help particular
countries in their negotiations for financing from the IMF, and I wanted to
offer my suggestions for our approach.
You know from recent talks with Latin American heads of state
that some are complaining that the IMF is too harsh in its “conditionality”—
i.e., the economic stablization and payments adjustment measures it re-
quires of countries as a condition for its financing. Peru is the most re-
cent case.2 Usually they ask us to intercede with IMF management for
softer treatment in their particular case.
This is not a new issue, nor is it confined to developing countries. The
IMF has for years served as a kind of whipping boy. Countries facing severe
economic difficulties and the need for strong corrective measures often
need an external source to blame. The IMF is an ideal candidate and is
accustomed to being in that position. If we didn’t have the IMF, we
would have to invent another institution to perform this function.
In many countries there is a division between those who support
needed actions and those who want to ignore the economic facts of life
and try to pursue programs that are unsustainable. The IMF would not be
doing a borrowing country any favor by coming down on the wrong side.
Quite the contrary. Reasonable economic and financial stability pro-
vides the essential basis for the sustained real growth that developing
countries need. Unfortunately, there is no real substitute for policies to
restore economic stability—other than grants or long-term aid, which is
not the IMF’s function. The IMF can provide only balance of payments
financing, and in amounts that are usually quite limited relative to the
size of the problem. The real value of an IMF program is the policy changes
it brings, not the money.
The IMF is not, in my judgment, politically unrealistic in its policy pre-
scriptions. It does not ignore political consequences. The IMF looks care-
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
the top of the page: “cc Mike—I agree. J.”
2 In March 1977, Peru undertook negotiations with the International Monetary
Fund for a credit to help stave off a potential default on its massive foreign debt. The con-
ditions under which the IMF was prepared to offer assistance were very controversial in
Peru.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
fully at all aspects of a country’s situation in a realistic and balanced way,
and tailors the program to the country’s particular circumstances. The
IMF’s record is a good one. It has helped a large number of countries to
correct their economic problems, and it presses for measures that are
consistent with our objectives of an open and liberal trade and pay-
ments system. The IMF’s contribution to the world economy is widely recog-
nized—including in the Congress, which is much more supportive of the IMF
than of the other institutions.
While the U.S. has an important voice in IMF matters, we cannot
and should not try to control IMF operations. Any U.S. influence on partic-
ular country financing proposals must be used selectively and through
quiet, informal discussions. Any changes we could make in a particular
program would be marginal. We should not be disturbed by positions
taken by the IMF at the outset of a negotiation, since there is a process
of bargaining and compromise on both sides. If we overstep in trying to
exercise influence, we will weaken and undermine the fundamental principles
and useful work of this valuable institution.
W. Michael Blumenthal3
3 Blumenthal signed “Mike” above this typed signature.
57.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of the Treasury for
Monetary Affairs (Solomon) to Secretary of the Treasury
Blumenthal1
Washington, September 23, 1977
SUBJECT
German Desire to Conform Views on National Economic Programs
German Finance Minister Apel has sent a message to you, Healey,
Boulin, and Boh outlining the new German stimulus package,2 and ex-
Widman and Hessler.
2 On September 14, the West German Government approved a multi-billion dollar
economic stimulus package. (Paul Lewis, “West Germany Is Planning Modest Boost for

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
pressing a desire to meet during the IMF Annual Meeting for “an inten-
sive exchange of opinions and information” (message attached),3 in
order to achieve agreement on a statement of goals and a coordination
of national economic policies. Apel’s message is also addressed to Wit-
teveen, which suggests he will approach Witteveen directly over the
weekend to discuss this.
There is considerable potential for disagreement on this issue. The
German Government, which is a coalition that has a very narrow
margin in the lower house and is a minority in the upper house, will
take the position it has done all it can politically in the way of stimulus
at this time. The Japanese will point to their recent actions as fully
adequate.
The British, on the other hand, are poised for a major assault on the
failure of the major surplus countries to do more to reflate their econ-
omies, and reduce their surpluses, so as to provide for a greater expan-
sion of world trade. This may be a major topic at the Five meetings, and
also has important implications for Summit follow-up and the up-
coming OECD targeting exercise.
Apel’s message is clearly intended to encourage high-level agree-
ment to stop further public criticism of national economic policies as
being counterproductive to the point of being politically harmful from
a domestic point of view. There is merit in Apel’s view. We can’t con-
vince our people that cooperation is working if public slanging matches
a la Callaghan continue.4
Suggested U.S. Position
—Favor reaching understanding among ourselves (Five) on public
posture that policies in effect and recently taken are broadly appro-
priate—even though some of us may privately be urging that more be
done if possible.
—Ask how we can help each other get the public support needed
to implement stronger measures.
—Acknowledge that some of our anticipations at time of London
Summit have not been fulfilled.
—Recognize that economic policy initiatives are not uniformly ca-
pable of fulfillment at same pace in differing economies.
3 Attached but not printed is a September 15 letter from Apel to Boulin, Healey, Blu-
menthal, Bo, and Witteveen.
ceeded”; later that day, he said that some G–7 countries, “such as the Federal Republic of
Germany and the United States, have not been able to get the degree of expansion in their
economies that they put their hands to.” (R.W. Apple, Jr., “Summit in London is Termed

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—Explore new ideas as to initiatives that might be suitable to the
changed circumstances we face.
58.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council of
Economic Advisers (Schultze) to President Carter1
Washington, September 24, 1977
SUBJECT
The International Monetary Fund and Conditionality
I concur with Mike Blumenthal’s recommendation that we be very
selective in influencing negotiations between the IMF and individual
countries.2 The IMF has a very sensitive task in negotiating conditions
for extensions of Fund credit and we should be careful not to under-
mine it. Most of the countries involved must take action to insure their
continued access to private credit markets. The effective use of the lim-
ited resources of the Fund and the assurance of appropriate behavior
on the part of countries in deficit requires the Fund at times to press for
commitment to difficult economic policies.
I do have some problems with the nature of the conditionality
which the IMF tends to impose. CEA is developing a paper on this
which I intend to discuss with Mike. My concerns can be briefly
summarized.
We expect that the large surpluses of the oil producing countries
will continue for the foreseeable future. As a result, there will neces-
sarily be deficits in other countries. The Fund’s policies have not fully
adjusted to these conditions. Pressure exerted by the Fund on deficit
countries to eliminate their current account deficits has had two impor-
tant consequences:
1. The Fund has often stressed domestic policies to restrict demand
as a means of adjustment while there have not been symmetrical pres-
sures to expand on countries in surplus. As a result, there has been a
contractionary bias in the policies of all countries taken together. This
bias has hindered recovery from the 1974–75 recession. It is important
that countries in trouble adopt structural policies to correct deep-seated
ills. It is particularly important for many of them to increase domestic
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
2 See Document 56.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
investment. But restricting demand is not, in all cases, the appropriate
medicine.
2. Some countries are running unsustainable deficits, which must
be reduced. But a widespread elimination of current account deficits at
the urging of the Fund has forced larger deficits on other countries,
some of whom have then been forced to turn to the Fund for assistance.
Indeed, one cause of the growth of the U.S. deficit this year has been the
success that other countries have had in reducing their deficits.
59.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, September 24, 1977
SUBJECT
Letter to Prime Minister Fukuda
1. Prime Minister Fukuda sent you a copy of his statement an-
nouncing the Japanese expansion program.2 He probably expects a
reply.
2. We now have the Treasury analysis of the Japanese expansion
package: It’s great on growth (permitting Japan to hit its Summit target
of 6.7%), and weak in reducing the external surplus.
3. Hence the attached proposed letter, which gives the Japanese
well deserved praise on growth, and an equally well deserved prod on
the surplus. (The Japanese have just announced some limited initial
measures to cut that surplus.)3
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
for action.
2 Owen sent a copy of Fukuda’s September 3 statement to Carter under cover of a
September 8 memorandum. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Mate-
vide details on these measures. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
topher noted that implementation of the measures “will come only after difficult do-
mestic discussions, and the effect on the surplus is likely to be temporary. We will, there-
fore, continue to press Japan, both bilaterally and in the multilateral trade negotiations, to
reduce its surplus, and we will consider tougher approaches if necessary.” Carter under-
lined the phrase “continue to press Japan” in Christopher’s report and wrote “good” in
the adjacent margin. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Sub-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
4. I have cleared it with State (Dick Cooper, who is just back from
Japan and believes a letter should be sent), and Treasury (Tony
Solomon).
RECOMMENDATION
That you sign the letter to Prime Minister Fukuda at Tab A.4
Tab A
Letter From President Carter to Japanese Prime Minister
Fukuda5
Washington, September 26, 1977
Dear Mr. Prime Minister,
Thank you for sending me your statement concerning the new
Japanese economic expansion measures. On preliminary analysis,
these measures look very promising; I am glad that your government
has acted vigorously to fulfill its Summit commitments regarding
growth. We have our London Summit growth commitments very
much in mind; the United States should reach its growth target this
year.
We remain concerned, as you know, by the size of Japan’s external
surplus. I welcome the indications at the recent US-Japanese sub-
Cabinet meeting that your government shares these concerns and will
seek actively to reduce that surplus.6 I have just learned that some ini-
tial steps have been taken to this end. Further substantial progress
would make it easier to resist growing protectionist pressures in the
United States and other countries. It would enable Japan to play its ap-
propriate role in promoting world recovery and strengthening the in-
ternational financial and trading system.
I hope that our two governments can continue to stay in close
touch, in concerting their policies to achieve steady non-inflationary
growth and an open world trading system, and that you will write me
whenever you feel that an exchange of views between us would serve
these ends.
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
4 Brzezinski wrote “Concur, Z.B.” below the recommendation.
5 No classification marking.
6 See Document 55.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
60.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, September 26, 1977
SUBJECT
Letter from Chancellor Schmidt
Attached is a letter to you from Chancellor Schmidt and an attach-
ment, which describe the new German economic program and indicate
that it was taken to fulfill Summit commitments. (Tab B)2
I also attach a brief Treasury evaluation of the German program,
which suggests that it will result in growth of about 4% next year, as
somewhat better results. The German Summit growth target was
We should compliment Schmidt, without implying that we believe
he has fully met the need, since other measures may well be needed. I
attach a proposed letter in this sense. (Tab A) It has been cleared with
State (Dick Cooper) and Treasury (Tony Solomon).
Tab A
Letter From President Carter to West German Chancellor
Schmidt4
Washington, September 27, 1977
Dear Mr. Chancellor,
Thank you for your letter of September 14. I am glad that you have
taken decisions to expand German economic activity. The countries
that pledged at the Downing Street Summit to continue effective stabi-
lization programs are largely fulfilling their commitments. The coun-
tries with stronger economies have, as you note, a special responsibility
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Sent for action.
2 Tab B, attached but not printed, is a courtesy translation of an undated letter from
Schmidt to Carter, as well as a translation of a September 14 paper entitled “Decisions of
the Federal Government to promote economic growth and employment.”
3 Tab C, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “German Program
for Stimulating the Economy.”
4 No classification marking.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
for world economic recovery and development. The United States ex-
pects to meet its growth target in 1977; given the sharp movement in
the U.S. external account, partly as a result of our growth, we think it
particularly important that others in a strong position take firm steps to
meet their targets. I have just received from Prime Minister Fukuda a
statement outlining the measures that Japan will be taking.5
If our nations can concert effective growth policies, prospects for
non-inflationary world recovery will be enhanced. I hope that you and
I can continue to share our thoughts about actions to this end.
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
5 See Document 59.
61.
Telegram From the Mission to the European Communities to
the Department of State1
12692. USEEC. Geneva also for MTN. Subj: Visit of Ambassador
Strauss to EC Commission. Ref: Brussels 12518.2
1. Summary: Strauss visit was marked by highly positive tone, stiff
Commission resistance for a while to specificity and at the end mutual
recognition that difficult question of tariff formula needed to be re-
solved or failure to do so publicly acknowledged. After intense talks,
both sides agreed on a joint communique´ which revealed the establish-
ment of a “joint working hypothesis” on tariff reductions.3 To ensure
that there would be no ambiguity about what was agreed upon, the
two sides also agreed to produce an agreed minute for internal use
going into details of this hypothesis. As a result of Strauss visit, EC
Confidential; Priority; Exdis. Also sent Priority to Geneva, all EC capitals, Ottawa, and
Tokyo.
Strauss’ September 22 press conference. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770345–0846)
joint U.S.–EC communique´ issued at the end of Strauss’ visit. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D770345–0358)

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
Commission is now committed to seek greater tariff reductions than
previous EC proposals and US to greater degree of harmonization. End
summary.
2. Ambassadors Strauss, McDonald and Wolff, accompanied by
Ambassador Hinton and STR staffers Feketekuty and Wynne,4 met
with EC President Jenkins, Vice Presidents Haferkamp and Gundelach,
Commissioner Davignon, Director General for External Relations Sir
Roy Denman, and other high-level EC officials during series of
meetings September 21–22. Prior to leaving Brussels, Ambassador
Strauss gave press conference presenting joint communique´ and an-
swering questions (see reftel for transcript). Although all areas of MTN
negotiations received some attention during US–EC meetings, bulk of
discussions was devoted to effort to obtain a joint position on tariff re-
ductions which would allow agreement to be reached by all potential
formula participants in the MTN by early October. Meetings were
marked by US assertion and eventually EC recognition that failure to
reach agreement would threaten entire US–EC understanding to con-
clude present phase of negotiations by January 15, 1978. Ambassador
Strauss emphasized the necessity of agreeing upon specific common
language on an approach to tariff reductions and that, failing this, he
would feel it necessary, in order to preserve credibility, to state publicly
that we had reached an impasse on tariffs with the EC.
gotiating sessions September 22 US and EC worked together to pro-
duce an agreement, embodied in the joint communique´ contained in
reftel. US side also insisted that joint communique´ be buttressed by an
internal understanding which would not be revealed in its entirety
publicly but which would prevent any further misunderstanding about
what had been agreed with respect to tariff reductions. Denman
reading from rough notes set it forth at final session with President
Jenkins present when it was accepted by all participants subject to
being polished by Ambassador McDonald and Denman in Geneva. It is
to indicate that both sides agreed to work toward adoption of the Swiss
formula,6 with an average depth of cut of 44 percent, as the goal for
tariff reductions, plus or minus 5 percent. This left open the possibility
that some participants might adopt a deeper cutting formula or higher
formula cuts than the other participants to offset a greater number of
4 Gordon Wynne.
tember 21 meetings with EC officials. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D770346–1304)
various MTN issues, including its tariff reduction proposal. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D770259–1259)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
exceptions. Content of agreed understanding was described by partici-
pants on both sides at various times during the discussions in varying
details and nuances and therefore posts should await receipt of defini-
tive version.
4. Earlier versions of the communique´, though not the final one in-
cluded an EC sentence emphasizing that no exceptions should be made
to initial tariff offers. Discussion of exceptions revolved around con-
tinued EC Commission statements that they would seek to avoid any
exceptions and the US noting that some exceptions beyond those man-
dated by US law would no doubt be necessary.7
Hinton
7 In an October 6 memorandum to Blumenthal, Solomon and Bergsten wrote: “The
touted US–EEC Agreement on Tariffs covers up a major discrepancy. The Committee has
agreed only to cut by 26% over five years, whereas Strauss envisages a 44% cut over a
longer period. The EC has made no commitment to cut after the first five years. In addi-
tion, there has been no agreement on exceptions. Hence there is less progress than meets
the eye.” (Carter Library, Anthony Solomon Collection, 1977–1980, Chronological File,
62.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council of
Economic Advisers (Schultze) to President Carter1
Washington, September 27, 1977
SUBJECT
Upcoming Report on the Steel Industry from the Council on Wage and Price
Stability (CWPS)
This memo supplements our phone conversation on Tuesday
afternoon.2
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 81, [Steel] [7]. No classification marking. A stamped nota-
tion reads: “The President has seen,” and Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Charlie—If
report is accurate, let criticism come. J.C.”
2 Carter did not speak to Schultze by telephone on Tuesday, September 20, or
Tuesday, September 27. Carter and Schultze did speak by telephone on Monday, Sep-
Daily Diary) No memorandum of conversation was found.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
On August 5, after a large steel price increase, you directed CWPS
to prepare a report on the industry.3 You asked for that report by Sep-
tember 30.
Preparation of the report is in its final stages. I have not yet seen it,
but Barry Bosworth (CWPS Executive Director) has briefed me on its
emerging contents. The report is factual and analytical and makes no
recommendations. But it is a hard-hitting report, and no matter how dip-
lomatically written, the facts and analysis will step on a lot of toes—in-
dustry, labor, and government. (See below.)
The CWPS authorizing law expires September 30. A 2-year ex-
tender has passed the Senate, but has been hung up in the House be-
cause of Andy Biemiller’s4 opposition. We finally worked out arrange-
ments to speed it thru by Friday.5 But publication of a controversial
report might hang it up.
Bosworth will hold up delivery of the report until sometime next
week, after passage of the CWPS extending legislation.6
You may want a further delay until after your meeting with steel
management and labor which is now being arranged for the very near
future.7 Upon receipt, you can announce that you are referring the re-
port to the task force or other group that will be established to prepare
recommendations for you on government policy toward the industry.
Some Examples of Tentative Findings to Date
1. Operating costs in the U.S. steel industry have grown far more
than the average for other industries.
• Between 1967 and 1977 average wages in the U.S. economy rose
97 percent—steel worker wages rose 142 percent, and coal wages (coking
coal is an important cost) rose 124 percent.
• Most of the earlier U.S. competitive advantage in raw material
costs has been lost; sharp improvements in shipping costs have reduced
the disadvantage to the Japanese of buying U.S. coal.
2. Technologically, new U.S. steel facilities are not inferior to other
countries. But U.S. construction costs have risen very sharply, which in-
creases the costs and lowers the potential profits from steel moderniza-
tion investment. Japanese construction costs are much lower and the
time it takes to construct a new plant far less.
4 Andrew Biemiller was, as Director of the Department of Legislation, the principal
lobbyist for the AFL–CIO.
5 September 30.
6 Carter wrote “ok” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
7 Carter underlined the phrase “further delay” and wrote “no” in the margin adja-
cent to this sentence.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
3. Environmental, health and safety regulations have been a significant
factor in raising U.S. steel industry costs, but other countries are doing as
much or more. It is hard to blame a deterioration of the U.S. competitive
position vis-a-vis the Japanese on environmental, health and safety
regulations.
lier voluntary restraint period) or the last five-year average—would not
significantly improve domestic industry sales. The main way it could
“help” the industry is to permit a rise in prices relative to costs.
5. The cost advantages of Japanese producers (without subsidy)
are sufficient to allow them to underprice American steel producers
within significant parts of the U.S. market without selling below cost.
The opposite is true of European steel makers. (These conclusions have
important implications for the dumping cases against European and Japanese
steel firms now in the courts.)
I intend, of course, to review the CWPS draft closely. But no matter
how carefully worded, the publication of a dispassionate examination
of the facts will arouse a great deal of critical reaction.8
8 The CWPS report on the steel industry was released on October 7. (Edward
Cowan, “Steelmakers Cited As Inflation Source,” The New York Times, October 8, 1977,
p. 29)
63.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, September 29, 1977
SUBJECT
Organizing ourselves on the steel problem
I met this morning with nearly everyone in the government concerned
with the steel problem.2 We unanimously agreed on the following steps. We
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 81, [Steel] [7]. No classification marking. A stamped nota-
tion reads: “The President has seen,” and Carter wrote at the top of the page” “Mike. J.”
2 Mike Blumenthal (Treasury), Charlie Schultze (CEA), Jim McIntyre (OMB), Bob
Strauss (STR), Ray Marshall (Labor), Sidney Harmon (Commerce), Tony Solomon
(Treasury), Dick Cooper (State), Stu Eizenstat (DPS), Jack Watson (Cabinet Secretary),
and Henry Owen (NSC). [Footnote in the original.]

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
seek your approval of these plans and suggest that you mention them at your
press conference today:3
1. The Under Secretary of the Treasury, Anthony Solomon, will lead a
small and select task force drawn from several agencies, to develop compre-
hensive policy alternatives, for your consideration, regarding both the do-
mestic and international aspects of the problem. We cannot treat the problem
solely or primarily as a matter of import restrictions. We need an integrated
approach to the industry’s fundamental problems, involving the cooperation of
government, industry, and labor. The EPG Steering Committee and Am-
bassador Strauss will regularly monitor the progress of the Solomon
task force. The Solomon task force should have its proposals ready by
late November for full review by interested Cabinet Secretaries and
White House units. The Administration must have its policies in order
for the return of Congress in January. The task force will need to con-
duct intensive discussions with steel management and labor. Ambas-
sador Strauss will handle all necessary international contacts and
negotiations.
2. Secretary Marshall, Secretary Kreps, and Jack Watson will immedi-
ately make personal visits to steel communities hard hit by lay-offs.
3. Within a few days you will receive from Stu Eizenstat proposals to re-
vamp our system for Trade Adjustment Assistance. These proposals deal
with all industries hard hit by imports.
4. Ambassador Strauss will immediately organize a White House Confer-
ence on steel, at which industry, union, congressional, and Administra-
tion representatives will seek to educate each other (without commit-
ments by anyone) on the dimensions and complexities of the problem.4
5. All of us involved will meet with “steel caucus” members to assure
the Congress of our concern and of our commitment to take reasonable
action quickly. We must work hard to avoid protectionist legislation prior to
the congressional adjournment.
6. You should soon meet, separately, with steel industry and union
leaders, and with leaders of the congressional “steel caucus.”5
7. Each agency should designate a high level officer to hear complaints
and ideas from the steel industry, unions, and communities and to pass
along this information to the Solomon task force. However, no one but
Solomon should “sound out” domestic interests concerning the accept-
ability of possible proposals.
3 For the transcript of Carter’s September 29 press conference, during which he dis-
cussed the steel industry, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy
4 Carter wrote “minimize number” in the margin adjacent to this point.
5 Carter wrote “combine meetings” in the margin adjacent to this point.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
To assure that we all pull in the same direction, these various ef-
forts will be continuously coordinated by the EPG Steering Committee.
We seek your authorization to proceed with this action program:6
W. Michael Blumenthal7
6 Carter indicated his approved of this option and initialed “JC.”
7 Blumenthal signed “Mike” above this typed signature.
64.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, September 30, 1977
SUBJECT
Steel Dumping Cases
The Treasury will announce on Monday, October 3, a “tentative deter-
mination” under the Anti-Dumping Act that carbon steel plate from Japan is
being sold in this country at “less than fair value.” This determination is
based on findings that Japanese producers have been marketing steel plate
below the cost of production. Based on this determination, the Customs
Service will be directed immediately to withhold appraisement of the
affected merchandise. Importers will then be required to post bonds
sufficient to cover estimated dumping duties on all further imports
equal to the average margins of dumping found. These margins are
about 32% in this case.
A final determination must follow in ninety days; if affirmative,
the matter will go to the International Trade Commission for their de-
termination whether a domestic industry is being injured by sales at
“less than fair value.”
In 1976 imports of this product from Japan were about $174 mil-
lion, thus far the largest volume of trade potentially affected by the
1974 cost-of-production amendments to the anti-dumping law.
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 80, [Steel] [4]. No classification marking. Marked “F.Y.I.” A
stamped notation reads: “The President has seen,” and Carter initialed “C” at the top of
the page.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
We also understand that a petition alleging dumping of a number of
steel sheet products from European Community countries may be filed in
coming weeks.
W. Michael Blumenthal2
2 Blumenthal signed “Mike” above this typed signature.
65.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, October 5, 1977
SUBJECT
Summit Follow-Up
1. Attached is the report on Summit follow-up agreed by the Inter-
national Summit Preparatory Group that met September 29 and 30.
Each national delegation is now submitting this report to its country’s
Head of State or Government. The report will not be released to the
press.
2. The report suggests that most Summit decisions are being well
executed. Two failures were noted:
1977.
—Japan did not reduce its surplus.
The Group discussed at some length the reasons for these failures.
In the case of Germany, there were forecasting errors, which were not
recognized in time. In the case of Japan there are structural problems,
which will require considerable time to correct. Both the German and
Japanese representatives said that their countries’ Summit commit-
ments had played a role in the expansionist decisions that their gov-
ernments took in September.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
initialed at the top of the page. Attached is an October 6 note to Carter from Brzezinski
that reads: “Henry’s memo provides a good summary. No need to read Tab A.” (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
3. The report stresses the importance of Germany increasing its
growth rate and Japan reducing its surplus. The Japanese said that they
reduce their external surplus. The Germans said that their 1978 growth
The weaker European countries did not believe that they should
join in a general economic expansion in 1978. The Italians and French
made clear that they were not about to throw away the gains achieved
through their stabilization programs by premature and potentially in-
flationary expansion. The British position was similar but less clear. All
three countries were prepared for moderate expansion if the stronger
economies could achieve a good growth record.
4. This Group may meet in December to review the tentative 1978
growth projections that will have been discussed in the OECD in No-
vember. If the net effect of these targets seems unsatisfactory in terms
of Summit commitments, the Group might say so to Heads of Govern-
ment. If the targets look good, the Group might prepare a statement
that the Heads of Government could issue in their respective capitals in
January 1978, so as to put their full authority behind these targets. The
German and Japanese delegates felt that this would make it easier to
get agreement in their countries on action to meet these targets.
5. There was some discussion of future Summits. The British and
Germans seem to be thinking of a meeting in mid-1978. Callaghan and
Schmidt will talk further about this when they meet in Bonn in October.
Clappier, the French representative, was attracted by the notion of a
brief Paris Summit in late 1977 to discuss 1978 growth targets, at the
time of your visit to Paris;3 but his enthusiasm cooled when he saw that
the other countries were thinking of a later Summit.4
6. If you have any reactions to all this that you wish me to take into
account in further planning, please let me know. I will be talking to my
French and German opposite numbers further about these matters,
when I go to a Trilateral Commission meeting in Bonn in late October.5
2 At the end of this paragraph, Carter wrote: “Japan has got to reduce/eliminate
trade surplus. They have not tried.”
3 Carter was scheduled to travel to nine countries, including France, from No-
vember 22 until December 3; in early November the trip was postponed. (Charles Mohr,
“Carter Postpones Foreign Tour To Deal With Energy Legislation,” The New York Times,
4 Carter wrote “Prefer FRG idea—1978” at the end of this paragraph.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
Tab A
Report Prepared by the International Summit Preparatory
Group6
undated
Report on Summit Follow-Up by International Preparatory Group
This report deals with actions taken since the Downing Street
Summit under the five main headings of the Annex to the Summit Dec-
laration.7 Some of these issues have been effectively addressed; in other
cases there have been lags. The central follow-up issues requiring atten-
tion of Heads of State and Government appear to us to be (i) macro-
economic policy—particularly achievement of non-inflationary growth
targets by the stronger economies and a better distribution of payments
imbalances; and (ii) trade—particularly early and substantial progress
in the multilateral trade negotiations.
I. World Economic Prospects
The countries that pledged themselves at London to continue ef-
fective stabilization policies have done so. Taken together, they have
made progress in reducing inflation; balances of payments have im-
proved; reserves have increased; currencies have been strengthened.
Unemployment remains very high and continues to increase, particu-
larly among young people. Growth is low in the UK and Italy; in France
it may be 3% in 1977. Recent limited steps by these countries to increase
employment have been consistent with the agreed strategy, which
gives first priority to the control of inflation in order to set the stage for
later expansion.
Although these countries’ ability to fulfill that strategy depends
mainly on their internal policies, it also depends on the external eco-
nomic environment. That environment is shaped, in some degree, by
the actions of the economies with greater freedom of maneuver. Ger-
many, Japan, and the United States pledged at the Summit to achieve
promised to contribute to the adjustment of payments imbalances.
In September, the German and Japanese governments decided to
undertake substantial programs to help fulfill their growth targets.
6 Confidential.
7 For the text of the London G–7 Summit Declaration and the accompanying ap-
pendix, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1977, Book I,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—Following earlier German measures in June, the further German
steps will have only a limited effect on German growth in 1977, which
is likely to fall about 1% below Summit growth targets; these additional
German measures should, however, contribute to improved growth
performance in 1978. Germany runs a decreasing but still substantial
surplus on current account.
—The Japanese expansion program will probably raise growth in
Japanese external surplus;8 the Japanese Prime Minister has accepted
the necessity “to strive for an external equilibrium”, and some initial
measures to this end have been announced.
Despite a recent slow-down, the United States should achieve its
Summit growth target for 1977. The US current account deficit is very
large and does not seem to be diminishing; part of this deficit is due to
increasing oil imports, as the US economy grows. This deficit poses a
potential problem for US policy because of its size, while large sur-
pluses are being incurred simultaneously by other strong economies.
Unemployment has remained too high in all three of the strong
economies; it has been slightly drifting up in Japan and Germany, and
down in the United States. Inflation in Germany and Japan has de-
United States. All three countries are concerned to curb inflationary
pressures.
Canada’s real growth for 1977 will be less than the 4% projected at
the Summit; unemployment will also be higher than expected.
Canada’s inflation rate is running at about 7.5%, and it continues to run
a substantial deficit on current account.
What can be learned from this record?
Summit commitments appear to have had a useful effect on the
participants’ policies. Both the German and Japanese governments
have referred to these commitments in announcing expansionist
measures.
The obstacles to effective and timely concert of the industrial na-
tions’ domestic policies are substantial. Economic trends cannot readily
be predicted with accuracy; they depend on the decisions of millions of
consumers and investors. Nor can these trends be altered quickly by
public policies, which have to be agreed by diverse political and eco-
nomic groups before they can be put into effect; and their results may
be altered or offset by unanticipated movements in private consump-
8 Carter underlined the phrase “It portends little early reduction in Japanese ex-
ternal surplus” and wrote at the end of the paragraph: “We might be facing an un-
pleasant dialogue—Japan is blocking imports.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
tion and investment. The objectives of growth, price stability, and bal-
ance in external payments have proved difficult to reconcile, even in
the countries which were thought to have the greatest freedom of ma-
neuver; fear of heightening inflationary expectations compounds the
problem. For all these reasons, a significant lag between commitments
and execution in economic policy can often be expected.
The fact that concerting economic policy is difficult does not mean
that we should abandon the task—only that we need to work harder at
it and try to learn from experience as we go along. For example, in plan-
ning future Summits, it would be wise to recognize that some time
must elapse before policies needed to fulfill Summit targets can take ef-
fect. More frequent international monitoring of Summit results may
also help to identify shortfalls in time for useful corrective action.
Meanwhile, the job is to get on with fulfilling the commitments
made at London. Growth and stabilization are still the dominant needs
for the countries that pledged to achieve these goals. The two needs are
interdependent: The strong countries’ prospects for non-inflationary
growth would be damaged by a revival of inflationary pressures in
other countries. The stabilization programs that some countries have to
follow involve substantial social, political, and economic costs, and it
will be difficult for them to continue these programs unless the agreed
Summit strategy for non-inflationary recovery is being visibly fulfilled.
Whatever happens to 1977 growth targets, therefore, it will be cru-
cial that overall improvement be achieved in 1978. Thus the November
meeting of the Economic Policy Committee of the OECD will be of
great importance.9
Growth must also be reflected in a much better equilibrium of bal-
ance of payments. This will require a reduction or elimination of ex-
isting large external surpluses. Failing this, it will be difficult for other
countries to reduce their deficits, and existing protectionist pressures
will grow dangerously. So far, the international financial system has
been able to cope with the counterpart deficits to the OPEC surpluses.
But the problems of doing so without further contraction and unem-
ployment will be intensified, in the face of persistent OPEC surpluses, if
the only strong economy accepting a corresponding deficit is the
United States.
Even if the Summit targets are achieved, major economic problems
will remain. Inflation will be difficult to reduce to manageable propor-
tions, and the threat of its revival will be a continuing deterrent to pre-
cipitate expansion. Unemployment will be hard to eliminate without
structural measures to deal with the special problems of young people
9 The OECD Economic Policy Committee dispenses macroeconomic policy advice.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
and other groups. In several of our countries, measures have been
taken since the Summit to deal with the particularly serious problem of
youth unemployment. To help in further developing such measures,
the proposal for a conference on youth unemployment foreshadowed
at the Summit was agreed by the recent OECD Ministerial meeting,10
and plans are now being made to hold a Ministerial Conference in
December.
We conclude from the foregoing:
1. Viewing the Summit nations as a whole, progress in growth, re-
ducing unemployment, and balance of payments adjustment will not
be as significant in 1977 as was hoped at the May Summit. While infla-
tion, especially in the weaker countries, is still much too high, the pros-
pects for its reduction in most countries seem a little better than they
did at the time of the Summit.
2. The principal routes to adjustment of present distribution of sur-
pluses and deficits remain: (i) policies in the stronger surplus countries
which increase domestic demand consistently with the control of infla-
tion, and orient their economies toward expanded imports; and (ii) sta-
bilization policies in the weaker deficit countries. Among the strong
countries, only the United States has moved into deficit. Measures to
increase home demand have recently been proposed in Japan and Ger-
many; the Japanese and German current surpluses are still too high.
3. Unemployment is rising in all the countries represented except
the United States. Increases in present rates of growth, along with con-
tinued restraint of inflation in prices and costs, are the best hope of re-
ducing it.
4. Protectionist policies would increase unemployment and infla-
tion. Unless a sustained recovery takes place, however, pressures for
protection can be expected to grow.
II. Balance of Payments Financing
IMF Facility. Even assuming satisfactory growth and stabilization
policies, there will remain a need for the provision of adequate interna-
tional financing to complement commercial credits in meeting balance
of payments deficits. Final agreement has been reached on establish-
ment of the Witteveen facility, to which the Summit nations pledged
their support at London, with firm commitments on financing
trial and oil-exporting countries. This should make substantial help
available to countries whose deficits are large relative to their quotas
and which are following stabilization policies.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
Quotas. Discussions are underway in the IMF on an increase in
Fund quotas, as foreshadowed at the Summit; the present target is to
reach agreement by the spring of 1978. Like the new IMF facility, the in-
creased IMF quotas should both give countries in deficit access to
money which will afford them time to adjust their policies at an appro-
priate pace and prevent further moves toward protectionism.
III. Trade
Protectionism. High unemployment in the industrialized countries
has continued to generate protectionist pressures since the Summit.
Nonetheless, there has not been widespread use of import restrictions.
The commitments made at Downing Street and reaffirmed in renewing
the OECD pledge have proved effective. Pressures for restrictive im-
port measures are likely to continue, however; governments will need
to exercise discipline to avoid measures that would transfer the burden
of unemployment to their trading partners; they should continue to
seek multilateral solutions, in appropriate forums, to pressing trade
problems. The best way to reduce pressures for import restrictions is to
accelerate overall growth and employment, to reduce substantial im-
balances of international payments positions, and to achieve rapid and
substantial progress in the Multilateral Trade Negotiations.
MTN. In the Tokyo Round of multilateral trade negotiations,
agreement has been reached on a timetable for achieving substantive
progress by the end of the year, as pledged at the Summit. As a first
step toward meeting the timetable, a working hypothesis for tariff re-
ductions, which will guide tariff negotiations, is being developed. The
agreed approach should ensure that the Summit goals of substantial re-
duction, harmonization, and elimination of tariffs in certain cases will
be achieved.
Progress has already been made in preparations for tabling re-
quests in the sectors of agriculture and non-tariff barriers, and work
has been set in hand on customs valuation, subsidies and counter-
vailing duties, standards, government procurement, and safeguard
mechanisms. Only if this momentum is maintained can the aims of
Downing Street Summit be met within the time scale we envisage. The
objective established for the MTN—a comprehensive set of agreements
to the maximum benefit of all—will require a major effort on the part of
all participants. The timetable for progress which has been agreed
is ambitious; the temptation to delay and settle for limited results
should be resisted; wider trade will help to stimulate growth and limit
inflation.11
11 Carter wrote “We’ll give our effort” at the end of this paragraph.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Export Credits. Progress has been achieved in fulfilling the Summit
agreement to reduce counter-productive competition in officially sup-
ported export credits, within the existing Consensus. The Consensus
expiration date has been extended to December 31, 1977. The object is
to improve the present international arrangements before the end of
1977.
Illicit Payments. The UN Economic and Social Council has directed
the ECOSOC ad hoc inter-governmental working group on the problem
of corrupt practices to complete an international agreement on illicit
payments in 1978, and has recommended that the UN General As-
sembly convene a conference to conclude such an agreement. The
working group’s ability to complete its assignment will require, among
other things, that the Summit countries give their full support, as
pledged at London.12
[Omitted here is discussion of energy.]
V. North-South Relations
The objectives which the Heads of State and Government set them-
selves for the Conference on International Economic Cooperation were
broadly met.13 The Conference’s results did not meet all the wishes of
the developing countries; nor did they entirely correspond to the in-
terests of the industrial countries; but in general terms they should help
to further the economic growth of developing countries within the
framework of the world economy. The Conference established the basis
for continuing the dialogue within international bodies.
Aid. Summit and other donor nations pledged at CIEC to increase
effectively and substantially their official development assistance
flows, and to contribute to a Special Action Program $1 billion in in-
creased development assistance for low-income countries. It will be im-
portant for the Summit countries to follow up these commitments
promptly; more effective development will not only enhance the devel-
oping countries’ welfare but also contribute to wider trade and eco-
nomic opportunities for all nations.
Access to International Finance. The Witteveen supplementary fa-
cility contains provision for longer periods of adjustment as part of
agreed conditions for IMF assistance to countries with balance of pay-
ments difficulties.
World Bank. The issue of the World Bank’s capital increase is now
under active review in the Bank’s board. While there is general agree-
ment that World Bank lending should continue to grow in real terms,
12 Carter wrote “Let’s push this—” at the end of this paragraph.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
as pledged at the Summit, the rate of growth remains to be decided. It
should be possible to reach agreement on the general capital increase
by June 1978.
Private Investment. The Development Committee of the IMF and
IBRD has made recommendations on a variety of mechanisms to im-
prove access by the developing countries to capital markets, as pledged
at the Summit. These include the use of guarantee authority and tech-
nical assistance by the international development banks. The Com-
mittee has also decided to study the nature and role of private invest-
ment in developing countries, including how host government policies
affect the investment climate.
Commodity Policy
a. Common Fund. At CIEC, the Group of Eight countries agreed that
a common fund should be established, to be negotiated in UNCTAD.
The participating governments have been meeting with other indus-
trial countries to prepare a proposal to present at what will be a very
difficult November session of the UNCTAD Negotiating Conference
on a common fund.
Useful progress has thus been made in certain areas of North-
South relations. But many key decisions, particularly on aid, remain to
be taken. The natural interdependence between the developed and de-
veloping countries is clear to all. But, as the CIEC showed, their rela-
tionship remains uneasy and potentially divisive. The Summit gov-
ernments will need to continue to give high priority to their policies
and to concerting their actions in this field.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
66.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, October 18, 1977
SUBJECT
The U.S. Balance of Payments
On September 10, I reported to you that the sharp decline in the
U.S. balance of trade and payments requires our immediate attention.2
You agreed that Tony Solomon and I should work with Jim Schle-
singer, Charlie Schultze, Dick Cooper, and Bill Nordhaus to review this
matter. My summary of the outcome follows:
A. The Forecasts
The numbers have not materially changed from the picture I de-
scribed earlier.3
($ billions)
Trade deficit
Current Account deficit
These forecasts are:
(1) based on optimistic assumptions (e.g., no OPEC oil price in-
creases in 1978).
(2) subject to the usual uncertainties, things could turn out better in
1978—or they could turn out much worse. (A trade deficit approaching
$40 billion is conceivable.)
B. The Problem
The real danger remains the potential for serious problems in in-
ternational financial markets engendered by these large deficits.
1. Markets have been nervous and the dollar has been under moderate
pressure. Foreign central banks have intervened in considerable
amounts, which, with continuing large private capital inflows, has
maintained reasonable stability in the dollar exchange rate. A central
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
+22%.”
2 Blumenthal’s report was not found.
3 Carter wrote “dep $ affects oil prices in future; good crops—world; recovery here;
oil imports” in the margin adjacent to the table.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
factor has been the growing level of oil imports and, perhaps more im-
portantly, fear that Congress will not pass a meaningful energy pro-
gram to deal with the problem over the longer run.
2. Any single disturbance, or spreading international opinion that
we cannot or will not act to deal with the trade and energy situation,
could set off chain reactions difficult to contain. Real upheaval is a possi-
bility and could cost much politically as well as economically around
the world.
Conclusion:
1. We cannot sit back and hope for the best.
2. We must be seen to be “doing something” about this problem.
3. Therefore, we must develop a program to:
a. Reduce energy import costs for 1978 through 1981 (until your
longer term energy program begins to have an effect).
b. Strengthen our export position (without resorting to protec-
tionist or other internationally irresponsible measures).
C. Possible Action
The following are possible components of a U.S. response:
1. Energy Related Measures
a. Slow down purchases for the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. Purchases
in 1978 could be reversed or slowed by Congressional action, saving up
b. Reverse the decision to slow production at Elk Hills.4 This would
ning in mid-1980 if the Sohio pipeline is completed.
c. Encourage the owners of the Trans-Alaskan Pipeline5 to decide now
to increase throughput capacity to the 1.6 million barrels per day capacity
of the Prudhoe Bay main field beginning mid-1980—saving $2 billion
per year. In light of a “glut” of oil on the West Coast, it might be advis-
able to give permission to have, for a temporary period, a trilateral “oil
swap” (with Japan) for any Alaskan oil produced in excess of 1.2 mil-
lion barrels a day.
d. Encourage Sohio and the State of California to resolve impedi-
ments which block the Sohio Pipeline project to Midland, Texas—allowing
utilization of increased Elk Hills production, beginning mid-1980, and
avoiding the need for a trilateral swap.
5 The Trans-Alaska Pipeline, which carries oil from the Prudhoe Bay in northern
Alaska to the port of Valdez in the southern part of the state, became operative in June
1977.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
There is also the radical action to restrict consumption of oil by
limiting imports and rationing gasoline. You have authority to introduce
gasoline rationing by Executive action, by declaration of national emer-
gency. Certainly, this would restore U.S. credibility about dealing with
our energy problem. Once in place, depending on the stringency of the
program, rationing could save $5 to $10 billion a year.
There was general agreement among us that it is not desirable to take this
step now. It could have an important negative economic impact on
growth; it is doubtful that the American people are ready for it, and the
political consequences could be extreme.
I nevertheless feel it desirable for you to order technical prepara-
tions to be worked out, and to continue to develop the political climate,
so that this step could be taken with minimum delay. Moreover, I
would recommend that we examine other longer-term measures, addi-
tional to those in your present energy package, for reducing our oil im-
pact bill.
2. Non-energy Related Measures
In addition to continuing to press Germany and Japan to stimulate
their economies, we could take the following actions to cut the trade
deficit in 1978 and beyond:
a. Expand Ex-Im Bank operations by about $4 billion (which would
provide additional exports at an increasing rate ranging from about
b. Expand CCC Budget by $1.5 billion per year (which would pro-
c. Moderate expansion of military sales for off-the-shelf items (about
$0.5 billion per year).
d. Sell some of our gold holdings on the private market (up to $0.5 bil-
lion per year).
If we took actions on all of these non-energy related areas, the maximum
potential savings would amount to about $2 to $3 billion each year.
Each of the above actions raises other policy issues. For example,
Ex-Im Bank options lie in areas that would involve easing some restric-
tions on nuclear sales. Similarly, expansion of military sales could
partly conflict with your arms sales policy.6
D. Recommendations:
There is no agreement among your advisers on which steps should be
taken to remedy the situation. For understandable reasons, Jim Schle-
6 The text of Carter’s May 19 announcement of his conventional arms transfer
policy is in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1977, Book I,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
singer does not favor delaying or stretching out the strategic petroleum
build-up. Charlie Schultze is reluctant to look to anything that inhibits
growth, and so forth. All of us agree, however, that the situation is serious
and that actions on your part are required.
In view of the above, I recommend as follows:
1. That you meet as soon as possible with Jim Schlesinger, Charlie
Schultze, Jim McIntyre, Tony Solomon and myself to agree on a course of
action.
2. That you should announce within the next few weeks (after
Congress enacts an energy legislation)7 a program of these shorter-term
energy measures—and, in a lower key, export expansion measures—de-
signed to reduce the deficits during the period up to the early 80’s,
when your longer term energy program would take effect. (Any actions
taken to increase military sales and to sell gold would not be announced
as part of a balance of payments program.)
3. My recommendation would involve decisions now to slow petro-
leum stock purchases for 1978 through 1980; to adopt the other energy meas-
ures described above, except for import quotas and rationing; and to intro-
duce a number of non-energy measures to improve the U.S. export position.
(Table attached).8
4. That we engage in a diplomatic offensive to persuade OPEC not to in-
crease the price of oil, at least through 1978.9
Although I have kept Arthur Burns informed generally, you and I
should review our proposed program with him.
W. Michael Blumenthal10
7 The National Energy Act, which Carter sent to Congress in April (see footnote 7,
on November 8 on the energy crisis, the need for conservation, and the rising price of oil.
For the text of his address, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy
8 Attached but not printed is a table entitled “Maximum Possible Impact on U.S.
Trade Deficit.”
Egypt, Kuwait, Iran, and Saudi Arabia to discuss oil pricing policy. See Foreign Relations,
10 Blumenthal signed “Mike” above this typed signature

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
67.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, October 20, 1977
SUBJECT
Japan’s External Surplus
We may be on the verge of substantial progress in regard to the
Japanese surplus.
I spent the greater part of the day with Japanese Deputy Vice Min-
ister for Foreign Affairs Yoshino, a highly responsible Japanese official
who is my opposite member for Summit planning, discussing a
package of Japanese measures to reduce Japan’s external surplus: re-
duction of barriers to imports; large purchases of US enriched uranium
and of US grains for stockpiling in the US; greater Japanese aid and in-
vestment abroad; and an increase in the projected FY 1978 Japanese
growth target from 6% to around 8%.
The latter is by far the most important of these measures; the FY
1978 growth target will need to be fixed in late 1977.
We agreed that if a package acceptable to both sides could be
worked out, it would be useful to dramatize this success by having the
matter agreed at a high political level. We talked of various ways in
which this could be done; the best would be a Carter–Fukuda meeting.
Yoshino said that if you could accept the Prime Minister’s standing in-
vitation to visit Japan, this would create enormous pressure on the Jap-
anese government to take the right decisions. Alternatively, he said,
Fukuda might come to Washington—although this would be less desir-
able, since it was Japan that would be making the concessions.
I said that there could be no thought of a Presidential trip unless it
was clear that a satisfactory package—including a substantial increase
in the Japanese growth target—could be worked out in advance. He
said that if he could tell the Prime Minister confidentially that a Presi-
dential trip was possible on this condition, the Prime Minister could
then make a political judgment as to whether he could overcome the
considerable obstacles to developing a package such as outlined above.
If so, he would let us know, and the modalities of extending and ac-
cepting an invitation could be worked out. Yoshino hoped that a Presi-
dential visit could take place during your forthcoming trip, after Delhi
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
of the page.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
or Brussels.2 If you could only come in 1978, the visit would still be a
useful part of the scheme, but some of the package (notably the new
growth target) would have been announced beforehand.
Comment: A Presidential trip to Japan that ratified a major package
of measures to reduce the Japanese surplus would be a large foreign
policy success. If your forthcoming trip could include such a visit, this
would add notably to the trip’s importance. Even a 1978 trip would in-
crease the chances of needed Japanese action, and could be related to
that action. We need not fear that Fukuda would fail to deliver the
package that he had promised as a condition of your visit; the domestic
political costs of a Presidential visit that backfired would be prohibi-
tive. If he issues the invitation, it will be because he has concluded that
a package is politically feasible that would have the desired economic
effect.
RECOMMENDATION
That I be authorized to tell Yoshino, before he leaves Friday3 night,
that there is a good chance of a Presidential trip to Japan—either during
your 1977 trip or later—if a major and mutually satisfactory package to
reduce Japan’s surplus can be worked out in advance.4
3 October 21.
4 Carter did not indicate his decision with respect to this recommendation. At the
end of the memorandum he wrote: “Zbig—Talk it over w/Fritz & Cy. It is likely that in
1979 I’ll want to make a trip to Asia. Japan has a long way to go to convince me on their
economic attitude. J.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
68.
Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Lake) and the Assistant Secretary of State for
Congressional Relations (Bennet) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, October 21, 1977
Congressional Staffers View Trade Liberalization
In the fourth of a series of S/P hosted meetings with Congressional
staffers, we met informally on October 12 with key Senate and House
staffers concerned with international trade issues.2 The discussion fo-
cused on the strength of protectionist sentiment in the Congress, for-
eign policy related issues, the impact of current trade issues such as
steel on Congressional views and on prospects for a successful conclu-
sion of the Multilateral Trade Negotiations (MTNs), and US adjustment
to changing trade patterns.
The staffers almost without exception, painted a dark picture for
congressional acceptance of trade liberalizing measures so long as pres-
sures from constituents for special protective action remain very
strong. They agreed that the problems of domestic industries and un-
employment are not likely to improve significantly in the foreseeable
future; therefore, stopgap action such as anti-dumping actions and or-
derly marketing agreements will have to be pursued to avoid even
worse restrictive trade legislation. They particularly emphasized the
congressional perception that the Administration was not doing all it
could to expeditiously use existing authority in the Trade Act to offset
unfair trade practices, such as dumping. The group agreed that unless
we could produce a trade package providing clear benefits to US
industry, Congress would reject the agreements our negotiators
concluded.
They expressed Congressional resistance to granting extensive
concessions to the upper tier developing countries in the light of their
emerging ability to compete with selected US industries. They urged
that there be greater coordination among various US policies to ensure
consistency; e.g., that we consider the need for LDCs to expand their
exports in order to earn foreign exchange to manage their debts to our
banks at the same time that we make decisions concerning possible re-
strictions on LDC products entering our markets.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Executive Secretariat, Official
2 No memorandum of conversation of this meeting was found.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
As for longer range prospects, the group shared mild enthusiasm
for the development of a national industrial policy which could ad-
dress the need for structural change in specific sectors, anticipate new
trade patterns, strengthen US competitiveness in selected industries,
and assist workers displaced because of a rapid increase in imports.
Nevertheless, there was considerable skepticism that this could in fact
be accomplished.
In sum, the mood of these key staff people towards our ability to
hold the line against protectionism was very pessimistic.
69.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, October 27, 1977
SUBJECT
Policy Implications of Summit Follow-Up
I sent you recently a memo describing the International Summit
Group’s follow-up meeting and report.2 I have since been discussing
with some of my foreign colleagues what the implications of this report
are for their countries’ policies. It suddenly occurred to me that I
should also be worrying about what the implications are for US policy.
They are twofold:
1. We should take early steps to assure strong US growth in 1978. The
Summit Group’s discussion brought out that if US growth falters, the
weak countries (UK, France, and Italy) will be tempted to give up
painful stabilization programs, and the strong countries (Japan and
Germany) will do less to achieve growth and to reduce their surpluses
than they might have done otherwise. Timing is important: The sooner
it becomes clear that US policies will be such as to produce a strong US
1978 growth, the more likely other countries are to be influenced by
that prospect in shaping their own 1978 policies.
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
mation. A stamped notation reads: “The President has seen.” Carter wrote at the top of
the page: “cc Schultze. J.” A copy of the memorandum was sent to Schultze under cover
of an October 31 note from Hutcheson. (Ibid.)
2 See Document 65.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
2. We should make greater efforts to improve the trade-off between infla-
tion and unemployment. The Summit Group’s discussion kept coming
back to the fact that most of the industrial countries have unacceptable
levels of inflation, and that fears of inflation hinder the efforts of all
these countries to reduce unemployment. If the US could show the way
in reducing inflation while pursuing steady growth, it would have
made an enormous contribution to the economic prospects and confi-
dence of the industrial world. I have a simple-minded suggestion: Why
not tell your chief economic advisors that you find 6% inflation unac-
ceptable, and want a report from them as to the actions that would be
needed to bring it substantially lower by 1980. The measures they pro-
pose may turn out to be politically infeasible, but that’s a decision only
you can make. Whether we can get inflation below 6% will do as much
as anything else to shape domestic and international economic pros-
pects, and it is not clear that this is going to happen by itself.
70.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, October 28, 1977
SUBJECT
Letter to Prime Minister Fukuda
Attached is a draft reply to Prime Minister Fukuda’s letter.2 I have
cleared its substance with State, Treasury, Commerce, and Bob Strauss.
Inter-agency work is going forward in preparing a package of
measures on which the US and Japan could agree to reduce Japan’s ex-
ternal surplus. Our thought is that Bob Strauss would discuss these
measures with Fukuda and other Japanese officials, when he goes to
Japan in early December—with the object of reaching an agreement
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Presi-
dent’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 11, Japan: Prime Minister Takeo
memorandum.
2 The attached draft is not printed. In his October 19 letter to Carter, Fukuda dis-
cussed his government’s economic stimulus program and urged industrialized country
cooperation. (Ibid.) In an October 27 memorandum to Brzezinski, Tarnoff characterized
Fukuda’s letter as an appeal “for patience and U.S. understanding of the efforts his gov-
ernment has taken to deal with the current account surplus.” (Ibid.) Carter’s reply to Fu-
kuda is printed as Document 71.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
then or as soon thereafter as possible, to be announced simultaneously
in Washington and Tokyo.
Yoshino (the diplomat who brought Fukuda’s letter) and I agreed
that there should be no evident connection between agreement on such
a package and a Presidential trip to Japan. I made clear that there could
be no trip without prior agreement on a package. He made clear that if
this agreement were reached, the Japanese government would hope
We don’t know whether the Japanese are prepared to do what is
necessary to reduce the surplus substantially. Yoshino, who is honest
and close to Fukuda, was encouraging; other reports are not. We will
only find out by trying.
noted that, in addition to Owen, Yoshino had met with Cooper, Solomon, Strauss, and
Wallich “to get a sense of what GOJ actions the USG thought would be necessary and suf-
ficient in the current situation.”
71.
Letter From President Carter to Japanese Prime Minister
Fukuda1
Washington, October 31, 1977
Dear Mr. Prime Minister,
Thank you for your letter of October 19.2 I am glad that you wrote
me so frankly about the need for close consultation, cooperation, and
the avoidance of misunderstandings. I agree fully with you. No ele-
ment of US foreign policy is more important than the connection be-
tween Japan and the United States. I intend to do everything I can to
keep that connection in good working order. To this end, I hope that
you will keep me informed of the domestic economic and political situ-
ation in Japan, and I will keep you advised of economic and political
trends in the United States that bear on our relationship.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 11, Japan: Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
As you know, the size of the Japanese external surplus fuels pro-
tectionist pressures in this country. I realize that it will take time to
solve this problem. That is why I am so anxious to make a good start.
US officials found the recent Tokyo sub-Cabinet level discussions
of bilateral trade questions fruitful.3 I look forward to early activation
of the joint economic projections study group and the joint trade facil-
ities sub-committee that were agreed on then. I welcome the additional
measures you have adopted to stimulate the Japanese domestic
economy, and the initial steps that you announced on September 20 to
expand Japan’s imports.4 I am pleased that additional important ac-
tions are also being considered.
I noted and was gratified by your public statement about the need
to “strive for an external equilibrium.” We need now to work out a pro-
cedure for seeking agreement on further steps to hasten movement in
this direction. US officials had rewarding discussions with Mr. Yoshino
about this during his recent visit to Washington.5 Our countries’
common purpose should be to develop a package of measures that
would assure early, substantial, and visible progress to reduce the size
of Japan’s current account surplus. My economic advisors will be dis-
cussing these matters among themselves; and discussions will be pur-
sued with officials of your government in the period immediately
ahead. I would hope that Bob Strauss could, in conjunction with Am-
bassador Mansfield, carry the discussion forward if he visits Japan in
early December, so that some understanding about a package of meas-
ures—bearing on not only trade, but aid, foreign exchange, and growth
policies—could be reached during his visit.
I understand the large obstacles to progress. Working together, I
believe that Japan and the United States can overcome these obstacles,
and make good progress in helping to build a viable world economy. In
isolation, we are all too likely to repeat the failures of the early 1930s,
which you described so eloquently at the Downing Street Summit. This
is why I have set forth so fully my thoughts about next steps in the
US-Japanese dialogue. I hope that you will be equally candid in giving
me your reaction. A continuing direct exchange of views between us is
the key to progress.
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
3 See Document 55.
4 See Document 59.
5 See Document 67.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
72.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs (Bergsten) to Secretary of the
Treasury Blumenthal1
Washington, November 8, 1977
SUBJECT
The Issues
Attached at Tab A is your agenda memo for the meeting; the more
detailed interagency paper is at Tab B.2 After laying out the underlying
facts, U.S. objectives and Japanese constraints, the papers outline four
policy approaches (detailed in Appendix 1 of Tab B):
—Our option of “assured import shares”.
—Commerce’s proposal that Japan double its imports of manufac-
tures over the next two or three years.
—State’s proposal that Japan achieve a current account deficit in
1979, and adopt precise measures now to achieve that objective.
—A combination of the current account target and increased
market shares for imports.
There is widespread agreement on the two key issues. First, all
agree that the Japanese must move to (a) reduce/or eliminate their
global (not bilateral) surpluses in the short run and (b) make structural
changes to raise the market share of imported manufactured and agri-
cultural goods over the longer run. Hence the eventual package will
have to include both an immediate current account target and a direct
assault on the structural problems, a la one of the first two options.
Second, there is agreement that we here in Washington cannot
judge which means to achieve these goals will be least objectionable to
1 Source: National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
1977. No classification marking. Sent through Solomon. Neither Bergsten nor Solomon
initialed the memorandum.
2 Tabs A–C are not attached. No minutes of the November 9 EPG meeting were
found. In the November 9 Evening Report to Carter, Vance summarized the meeting,
which Blumenthal chaired: “We all agreed that our efforts with the Japanese must be
carefully calibrated so that we have maximum chance to achieve our objectives while
keeping faith with your commitments to Fukuda not to ‘shock’ them publicly. Our tenta-
tive thinking is that Mike Mansfield, using the personal relationship that he has built up
with Fukuda, should begin the process with a private and frank talk with Fukuda. We
will send a combined STR–Treasury–State working level group to Tokyo Monday to pre-
pare Mike for his meeting. After that, we should proceed with technical discussions,
which would be followed by a possible visit by Bob Strauss.” (Carter Library, National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
the Japanese. Hence we should essentially present Fukuda with all of
our options and ask him to choose which combination is most achiev-
able—assuring, however,
that
it will
achieve
our
fundamental
objectives.
This approach should adequately promote U.S. economic objec-
tives while minimizing the costs to overall U.S.-Japanese relations.
However, it is essential that the package we present—and those who
present it to the Japanese—assign adequate weight to the structural,
longer term measures.
Your Objectives
Your objectives at the meeting should thus be fourfold:
—To get agreement on sufficiently detailed proposals to make up a
credible presentation to the Japanese; the short-term package is de-
tailed in Appendix 2 of Tab B, and the long-term alternatives at Tab C.
The real choice is between seeking GOJ agreement/commitment on ul-
timate goals or on changes in specific policies or some combination of
the two.
—To assure full inclusion of the long-term, structural elements in
the package.
—To reach agreement on a tactical approach which will assure ac-
curate presentation of the package to the Japanese.
—To create interagency machinery for USG monitoring and
follow-up.
For the short-term package, the list in Appendix 2 is acceptable if
we want to incorporate specific measures to buttress the GOJ current
account commitment.
For the longer term, we prefer the market shares approach. Value
targets (such as a doubling of imports) are overwhelmingly determined
by economic growth and other macroeconomic factors. Under this ap-
proach, we would seek a GOJ commitment to raise the import compo-
nent of its consumption of consumer goods (and the other main
sectors) from x% to y% by, say, 1980.
However, we must recognize that Japan’s ability to meet market
share targets is limited, whether the shares are for the entire manufac-
turers sector or disaggregated, as we would ideally prefer, for con-
sumer goods/investment goods/processed raw materials/agriculture.
State opposes this approach because of the political difficulties it could
cause Fukuda; we (and Jules Katz) believe that “bottom line targets” of
this type may cause fewer problems for Fukuda than would a negotia-
tion over detailed policy changes.
On the tactics, it is essential that we convey our views to Fukuda
and the Japanese bureaucracy very soon. As far as we know, the Prime
Minister is still planning to offer a program on November 18. We must
inform him, well before that time, that his current thinking would pro-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
duce minimal results and that much more far-reaching steps are
needed.
Dick Holbrooke feels that only two Americans can credibly carry
this message to Fukuda, because of their domestic political credentials:
Ambassador Mansfield and Bob Strauss. There is widespread inter-
agency agreement that Mansfield, buttressed by a small technical team
from Washington, should convey the word early next week if we can
get our position together in time. Strauss could then go to Fukuda in
December to conclude the final agreement, once the Japanese had de-
cided which approach to choose.
On the interagency follow-up, there is now reasonably effective coor-
dination at the Assistant Secretary level (chaired by STR) and at the
working level (chaired by State). If a more formalized EPG subgroup is
deemed necessary, it should be chaired either by Treasury (due to your
chairmanship of the EPG and overall international economic responsi-
bility) or by STR (because these GOJ measures will be almost wholly in
the trade area).
73.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, November 9, 1977
SUBJECT
“Year of the Economy”
You were wise to make 1977 the Year of Energy—both because the
issue is important and because it is useful to order an administration’s
activities around a central theme and “subordinate other business to
it,” as Churchill once said. From a foreign policy standpoint, it would
make sense to make 1978 the Year of the Economy—for two reasons:
1. Economic Issues Are Now Central: In the industrial world stagfla-
tion may not pose as dramatic a danger as the Great Depression did in
the 1930’s, but it could eventually do as much to weaken moderate po-
litical forces in Europe and Japan, and thus to unhinge the existing in-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 121, Trade: 1977. Confidential. Sent for information.
Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Stu. C.” Brzezinski also initialed the memorandum.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
ternational order. In the poorer developing countries, stagnation poses
a serious long-term threat.
2. There is good potential for progress in meeting these problems in 1978.
The single most important factor is the health of the US economy, and
others can spell out the opportunities for action on this front. But there
is a promising foreign agenda, whose fulfillment would promote US
and world recovery:
—concluding an MTN agreement;2
—reforming our bilateral aid programs, which is a lot more impor-
tant now than spending more money on these programs;3
—setting up the new IMF $10 billion lending facility, which is al-
ready in trouble on the Hill; progressing toward agreement on new
IMF quotas; and getting agreement on a general increase in the re-
sources of the World Bank;4
—pushing for increased production abroad of commodities in
short supply—notably energy and food—and trying to set up an inter-
national system of national grain resources;5
—concerting with other oil-importing countries on measures to re-
duce energy consumption and thus restrain oil price increases;6
—concerting with Japan and Western Europe about the industrial
countries’ macro-economic policies, and with Japan about a package of
measures to reduce its external surplus.7
Each of these measures is already in train. With Presidential lead-
ership and a little luck, most of them could be brought to a successful
conclusion next year. Taken together with the measures on the do-
mestic front that others will propose to you, they would make the
“Year of the Economy” one of substantial achievement.
2 Carter underlined the phrase “MTN agreement.”
3 Carter underlined the words “reforming” and “aid programs.”
4 Carter underlined the phrase “IMF $10 billion.”
5 Carter underlined the phrases “increased production abroad” and “energy and
food.”
6 Carter underlined the phrase “reduce energy consumption.”
7 Carter underlined the phrases “Japan and Western Europe,” “macro-economic
policies,” “Japan,” and “external surplus.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
74.
Memorandum From Michael Armacost of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 10, 1977
SUBJECT
Major Export Promotion Drive
Our trade and payments position is atrocious, yet as far as I am
aware the Administration has made no determined effort to come to
terms with this on the export side. We are launching major efforts to try
and open up the Japanese market to manufactured goods exports; yet
when criticized for having a sheltered market, Japanese officials invari-
ably claim that our businessmen do not try hard enough to compete in
Japan. There is some truth to the contention, though it is essentially a
self-serving defensive ploy. Nonetheless, it points up the fact that an
important adjunct to our Japan initiatives should be a major effort to
launch an export promotion drive with the blessings of the White
House.
This has been attempted before. But the last attempt (four or five
years ago) foundered because it was run essentially out of Commerce
which enjoyed little confidence in the business community and little
clout in the White House. After a few meetings, it fizzled.
I would suggest that the President bring a few key businessmen
and labor leaders in to discuss launching a new export promotion drive
to advance foreign economic policy aims and spur employment. The
leaders of such a drive—if it is to have any prospect of success—must
be recognizable figures, known to the President, enjoying the confi-
dence of the business community and labor, and possessed of suc-
cessful experience selling products abroad (ideally with some success
in the Japanese market). This cannot be a venture limited to the big
multinationals; it must be geared at intermediate sized firms as well to
give a broad grass roots reach.
My knowledge of the giants of industry is limited, but Irving Sha-
piro, Chairman of DuPont, might be an ideal person to lead an effort of
this kind. Tom Clausen, President of the Bank of America, should be
drawn in on it. So perhaps, should John Connor, Allied Chemical
(former Secretary of Commerce); and Bob Ingersoll, former Chairman
of Borg Warner and Ambassador to Japan. Doubtless Bob Strauss, Mike
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Blumenthal, Juanita Kreps, and Roy Marshall would all have other
candidates.
The important thing is to get moving soon, to think big, to place
the leadership of the enterprise on people outside the bureaucracy, and
to be willing to invest some White House attention, activity, and pres-
tige in the venture.
RECOMMENDATION:
That you broach this idea at the next foreign policy breakfast with
the President and Cy Vance.2
2 In an attached undated note to Armacost, Owen wrote: “This is a good idea, but I
think we should check it with State & Commerce before doing it. I have calls in to Cooper
+ Weil, + will be back to you. I don’t think we should approach President until then.”
75.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, November 15, 1977
SUBJECT
Japanese Surplus
1. The US inter-agency exercise sparked by your recent exchange
of letters with Fukuda2 has borne fruit: An inter-agency group is on its
way to Tokyo to outline to the Japanese government a possible package
of short-term measures and long-term commitments that it might take
to reduce and eventually eliminate the Japanese surplus.3 It’s a good
package—the right balance between pressure and sensitivity to Japa-
nese concerns. If subsequent discussions go well, Bob Strauss will visit
Japan in early December to seek an agreement on all this with Fukuda.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
top of the page.
Document 70.
3 On November 9, the EPG discussed economic strategy toward Japan; no minutes
of the meeting were found, but see footnote 2, Document 72.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
2. Some indication of how seriously the Japanese take this issue is
provided by Prime Minister Fukuda’s decision at a special Cabinet
meeting Saturday4 to set up a Special Headquarters for Foreign Eco-
nomic Policy, answering directly to him; Yoshino, who brought Fu-
kuda’s letter to you and with whom we had the discussions of Japan’s
surplus that I reported to you,5 will be its Secretary General. This move
lifts the surplus issue out of the bureaucracy to the highest political
level. It does not tell us how the Japanese will react, however. They
seem more alert to our concerns than previously. But there is still a con-
siderable battle to be waged inside the Japanese government before a
decision can be reached. That battle may be fought out in public and the
US may be implicated, if different groups in that government resort to
press leaks. But we’re on the right course, and I think there’s a fair
chance of success.
4 November 12.
5 See Document 67.
76.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
The Trade Issue in our Relations with Japan
On the eve of important negotiations with Japan on trade and eco-
nomic issues2 Mike Mansfield has sent in a general appraisal of our re-
lations with Tokyo.3 As usual Mike registers some eminently sensible
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
the memorandum. Armacost sent it to Brzezinski for his signature under cover of a No-
vember 14 memorandum, in which he noted that the memorandum to Carter had been
prepared at Brzezinski’s request. A handwritten notation on Armacost’s memorandum
2 See Document 75.
“State of the Relationship,” or telegram 17230 from Tokyo, November 8, on “US–Japan
Economic
Relations.”
(National
Archives,
RG
59,
Central
Foreign
Policy
File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
points. He warns against pressuring the Japanese with such zeal and
single-mindedness on trade matters that we lose sight of the broadly
convergent interests we share with Japan. He notes with some fore-
boding that grievances are accumulating on both sides of the relation-
ship, and he underscores our own stake in maintaining cordial and mu-
tually beneficial ties. He reminds us that we must pursue our economic
objectives with a realistic awareness of the constraints that are built into
Japan’s political system. We must avoid the impression that we are in-
sensitive to Japan’s economic and political interests, and are giving
little more than lip service to preserving our wider partnership with
them. He suggests that we forego publicly lecturing the Japanese on
our conceptions of their responsibilities. These are useful and timely re-
minders of important truths. We should bear them in mind.
They are not the only considerations, however, that should guide
us in the weeks ahead. The Japanese have been derelict in meeting their
international responsibilities in the economic field. Our discussions
with them on this subject during the past nine months have produced
nice communiques but few tangible results. Many Japanese leaders still
regard their massive current account surplus and their bilateral trade
surplus with us as cyclical problems which are likely to prove transi-
tory. They are looking for short-term, cheap palliatives which will get
us off their backs for a while in hopes that some other issue will emerge
to divert our attention. Our most pressing requirement is to strengthen
the hand of those within Japan who are prepared to contemplate
far-reaching changes in their trade practices—particularly their atti-
tudes toward the import of manufactured goods.
Japanese diplomacy on commercial issues tends to be reactive and
defensive. Rapid movement toward equilibrium in Japan’s trade or
current accounts will not come without the determined application of
strong external pressures. And even those Japanese who find such
pressures distasteful generally acknowledge that they are an indispens-
able prerequisite of change. We must apply these pressures adroitly,
yet persistently, and we can anticipate some adverse fallout on our po-
litical relationship. This should be manageable. Indeed Japan’s concern
to keep it within bounds will be one of our prime levers (just as it was
one of Japan’s in the Tokai dispute).4 Our prospects of success will de-
pend on careful and detailed exposition of what we want, persistence
in seeking results, clear signals regarding the consequences of inaction,
and some patience and good humor.
4 Reference is to the U.S.-Japanese disagreement over the opening of the Tokai
Mura nuclear reprocessing facility in Japan. On September 1, the countries announced
that they had reached an agreement that would permit the plant to open. (Andrew H.
Malcolm, “U.S. and Japan Agree on Tokyo’s Opening of Atom Fuel Plant,” The New York

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
The diplomatic scenario for moving on this issue has now taken
shape. Mansfield will make a strong presentation to Fukuda on
Thursday,5 highlighting the importance we attach to early achievement
of a deficit in Japan’s current accounts, and a substantial increase in
Japanese imports of manufactured goods. A team, headed by Dick
Rivers of Bob Strauss’ office, will then propose a package of short-term
and medium-term measures to inject greater balance in Japan’s trade
with the U.S. to the relevant Japanese Ministries. Fukuda will be in-
formed that Alan Wolff will be prepared to go to Tokyo sometime in
the next several weeks to move these negotiations along. Bob Strauss
will be ready to go to Tokyo to conclude an agreement only if an accept-
able package can be worked out. The timing is propitious. The Japanese
are now formulating their next budget; they are exposed to criticism on
the trade issue not only by the U.S. but the Europeans and non-OPEC
developing countries; Fukuda has a strong hand in economic issues
within the government, and he faces no early elections; the business
community is apprehensive over further large-scale appreciation of the
yen.
EPG had tentatively decided during its meeting that day on U.S. economic strategy
toward Japan (see footnote 2, Document 72) “that Mike Mansfield, using the personal re-
lationship that he has built up with Fukuda, should begin the process with a private and
frank talk with Fukuda.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
77.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, November 29, 1977
SUBJECT
US-Japan Trade Issue: Current State of Play and Next Steps
Prior to his departure from Tokyo last week, Dick Rivers was
given an initial Japanese Government response to our suggestions for
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
tion. A stamped notation reads: “The President has seen,” and Carter initialed “C” at the
top of the page. Owen and Armacost sent the memorandum to Brzezinski for his signa-
ture under cover of a November 29 memorandum. (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
reducing Japan’s current account surplus. It fell far short of our require-
ments in its extent and in its specificity. Indeed, it was a minimal initial
bargaining position which eschewed any formal commitments to
achieve a deficit on current account by a particular date, to increase sig-
nificantly the economic growth target for the next fiscal year, or to ex-
pand imports of manufactured goods dramatically.2
We instructed our Embassy in Tokyo to convey disappointment at
this response; to note the priority we attach to Japanese assurances to
the international community that it will take the steps necessary to
achieve a current account deficit as soon as possible; and to inform the
Japanese that Ambassador Alan Wolff, Bob Strauss’ deputy, would be
prepared to come to Tokyo on December 4–7 to continue the discussion
of these issues as a prelude to a possible trip by Bob in mid-December.3
Intelligence sources indicate that Prime Minister Fukuda recog-
nizes that his hastily-prepared $3 billion import promotion program
and the recent appreciation of the yen will not be sufficient to reduce
Japan’s huge current accounts surplus for many months. Thus Tokyo
will remain vulnerable to growing pressures from the United States,
Western Europe, and non-OPEC developing countries to buy more or
sell less. Consequently, Prime Minister Fukuda has ordered his eco-
nomic advisors back to the drawing boards to draft additional substan-
tive measures, including tariff cuts, quota increases, and a higher eco-
nomic growth target. He has evidently decided to send a new budget to
the Diet in January, instead of waiting till April—which suggests that
he has further measures for domestic expansion in mind—to meet pres-
sures from the Japanese business community. The Prime Minister faces
an uphill battle on his import policies because his Ministries are feeling
the heat from special interest groups—particularly small and interme-
diate size businesses and farmers. Expressions of our concern about
growing protectionist pressures in the U.S. have lent urgency to Fu-
kuda’s efforts, and our soundings—with Ambassador Mansfield, Japa-
nese newsmen, the Japanese Foreign Ministry—suggest that the con-
tinued application of pressure from us (provided it is adroit and
unobtrusive) provides the Prime Minister with much-needed leverage
with recalcitrant Ministries.4
2 Widman reported on the results of the visit of U.S. officials to Japan in a No-
vember 22 memorandum to Blumenthal. (Carter Library, Anthony Solomon Collection,
4 In his November 30 Evening Report to Carter, Vance noted that both he and Mans-
field believed “that we are on the right track and that it is important at this time to con-
tinue to move forward with steady but not excessive pressure, trying to reduce some-
what the public air of confrontation which the press has given our discussions.” (Carter

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
On November 28, the Prime Minister sent his Private Secretary to
convey the following message to you:
—He has reshuffled his Cabinet and brought in a more experi-
enced and impressive team to run the Economic Ministries. (Comment:
Fukuda’s primary motivation in selecting these men was his desire to
facilitate the development of more forthcoming positions in the negoti-
ations with us.) The new Minister of International Trade and Ministry,
Toshio Komoto, is a favorite of Japan’s big business community, and is
pressing for a more expansionary budget. Kiichi Miyazawa, the new Di-
rector of the Economic Planning Agency, is a genuine internationalist
in his outlook and a strong friend of the United States. Tatsuo Mura-
yama, Minister of Finance, was formerly the Director General of the Fi-
nance Ministry’s Tax Bureau; he was Fukuda’s junior during the
latter’s days in the Finance Ministry and is responsive to his direction.
Nobuhiko Ushiba has been appointed State Minister without Portfolio
with responsibilities for International Economic Affairs. Ushiba was
formerly Japan’s Ambassador to the United States, is a prominent
leader in the Trilateral Commission, and has strong experience in inter-
national trade and financial matters.
—He would like to continue consultations with the U.S. on trade
issues by sending a small group of close confidantes to Washington
around December 10. He is thinking of a team led by Ushiba, and in-
cluding Morizuku Motono (Foreign Ministry) and Owada. (Comment:
While a prime objective of such a mission would be to explain the polit-
ical constraints which impair Japan’s ability to produce immediate re-
sults, all of these men appreciate Japan’s need to move more boldly to
reduce its huge current accounts surplus. Thus they can be counted on
reliably to report on the political pressures for action that exist here.)5
Meanwhile, Ambassador Mansfield confirms what Japanese offi-
cials had told us previously: that U.S. pressure has not strained rela-
tions between the two countries, and is welcomed by Japanese officials
who are pressing for action within the Japanese Government.
Though we had planned to dispatch Alan Wolff to Tokyo this
weekend, that no longer seems necessary. We can decide whether Bob
Strauss should go to Japan late in December to reach final agreement on
a package, after the Japanese mission has been here.
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 19, Evening Re-
ports (State): 11/77)
5 In his November 30 Evening Report to Carter, Vance asserted that Ushiba’s visit
would be “the key period for us.” He continued: “We intend to calibrate very carefully
the statements that each Cabinet member makes to Ushiba. We are stressing with the Jap-
anese that the trip will not be the conclusion of our discussions, but only part of the
process, and we are still thinking very much in terms of the possibility of a trip to Tokyo
by Bob Strauss at the end of the year.” (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
78.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, November 29, 1977
SUBJECT
1978 Summit
This week Dick Cooper, Tony Solomon, and I hold our first
meeting to prepare for your 1978 Summit.2 We will be searching for
new initiatives. The more important question, however, is that of pur-
pose and strategy. This memorandum outlines my current thinking,
and solicits your guidance.
On the economic front, the Summit’s purpose is clear: to concert
policies of the industrial countries in order to overcome stagflation in
the industrial world and promote growth in LDCs. We can devise a
strategy to this end.
But the Summit is also a political exercise—designed to strengthen
relations among industrial countries. These relations are now affected
by a variety of problems—political and security, as well as economic—
which
are
treated
in
separate
fora:
NATO
Foreign
Ministers,
US-Japanese bilateral talks, etc. But the problems interact, and there is
no place where they are discussed as a whole and at a high political
level. This should be the function of the Summit.
To this end, I am writing my German opposite member, sug-
gesting that the next Summit leave time for the heads of government to
discuss the overall state of the trilateral relationship, as a specific
agenda item. I am also suggesting that the Summit Preparatory Group
address the same issue.
The Japanese and Europeans are used to dealing bilaterally with
the US about non-economic issues. This made sense in the 1950s, when
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
“The President has seen,” and Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Henry—o.k. We’ll
have a good agenda re non prolif—SALT III—how Mid East peace was achieved, etc.
J.C.”
2 No memorandum of conversation of this meeting was found. Lake and Hormats
each sent a memorandum to Cooper on their thoughts about the Summit. (Memorandum
from Lake to Cooper, November 21, and memorandum from Hormats to Cooper, No-
vember 28; both National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Under Secretary for Economic
Affairs, 1978–1980 Files Pertaining to International Monetary Affairs, OECD, Documents,
Assistant, forwarded the memoranda to Owen and Solomon on November 30. (Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects, Henry Owen, Box 24,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
Japan and Europe were still weak; it no longer makes sense in the
1970s. The private sector’s awareness of this change is reflected in the
Trilateral Commission, whose recent meeting in Bonn focused on both
economic and non-economic issues.3 It is time for us to edge the
Summit toward increasing trilateral discussion of the political, as well
as economic, aspects of relations among the industrial regions.4
If you have any reactions that you wish me to take into account in
Summit planning, please let me know.
4 Brzezinski highlighted the final four lines of this paragraph beginning with the
phrase “whose recent meeting in Bonn” and wrote “I very much agree. ZB.”
79.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of the Treasury for
Monetary Affairs (Solomon) to President Carter1
Washington, December 1, 1977
SUBJECT
Summary of Steel Task Force Report
The steel task force report consists of three major sections:2
—an introduction which provides
a
background on
those
problems of the steel industry which are addressed by the report;
—an outline of the general objectives which guided the task force
in developing the program; and
—a five-part program which is responsive to problems in those
areas where government policies impact upon the industry.
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files,
reads: “The President has seen,” and at the top of the page, Carter wrote: “a) We should
state that pollution standards will not be lowered, b) Tax measures will be ‘considered’ to
encourage modernization.”
2 The task force was chaired by Solomon; see Document 63. Attached but not
printed is the undated “Report to the President—A Comprehensive Program for the Steel
Industry.” A notation on the report’s cover page reads: “The President has seen.” Carter
initialed the cover page and wrote: “To: Stu & Tony—This is ok. See comments on Stu’s
memo. a) Too many ‘task forces’ and committees—consolidate if possible. b) Reread this
for typos & some confusing language.” The memorandum from Eizenstat to which
Carter refers is printed as Document 80.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
The program proposals are grouped into major areas of: (1) relief
from unfair trade practices; (2) modernization of plant; (3) rationalizing
environmental practices and policies; (4) community and labor assist-
ance programs; and (5) other general measures.
1. Relief from Unfair Trade Practices
A “trigger-price” antidumping procedure3 is proposed to deal
with complaints of steel imports at prices below home market prices or
costs of production that injure the U.S. industry.
The trigger-price is to be established for each class of steel mill
product based on production costs of the world’s most efficient pro-
ducer (currently Japan).
—The use of trigger price to initiate proceedings will accelerate the
identification and prevention of dumping.
—The system is consistent with U.S. law and the GATT.
—It will not deny to any affected person rights to initiate or contest
proceedings on findings under the Antidumping Act.
2. Modernization of Plant
—The general tax measures of the Administration’s tax reform
proposal will emphasize4 incentives for modernization.
—IRS will be asked to investigate the appropriateness of short-
ening useful lives of capital goods for tax depreciation from 18 to 15
years.
—Additional funds will be made available for loan guarantees for
modernization under existing programs.
3. Rationalizing Environmental Policies and Practices
—A review of EPA regulatory procedures will be undertaken to
reduce rigidities5 and inconsistencies.
—The access of the industry to EPA for discussions with respect to
specific policies will be expanded.
—There will be a reexamination of other policies (e.g. offset pol-
icies6—the transfer of air pollution credits from one facility to another).
3 Under the trigger price anti-dumping procedure, also known as the trigger price
mechanism (TPM), the Department of the Treasury would launch an anti-dumping in-
vestigation when the price of certain steel imports fell below a pre-determined level (the
so-called “trigger price”).
4 Carter underlined the word “emphasize” and wrote “?” in the adjacent margin.
5 Carter underlined the words “reduce rigidities” and wrote “?” in the adjacent
margin.
6 Carter underlined the words “offset policies” and wrote “?” in the adjacent
margin.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
4. Community and Labor Assistance
—The loan guarantee programs for modernization under section
(2) will be geared to plants located in areas of high unemployment.
—Existing EDA funds will be made available to combat unem-
ployment in severely impacted steel communities.
—A task force will be established to examine alternative uses for
closed steel plants.
—Consideration will be given to economically viable proposals for
community and/or worker takeover of previously closed plants.
5. Other General Measures
—Requests for business reviews of joint ventures for research and
development and mergers will be expedited by Justice.
—A government review of Federal funding of industry research
and development will examine the merits of greater assistance to the
steel industry—particularly in regard to energy and the environment.
—A task force will examine regulatory and other factors which
lead to high transportation costs for industries processing bulk
materials.
—A tripartite committee of business, labor, and government will
be established to continue a dialogue on issues of common concern.
These measures will provide a basis for the industry through its
own efforts, and the cooperation of labor, to regain a strong competi-
tive position in the domestic economy.
80.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic
Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) to President Carter1
Washington, December 1, 1977
SUBJECT
Meeting on Task Force Report on Steel
I thought before you read the final steel report2 you might want to
know the results of the lengthy inter-agency meeting which we con-
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files,
reads: “The President has seen,” and Carter wrote at the top of the page: “To Stu & Tony.
JC.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
vened to review the outstanding questions on the Solomon Steel
Report.3
I. REFERENCE PRICE SYSTEM
1. Time Length—We had a discussion about the length of time
during which the reference price system would last since this was not
mentioned in the initial summary. There was a clear consensus that the
report should make clear that while there is no set deadline on the ref-
erence price system, that it was intended to be temporary and would be
reviewed periodically to determine its effectiveness and in light of
changing circumstances.4
2. Dropping Anti-Dumping Cases—The question here was whether
we should seek specific assurances from the major steel companies to
drop their pending anti-dumping cases and to forego filing ones that
are now in the process of being prepared. The Justice Department felt
strongly that no such assurances can be asked on legal grounds. Com-
panies could not be asked to forego their legal rights in return for this
system. However, presumably the course taken by the industry on
anti-dumping suits would be a factor in the Treasury’s determination
as to the length of time the price should be maintained. Tony Solomon
has implied to them, as strongly as he can within legal bounds, that the
Administration cannot be expected to simultaneously pursue this
“fast-track” reference price system and the more laborious investiga-
tion of anti-dumping actions.5
3. Legal Issues Regarding Reference Price—There are essentially two
legal issues involved, which the Department of Justice had not had the
opportunity previously to explore. First was the authority of the Secre-
tary of the Treasury to self-initiate a dumping investigation, which is a
key ingredient in this fast-track reference price proposal. While the Jus-
tice Department does not yet have a formal opinion, the Assistant At-
torney General for the Office of Legal Counsel indicated that he thinks
(as does the Treasury Department) that a strong case can be made that
3 No minutes of this meeting were found. On November 23, Blumenthal sent a sum-
mary of the Steel Task Force’s recommendations to Carter for his approval. Carter sent
Eizenstat Blumenthal’s cover memorandum on which he wrote: “Stu—You, Solomon &
others work out differences. Then submit to me,” adding as a postscript “Expedite.”
(Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Sub-
without Carter’s comments but with the summary of the Task Force report attached, is in
the Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze
Subject Files, Box 81, [Steel] [6].
4 Carter wrote “I agree” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
5 Carter highlighted the final sentence of this paragraph and wrote “good” in the
adjacent margin.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
the Secretary does have such authority. He will be able to give a favor-
able formal legal opinion next week.
The second major legal issue regarding the reference price is
whether it is violative of the antitrust laws. The Assistant Attorney
General for Antitrust, who was at the meeting, indicated that the refer-
ence price system, in its general concept, could probably sustain legal
challenge, although there might be some judges who would call this an
illegal parallel pricing agreement by industry. He made it clear that he
could not give a better opinion at this time until he saw the actual
numbers which would be used for setting the reference price. The ac-
tual reference price will not be available for several months.6
4. Limitation to Steel Industry—The question here was whether or
not the reference price system would have to be extended on equity
grounds to other industries. Dick Cooper made it clear that if other in-
dustries fit the criteria he would have no objection to their applicability
to other industries. Treasury maintained, seemingly to the satisfaction
to the group, that a strong case could be made that there are unique cir-
cumstances here, both due to injury involved to the steel industry from
imports and the large number of anti-dumping cases which are
straining Treasury’s resources. Thus, this reference price system is
merely an administrative method of expediting the handling of these
cases, which are largely concentrated in the steel industry.7
5. Multilateral Discussions—As you are aware, STR had raised the
issue of including in the report and the announcement an indication
that multilateral solutions would continue to be sought to steel trade
problems. Treasury and Charlie Schultze felt strongly that no language
should be included which implied multilateral negotiations would be
forthcoming toward an agreement. A compromise was reached where
language would be used favoring the need for continued consultations
on a multilateral basis.8
6. Inflation Impact—I raised the question of whether the inflation
impact for this program could be known at this time, before the actual
reference price was set. Charlie Schultze indicated that it could not be
known but that this reference price system would be less inflationary
than the other major options—quantitative restrictions on steel imports
or allowing the massive number of anti-dumping suits to proceed.
7. Quid-Pro-Quo On Price-Wage Behavior—This was one of the most
disappointing parts of the meeting for me. Treasury felt quite strongly
that if we attempt to tie this program to wage and price moderation
6 Carter wrote “Be careful about this” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
7 Carter wrote “Temporary nature of reference price can help here” in the margin
adjacent to this paragraph.
8 Carter wrote “ok” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
that the industry would balk and simply continue to file anti-dumping
cases. The most we could get agreement on was that the report would
reference the fact that the steel industry’s problems were not solely due
to imports but that costs were also a factor and some very general lan-
guage would be put in about costs. In addition, the statement will be
made that it is the hope of the Administration that the reference price
system will be used for increased production, with the implication that
it should not be used for price increases (although Charlie Schultze
feels that the industry will use this to increase their profit margins).
Barry Bosworth pointed out that since the reference price is based on
the cheapest foreign production costs, there is a built-in pressure on
price restraint.9
8. Shift to Fabricated Products—In its memo STR raised the concern
that since the reference price would not apply to certain steel imports,
such as carbon steel plate and fabricated steel products, foreign gov-
ernments would simply shift their imports to these lines.10 It was
agreed that a general statement would be made in the report con-
cerning a monitoring effort by Customs on such products.
9. Exchange Rates—OMB in its memo had raised the question of
whether the recent changes in exchange rates may reduce the need for
industry protection.11 It was felt that the reference price system was still
needed but that exchange rates would be one of the factors that would
be reviewed when the reference price was evaluated.12
10. Fixing the Reference Prices—After the meeting, Tony Solomon
indicated that he had reasonable confidence in the ability of Treasury to
fix the “right” level of reference prices. They will use data developed by
COWPS in their study of the steel industry.13
II. DOMESTIC PROPOSALS
1. Reduction in Guideline Life—Questions had been raised about re-
ducing the guideline life of steel equipment from its current level of 18
years to 15 years. You had questioned its impact on other heavy in-
dustry in your note.14 Treasury mentioned the following:
9 Carter wrote “Business-Labor-Govt task force should address productivity ques-
tion” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
10 The STR memorandum was not further identified; however, Strauss discussed
his concerns about the Steel Task Force report in a November 29 memorandum to Carter.
(Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Sub-
ject Files, Box 81, [Steel] [6])
11 The OMB memorandum was not further identified.
12 Carter wrote “Don’t eliminate this factor” in the margin adjacent to this
paragraph.
13 Carter wrote “Consult & let me see ref price & comments” in the margin adjacent
to this paragraph.
14 Not further identified.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
a.) This report would merely recommend that the IRS study the
possibility of reducing guideline life.
b.) Different industries now had different useful lives for their
equipment so that there would not be an impact on other industries by
changes here.
c.) Reasonable assurances of modernization by the industry would
help give a justification for reducing the guideline life.
2. EDA Revolving Fund of $215 million—As you are aware, OMB
had significant problems with the use of a revolving fund since they
correctly believe that this is contrary to good budget management and
simply guarantees continuing loan guarantees with little oversight. In-
deed, OMB in 1973 essentially stopped the use of this revolving fund.
After a good deal of discussion it was agreed that the report would
simply mention, without a dollar figure, the general use of EDA loan
guarantee authority. This would permit the use of existing authority
and the regular appropriations process, rather than a revolving fund.15
3. Joint Venture-Merger Guidelines—Treasury has accepted the re-
vised language which has been drafted by the Antitrust Division of the
Justice Department. There are now no disagreements in this area.
4. Tripartite Committee—You had questioned this.16 This had been
suggested by the Department of Labor. Barry Bosworth was not ter-
ribly favorable to it but no one had strong objections. Tony Solomon
made an excellent point that since his draft report has leaked with this
recommended committee in it,17 it might seem odd to pull back on such
an innocuous recommendation.
5. Other Points—You also had question marks by several of the rec-
ommendations on community and labor assistance. The $20 million
from EDA is for planning grants to combat unemployment in the af-
fected steel communities and is generally consistent with our recom-
mendations in the trade adjustment assistance area. The recommenda-
tion regarding communities and/or worker takeover of abandoned
steel facilities is merely a commitment to evaluate the results of a study
proposed by certain Church groups in Youngstown and involves no
commitments of funds by the Task Force.18
15 Carter wrote “Loans should be sound” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
He also underlined the last five words in the paragraph, “rather than a revolving fund,”
and wrote “good” in the adjacent margin.
16 Not further identified.
17 On November 30, for example, The Wall Street Journal printed an article on the un-
released Steel Task Force report that referred to the formation of a joint labor/manage-
ment/government committee. (David Ignatius, “Carter Weighs Plan to Revive Weak
18 Carter underlined the words “no commitments of funds” and wrote “good” in
the adjacent margin.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
III. TIMING OF RELEASE
Treasury would like to release it tomorrow because of their fear of
further leaks. However, most of the substantive information is unfortu-
nately already in the papers and if you feel that a few extra days is nec-
essary, Tony Solomon believes it would not be a tragedy to release it
Monday or Tuesday.19
Tony has indicated that he has consulted widely with Congress, al-
though, of course, he has not been able to give them the final results for
the report. I have talked to Frank Moore about congressional consulta-
tions. A release early next week would allow for more time for Con-
gressional briefings. Frank indicated that if he knows in the morning
that you have approved the report, he could get together at least a small
group of the steel caucus (most Congressmen are out of town at this
point and will be back Tuesday) for a pre-press conference briefing
around 1:00. He could get a larger group together Tuesday, when the
House comes back in session.
Jack Watson and I believe releasing it early next week will give ev-
eryone a chance to review the final report, which no one will have seen
until tomorrow morning. We feel there is little to lose by a few extra
days delay and much that can be gained by a careful review of the
report.20
20 At the end of this paragraph, Carter wrote: “Fri, Sat, Mon or Tues ok w/me.” At
the bottom of the page, he wrote: “Press release should emphasize a) Minimum inflation
impact b) No violation of anti-trust laws c) Pollution standards upheld d) Budget impact
small e) Modernization/productivity f) Maintains competitive market forces.” Next to
this note, Carter added: “If ready Fri afternoon, go ahead—I have no preference. J.” On
Tuesday, December 6, the White House announced that Carter had approved the recom-
mendations contained in the Solomon Task Force’s “Report to the President—A Compre-
hensive Program for the Steel Industry.” See Public Papers of the Presidents of the United
States: Jimmy Carter, 1977, Book II, p. 2083.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
81.
Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Christopher to
President Carter1
Washington, December 9, 1977
Ushiba Visit. Next Monday,2 Japanese Minister of State for External
Economic Affairs Ushiba will begin a four-day visit which will include
talks with Bob Strauss, Mike Blumenthal, Ray Marshall, Juanita Kreps,
Bob Bergland, Charles Schultze, Arthur Burns, Henry Owen, Dick
Cooper and Congressional and business leaders. We hope the Vice
President will also see Ushiba at the outset to set the overall tone.3 An
interagency group will complete three weeks of intensive work to-
morrow on a common set of talking points and briefing papers to as-
sure that we are all working from the same base.
By Ushiba’s own admission in recent press conferences, the pro-
posals he is bringing fall short of our maximum expectations.4 Our pre-
liminary analysis, and that of Mike Mansfield,5 is that while the Japa-
nese measures are indeed deficient, they represent forward motion
with the prospect of more to come. Our aim during the Ushiba visit is to
keep steady pressure on the Japanese, but avoid the kind of overt shock
that will fuel antipathies toward the Japanese here and make it more
difficult for them to respond at home. Accordingly, we believe we
should: (a) defer definitive response to Ushiba’s measures until after
he departs, and then send a coordinated interagency message, and
(b) publicly treat the Ushiba visit as an important stage in an ongoing
consultative process rather than a confrontation, and work against in-
evitable pressures from the press to brand the visit a failure.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Ushiba visit.]
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
page.
2 December 12.
3 Carter wrote “ok w/me” in the margin adjacent to this sentence.
4 An article in the December 9 edition of The New York Times reporting a recent inter-
view given by Ushiba is entitled “Japanese Indicate They Cannot Meet U.S. Trade De-
Ushiba would make in Washington. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D770458–0415) Armacost provided his assessment of Ushiba’s proposals in a De-
cember 13 memorandum to Brzezinski. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brze-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
82.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the President’s Assistant
(Watson)1
Washington, December 12, 1977
SUBJECT
Foreign Economic Policy Coordination
I have just learned that in September the President asked Mike Blu-
menthal to work with Jim Schlesinger, Charlie Schultze, Dick Cooper
and others on a review of the US balance of payments situation.2 Subse-
quently, Mike, Charlie and Cy Vance sent the President separate
memos outlining possible policy responses for dealing with our trade
and current account deficit.3 I did not receive these memos and so did
not have an opportunity to comment on important policy recommen-
dations. The President then met with a group on November 23 to re-
view the situation.4 I only became aware of this exercise because Cy
Vance’s memo of December 1 was routed to the NSC for action.
Foreign economic policy, including trade and monetary matters, is
an important aspect of overall US foreign policy. I would like, in the fu-
ture, to receive copies of all memos going to the President on these sub-
jects, so that I can have an opportunity to comment on them. I would
also like to have Henry Owen, who is working on this range of issues
with me, to be invited to attend meetings, such as the one that took
place on November 23.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Brzezinski for his signature under cover of a December 9 memorandum from Owen, who
wrote: “As we discussed on the phone, we have prepared memos for your signature to
Jack Watson, Rick Hutcheson and Tim Kraft asking that they take appropriate steps to as-
sure that you (1) receive copies of all memos sent to the President concerning foreign eco-
nomic policy and (2) are invited to meetings where such policy issues are discussed.”
(Ibid.) The December 12 memoranda to Hutcheson and Kraft, initialed by Brzezinski, are
attached but not printed. (Ibid.)
2 Not further identified, but see Document 66.
3 Blumenthal’s memorandum to Carter is Document 66. Schultze presented his
views in a November 15 memorandum to Carter entitled “Secretary Blumenthal’s Memo
on the U.S. Balance of Payments and Proposed Measures to Reduce It.” Vance offered his
views to Carter in a December 1 memorandum entitled “The U.S. Balance of Payments.”
Eizenstat and Schirmer also submitted a memorandum to Carter on the issue, dated No-
vember 19 and entitled “Analysis of Blumenthal Memo: Balance of Payments.” All three
memoranda are in the Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presi-
the Cabinet Room, were found. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily
Diary)

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
83.
Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Economic
Affairs (Cooper) to Vice President Mondale1
Washington, December 14, 1977
SUBJECT
Recent Movements of the Dollar in Foreign Markets
In recent weeks the dollar has fallen noticeably against major for-
eign currencies, as the probable outcome of the U.S. energy policy de-
bate has been deteriorating daily. The major factor affecting the dollar
is the present and prospective deficit in the current account of the bal-
ance of payments, running at a rate of $17.5 billion in the first half of
1977 and expected to worsen in 1978. The current deficit is as large as it
is because of a more vigorous economic recovery here than abroad and
because of the rapid growth in our dependence on imported oil.
Between November 30 and December 13, the dollar fell an average
of 1.1 percent against the currencies of our trading partners. The down-
ward movement has been erratic rather than continuous, with brief pe-
riods of recovery. These movements carry the Japanese yen and the
German mark further along the paths of appreciation they have been
following since September.
A longer view of exchange rate movements shows that since
March 1973 (when currencies began to float against one another on a
general basis) the dollar has appreciated on all the various measures
that we use, by amounts varying from 1 percent (against the SDR) to 10
percent (against a bundle of 46 currencies weighted by their impor-
tance in U.S. trade). Since the beginning of 1977, the dollar has appreci-
ated by 0.9 percent on the measure most relevant to the U.S. but it has
depreciated by about 3 percent against the SDR—the main difference
being the greater importance of depreciating currencies of less devel-
oped countries in the trade-weighted index than in the SDR. These
changes are negligible.
The recent appreciations of the German mark and of the Japanese
yen are rightly alarming to Germany and to Japan. But they can avoid
such currency appreciations by expanding their domestic economies
more rapidly, and in the case of Japan by taking steps to encourage
more imports (the real pressure on Japan in their current discussions
1 Source: Carter Library, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, National Security Issues,
marking. Forwarded to Mondale under cover of a December 16 memorandum from Clift;
a note on Clift’s memorandum reads: “The V.P. has seen.” (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
with us is the appreciation of the yen, which is largely a consequence of
their own policies).
You are right to be concerned about the possible impact of cur-
rency movements on OPEC oil pricing decisions, and that is our chief
concern with the relatively modest depreciation of the dollar in recent
weeks. An index of exchange rate changes weighted by OPEC trade
shows a depreciation of the dollar by about 3½ percent between Jan-
uary and the end of October. This will be used by the price hawks as an
argument for increasing the dollar price. An inhibiting factor is that
OPEC assets are denominated mainly in dollars, and the leading OPEC
countries will not want to take steps that reduce the real value of their
own assets. But there is no doubt that depreciation of the dollar in these
weeks immediately before an OPEC pricing decision is awkward.2
PERCENTAGE CHANGE IN VALUE OF U.S. DOLLAR
IN TERMS OF
OPEC Trade-
Weighted
Weighted
SDR
Currencies
Currencies
*To Oct. 1977
clusion, a 6-month freeze on oil prices was announced.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
84.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1
Washington, December 19, 1977
SUBJECT
Briefing Paper on Trade Issues for Your Visit to Paris and Brussels in
January 1978
BACKGROUND
The multilateral trade negotiations should feature prominently in
your discussions with EC President Roy Jenkins and French President
Giscard d’Estaing during your upcoming visit to Europe.2 Your visit
will be extremely helpful in persuading the EC Commission to support
a substantial negotiating package by the mid-January target date for
completing the preparatory phase of the negotiations and in per-
suading the French government to support (or at least not to veto) such
a package in the Council of Ministers. The Council is expected to meet
on January 17 to decide whether the Commission should be allowed to
proceed on the basis of the initial negotiating documents.
The London Summit produced the political will necessary to move
the MTN off dead center. Since then, the EC Commission (Jenkins, Haf-
erkamp, Gundelach, Davignon) has worked well with us in developing
a plan for reducing industrial tariffs by 40 percent, and I would suggest
that you commend the Commission for their leadership in this area.
At the same time, you should press the Commission to maintain
their leadership role in working out other elements of a substantial
MTN package, including agreements of substantial benefit to agricul-
ture and a comprehensive solution to the subsidies/countervailing
duty issue. I would hope that you could conclude your session at the
Commission with a forceful communique that will pledge the U.S. and
the EC to provide the leadership necessary to negotiate a substantial
MTN package before the summer holidays.
KEY ISSUES
1. Tariffs.—The U.S. and the EC Commission have worked out a
plan for reducing industrial tariffs by 40 percent. Formal adoption of
the plan, and the exchange of offers, is scheduled for the week of Jan-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
classification marking. Forwarded to Carter under cover of a December 20 memorandum
from Owen. (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
uary 15. The Commission will not be able to proceed, however, until
the member states have approved it, and French consent will be key.
The French government is reluctant with the March parliamentary elec-
tions only a few months away and with widespread public concern
about imports from the third world and Japan. They have asked us to
minimize publicity over the 40 percent tariff cutting goal.
The ability of the EC Commission to press ahead towards a major
result in the MTN could depend on whether you can obtain a French
commitment to support, or at a minimum not to veto, tabling of the Eu-
ropean Community’s tariff offer by January 20. We can acknowledge
that the 40 percent cut should not be given major press emphasis. In-
stead the major focus should be on the improvement of trade rules in
such areas as subsidies, safeguards, standards, and government
procurement.
2. Safeguards.—The European Community has conditioned its ten-
tative support for a 40 percent tariff cut on the negotiation of a safe-
guard agreement that would permit them to restrict, on a selective
basis, imports for particular countries when they become disruptive. In
essence, they are saying that their economies can adjust to increased
competition from the U.S., but not from some of the less developed
countries, and perhaps Japan. We have indicated a willingness to work
out an understanding on this issue, but we have been reluctant to ac-
cept unlimited selectivity because it could open the door to protec-
tionism by making safeguards too easy to use; it could lead to a frag-
mentation of the world trading system and exacerbate North/South
relations; it could lead to a diversion of exports from the EC to the U.S.
market; and it could be used against us. We have insisted that any
move toward selectivity be circumscribed by conditions for its use and
better international discipline.
The French government has been pushing hard for selective safe-
guards, as part of their concept of organized liberalism. They consider
it essential to reduce public fears about a potential flood of imports
from the third world. Your ability to obtain assurances from French
leaders on tariff cuts is likely to depend, in part, on our willingness to
support them on this issue.
3. Non-Tariff Barriers (including subsidies and agricultural trade bar-
riers).—Both the U.S. and the EC have emphasized the importance of
non-tariff barriers in the current trade talks. We have made progress on
a number of these, but we have yet to make such progress on some of
the tough negotiating issues, such as plans for reducing barriers to agri-
cultural trade and rules for minimizing the trade-distorting impact of
subsidies. Disagreement on these issues evoke strong emotions on both
sides of the Atlantic, and in the absence of substantive solutions in the
MTN we are headed for a major confrontation that would tend to

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
poison the political atmosphere in other areas. This negotiation is likely
to be our only chance for quite a few years to put in place an improved
international framework for resolving conflicts arising from differences
in agricultural policy and in industrial policy. As a practical matter, we
cannot conclude an MTN without adequate solutions in these areas;
and a major political effort will have to be made to reduce U.S./EC
differences.
4. Protectionist Pressures.—The primary concern of the Europeans
is likely to focus on current pressures for trade restrictions. They
will be particularly anxious about problems relating to trade in steel
(Annex A).3 They will also be concerned about the protectionist mood
in the U.S. more generally. They will welcome a forceful expression of
U.S. intention to resist pressures for trade restrictions.
Talking Points
In Paris.—
1. We have been pleased by the progress that has been made in the
MTN trade talks in some key issues as a result of close cooperation be-
tween the EC Commission and U.S. negotiators.
2. We are anxious that similar progress be made in the near future
on non-tariff barriers affecting agricultural trade and subsidies.
3. We sincerely hope that the French government will support the
package of proposals, including the 40 percent tariff cutting goal,
which the EC Commission will present to the Council of Ministers on
January 17 as a basis for further negotiation.
4. We understand the sensitive political situation in France and the
need to find an acceptable political formulation for the negotiating
package, including a de-emphasis of the tariff goal and major stress on
improved trading rules, including those on safeguards.
5. If needed—We understand the need for more flexibility in the
use of safeguard measures, but we must avoid arrangements which
will open the door to protectionist forces and increase North/South
tensions.
In Brussels with the EC Commission.—
1. We are pleased by the momentum that has been achieved in the
MTN trade talks as a result of the close working relationship that has
been established between the EC Commission and U.S. trade negoti-
ators headed by Ambassador Robert S. Strauss. A substantial result
from these talks is crucial to the maintenance of the open trading
system.
3 Not attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
2. We hope that the Commission will exercise the leadership neces-
sary to make substantial progress in these talks on such difficult issues
as plans for reducing agricultural trade barriers and minimizing the
trade distorting impact of subsidies. Adequate solutions are needed to
put the U.S. and EC relations on a sound footing over the years ahead
and to avoid political problems.
3. We look forward to approval by the Council of Ministers on Jan-
uary 17 of the comprehensive package of negotiating proposals that
have been worked out between U.S. and EC negotiators. [If warranted
by the results of the Paris talks—We have been assured by the French
government that they will be supportive of the proposals.]4
4. We attach great importance to the exchange of negotiating offers
during the week of January 15. The U.S. is prepared to make a substan-
tial offer, and we very much hope that the EC will do likewise.
5. If needed—We understand the need for more flexibility in the
use of safeguard measures, but we must avoid arrangements which
will open the door to protectionist forces and increase North/South
tensions.
4 Brackets in the original.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
85.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic
Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) and the Associate Director of
the Domestic Policy Staff (Schirmer) to President Carter1
Washington, December 19, 1977
SUBJECT
Decision Memorandum on Balance of Payments Options (At your request)
I. THE NATURE OF THE PROBLEM
A. The Forecasts (Provided by Treasury)
($ billions)
Trade deficit
Current Account deficit
These forecasts are:
(1) based on optimistic assumptions (e.g., no OPEC oil price in-
creases in 1978).
(2) subject to the usual uncertainties, things could turn out better in
1978—or they could turn out much worse. (A trade deficit approaching
$40 billion is conceivable.)
B. Recent Performance of the dollar
In the last three months, the dollar has depreciated 9% against the
yen and over 6% against the British, Belgian, and Dutch currencies.
II. Approaches to the Problem
Your advisors have put forward several different views of how the
U.S. should deal with the balance of payments/current account deficit
problem. There is, however, consensus on several points:
• confidence in the dollar is critical to our continued ability to fi-
nance existing and projected U.S. trade and current account deficits;
• enactment and implementation of a strong national energy pro-
gram is central to our ability to deal with the trade deficit problem and
our excessive dependency on foreign oil;
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
notation reads: “The President has seen,” and Carter wrote “Stu. J” at the top of the page.
Attached is a December 20 note to Carter from Eizenstat that reads: “Since the final
typing of this memo, Mike Blumenthal has called me to tell me that Cy Vance now favors
some sort of general statement of concern on the balance of payments problem.” Carter
wrote “ok” on the note. (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
• we should continue diplomatic efforts to encourage more rapid
growth by our strongest trading partners; and
• public education about the balance of trade issue is needed here
at home.
A. The Blumenthal approach2
Confidence in the dollar has waned in recent weeks, and specula-
tion has developed which has further depressed the dollar exchange
rate and confidence in our currency. There is now some risk of a major
speculative run against the dollar with serious implications for the
preservation of the liberal trade and payments system, U.S. leadership
internationally and our own domestic economy. Relationships with
European monetary authorities are becoming increasingly difficult.
The market disorder is receiving heavy and disturbing press play. The
widespread market perception that the U.S. is not prepared to make
any attempt to stop the decline of the dollar tends to deter the capital
inflow needed to finance the current account deficit. Because the world
monetary system is based on the dollar, lack of confidence in the dollar
also damages confidence in the world economy which is crucial to
global economic expansion.
While Blumenthal does not recommend efforts to slow U.S. eco-
nomic growth, he does recommend actions designed to convince
traders, businessmen, and foreign governments that the Administra-
tion intends to act forcefully to bring its current account under control
and keep the dollar strong. This cannot be achieved solely by monetary
measures such as increasing intervention in the foreign exchange
market.
He also considers it psychologically important that the deficit next
year be somewhat smaller than in 1977. For this purpose, he recom-
mends that you express public concern (but not alarm) about the dollar.
This statement should be supported by new energy measures as well as
discussion of the Administration’s fiscal policy and tax policy objec-
tives. He recommends a number of actions designed to reverse what he
believes to be a widespread perception of “malign neglect” by the Ad-
ministration even though the specific measures recommended would
not in themselves reduce the deficit dramatically.3
B. The Vance/Schultze view4
The size of the U.S. current account deficit, particularly oil imports,
is a matter for concern. Although it creates a drag on U.S. economic re-
covery, the deficit does not indicate a fundamental weakness in the U.S.
2 See Document 66.
3 Carter wrote “ok” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
economy. Our ability to compete is unimpaired. Our foreign markets
are simply growing slowly or not at all, while U.S. economic growth
leads the industrial world.
The dollar has depreciated considerably against slow-growing
countries, many of which are now in surplus as a response to our def-
icit. The recent exchange rate adjustments will help to keep our deficit
in line and reduce the surpluses elsewhere. The exchange rate changes
also put pressure on the countries in surplus to take needed action to
stimulate their economies. Although there may be alarmist press cov-
erage, Vance and Schultze see little risk that exchange markets will get
out of hand. In fact, this risk is likely to be increased rather than re-
duced by major policy reversals and high visibility statements that em-
phasize our alarm.
Schultze and Vance recommend low key public education, pursuit
of diplomatic efforts to stimulate adjustment by countries in surplus
and quiet adoption of reasonable, low-cost measures.
C. Schlesinger Comment
We must recognize that while approximately half the deterioration
in our balance of trade is attributable to increased oil imports, the other
half is not. Over the past two years, there has been a significant deterio-
ration in our trade balance in the industrial products sector, and some
deterioration in the agricultural sector. Our biggest single problem—
the $12 billion annual Japanese trade surplus—is largely unrelated to
energy imports. It is interesting to note that, considering the relative
sizes of GNPs, the Japanese import the equivalent of twice the amount
of oil as does the United States and yet still manage to run an enormous
balance of trade surplus. Thus, when considering the balance of pay-
ments problem, we must keep the non-energy component in mind and
act accordingly. This should call into question any strategy which does
not focus on a broad range of remedial actions.5 Those actions, however
should be implemented gradually, and any energy-related actions
should be implemented without an explicit linkage to the balance of
payments problem.
III. OPTIONS FOR DECISION
The pros and cons of each of the options suggested by Secretary
Blumenthal are outlined below. Some of the impacts of these options
can be described as either positive or negative, depending on the basic
approach to the problem which you feel is most appropriate. For ex-
ample, a highly visible expression of concern about the strength of the
dollar would be a plus under the Blumenthal approach, and a negative
under the Schultze/Vance approach.
5 Carter underlined the phrase “broad range.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
1. Defer or slow down purchases for the Strategic Petroleum Reserve
Pro:
outflows in future years).
• Various rates of slowdown, short of complete deferral of pur-
chases, are available which could be selected to demonstrate our con-
cern, particularly in 1978.
Con:
• Legislative revision would be required for any schedule which
delays storing the first 500 million barrels beyond December 1980.
• This program is popular with the Congress and the public. It was
a major element of your April 20 Energy Program,6 and is aimed at
counteracting our petroleum import supply vulnerability.
• Delaying SPRO may be taken as a sign that we do not really be-
lieve that the energy problem is serious, although Blumenthal suggests
that it could also be cast as reflecting our perception of the easing of
mid-East tension as a result of the Arab-Israeli talks.7
• Surpluses in the world oil market are likely to continue over the
next two to three years which should keep OPEC price increases to a
minimum. SPRO purchases during these years are therefore optimal
from a price and availability standpoint.
• Vulnerability studies to date show that the SPRO, at least at the
500 million barrel level, is a worthwhile insurance policy against
supply interruptions or cutbacks.
• Deferral of SPRO would undermine efforts to encourage our
allies to undertake storage programs (which may ultimately reduce the
size of necessary U.S. storage.)
COMMENT: This would be the most dramatic evidence of U.S.
concern over the balance of payments problem. It would reverse a
major element of your energy policy which has been consistently stated
since the early days of the campaign. Blumenthal believes this change
would be appropriate, indicating a belief that “embargo insurance” is
not as urgent as our trade deficit. Vance does not believe that the
change in the deficit would be more than cosmetic.
A decision could be made to continue with the first 500 million
barrels, and to adjust the fill rate (or a decision on the second 500 mil-
7 Direct Egyptian-Israeli talks began with Egyptian President Anwar Sadat’s No-
vember 19–21 visit to Jerusalem.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
lion barrels) if the balance of payments picture or the oil supply situa-
tion should change. Under this alternative, the immediate impact on
the deficit would be foregone, but it would reduce future pressures on
the picture.
Blumenthal recommends slowdown in purchases in 1978 through
1980. Vance, Schultze, Schlesinger and we recommend keeping on
schedule with the first 500 million barrels but keeping an eye on the
need for and the economics of the second installment.
Slow down SPRO purchases (Blumenthal)
Maintain current schedule for first increment but defer decision on next
increment (Vance, Schultze)8
Maintain current plan for full SPRO (Schlesinger)
2. Increase rate of production at Elk Hills and expedite construction of the
Sohio pipeline
Pro:
(assuming completion of the Sohio pipeline).
• All federal and state permit issues for Sohio have been worked
out. The one remaining issue (between Sohio and the local utility) can
probably be solved soon. The project has a decent chance of completion
by the time Elk Hills can be cranked up to full capacity.
Con:
• If the Sohio project cannot be completed in time, Elk Hills pro-
duction cannot be increased to its maximum since no transportation ca-
pacity, even to the West Coast, will be available.
• Would constitute a change in earlier policy, although this is not
likely to be either controversial or noticed by other than local interests.
COMMENT: All parties recommend full production of Elk Hills,
including moving forward aggressively to fund a new gas plant in the
field and secure related transportation systems.
Begin work for full production of Elk Hills (all recommend)9
Continue Elk Hills slowdown
8 Carter indicated his approval of this option and wrote “Maintain 1985 schedule on
purchases.”
9 Carter indicated his approval of this option.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
3. Encourage an immediate decision by the owners to increase the
throughput of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System (TAPS)
Pro:
• Would add 400,000 barrels per day to domestic production
saving $2 billion/year beginning in mid or late 1980.
• If completed, Sohio can handle at least part of this additional
capacity.
• This is the single most cost effective option available to reduce
the underlying levels of oil imports and the balance of payments deficit
over the next 3 years.
Con:
• The additional Sohio transmission capacity will probably not be
sufficient to handle Elk Hills and Alaskan oil. Some of this oil would
have to be tankered through the Panama Canal or swapped with Japan.
• While a Japanese oil swap would not increase U.S. dependence
on foreign oil, it has been violently opposed by numerous members of
Congress. A swap would be politically difficult.
• Would reverse a previously stated policy of avoiding oil swaps
which received substantial favorable press.
COMMENT: Vance, Schultze, Blumenthal, and Schlesinger recom-
mend increasing TAPS throughput and arranging for a swap with
Japan if needed. We concur with this recommendation on the merits,
but believe that announcing or implementing such a decision should be
deferred until we have consulted extensively with members of
Congress and California officials. We strongly urge you not to even
float the idea of a swap until the energy bill passes and until there has
been adequate Congressional consultation.
Encourage an increase in TAPS throughput and swap oil with Japan
if needed. (all recommend)10
Delay announcement and implementation pending consultation. (all
recommend except Blumenthal)
Continue with current policy.
4. Direct limitation of oil imports (quotas/import fees)
Pro:
• Most direct means of curtailing consumption of oil, but would
require some sort of domestic allocation or consumer rationing. Use of
10 Carter indicated his approval of this option and wrote “No reference to Japan
swap.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
quotas (or fees) could reduce payments by $5 to $10 billion, depending
on the stringency of the program.
• Would constitute dramatic evidence of our determination to deal
both with the trade deficit and with our energy problem.
• Some argue that rationing is fairer means of inducing conserva-
tion than price increases.
Con:
• Rationing in the absence of a major supply interruption would
be perceived as a drastic, and probably unnecessary step by the public.
• Reduction in oil import availability could have a significant neg-
ative impact on economic growth.
Any
rationing
system
is
cumbersome
and
expensive
administratively.
• Revised rationing plan (and other contingency plans) is still in
preparation. These require congressional approval after submission,
and implementation of the plans is subject to a one-house veto.
• Other steps, short of rationing, are available to cut back
consumption.
• No rationing system can be completely equitable. Hardships
would be caused in certain sectors of our society.
COMMENT: You have the legal authority to impose import quotas
for balance of payments reasons. You also have the authority to impose
gasoline rationing (subject to Congressional disapproval). None of
your advisors recommends rationing at this time. All agree, however,
that development of rationing and contingency plans (and analyses of
import quotas or fees) should continue expeditiously.
Continue plan preparation, but avoid rationing (all recommend)11
Proceed to develop rationing plan for immediate implementation
In the FY 1979 budget session on agriculture you decided to in-
6. Expand Eximbank lending by about $4 billion
This issue will be reviewed in detail in the Eximbank budget ses-
sion on December 20 so will not be treated in this memo.13
11 Carter indicated his approval of this option.
12 Carter made a checkmark in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
7. Sell some of our gold holdings in the private market
Pro:
• This would have a slight, but positive impact on the balance of
payments.
• It is consistent with our longer term goal of removing gold from
the international financial system.
• Sales can be timed so as to avoid disrupting the international
market, or impacting upon the French elections.
Con:
• There are a small number of highly vocal critics (including some
in Congress) who believe that selling gold undermines the stability of
the dollar and the entire monetary system.
• Immediate sales could offend the French and this could become
an issue in the March elections.
COMMENT: All of your advisors believe that this is a sensible
policy. No announcement, however, should be made until after the
French elections in March.
Gold sales should be justified on the grounds that this is sensible
monetary policy, and should not be announced as part of a balance of
payments strategy.
Approve gold sales after the French elections (all recommend)14
Disapprove gold sales
8. Moderate expansion of military sales for off-the-shelf items
Pro:
• Would generate about $500 million per year
Con:
• Would be at least a partial retreat from your efforts to reduce
arms sales
• Foreign military sales from past commitments are expected to
• Acceleration of shipments in 1978 could come only by tempo-
rarily degrading our own defense capabilities.
• The impact on balance of payments is relatively small.
COMMENT: Blumenthal recommends that sales be expanded but
makes clear that this should not be publicly linked with balance of pay-
ments. Schultze, Vance, and we recommend against any such increase
14 Carter indicated his approval of this option and wrote “modest.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
on the grounds that the low level of temporary impact is not significant
enough to warrant contradiction of your present arms sales policy.
Approve increase in arms sales (Blumenthal)
Disapprove increase in arms sales (Schultze, Vance, Eizenstat)15
IV. PACKAGING OF THE OPTIONS SELECTED
Blumenthal believes that a demonstration of your concern is of far
greater importance than the actual statistical effect to be expected from
these specific measures. Therefore, he recommends that you announce
your determination to maintain a strong dollar, relying primarily on:
• policies to maintain a growing, non-inflationary domestic
economy;
• an effective energy program, but including as specific balance of
payments actions such energy-related measures as you select;
• expansion of CCC and EXIM budgets;
• speculation against the dollar might then be stopped and some
visible improvement in the current account position achieved during
1978.
Blumenthal further states that although we should continue to
urge economic expansion abroad in appropriate cases, we should rec-
ognize that we have pushed the Japanese and Germans about as far as
they will tolerate at this time. In an effort to avoid further currency ap-
preciation both countries are now turning to restrictive measures on
capital inflow.
Vance, Schultze, Schlesinger, and we recommend against such an
announced package on the grounds that:
• even if all of the options were selected, the total impact on the
balance of payments is fairly small. If this is touted as our whole pro-
gram, it may appear too small and discourage international confidence
in the dollar;
• calling particular attention to the problem could set off more
alarm in the international market than not doing so;
• the U.S. balance of payments picture is already relatively
well-known by sophisticated observers and participants in interna-
tional money markets and it has not seemed to do the dollar great or
disorderly harm. In fact some appreciation of the mark and the yen will
encourage the stimulative policies by Germany and Japan which we
seek. As long as this appreciation occurs in an orderly way, it is not
undesirable.
15 Carter indicated his approval of this option.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Package energy options together and link to balance of payments
(Blumenthal)
Proceed to implement options, but do not expressly link to balance of
payments (Schultze, Vance, Eizenstat)16
16 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to these options. At the end of
the memorandum he wrote: “Statement approved for use when/if needed. JC.”
86.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic
Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) to President Carter1
Washington, December 20, 1977
SUBJECT
Proposed Statement For Release Tomorrow
Attached is a draft of the proposed statement to be issued under
your name on the balance of trade and payments issue.2 I have had it
reviewed by Henry Owen on Zbig’s staff, by Schlesinger’s staff, and
copies have been provided to Charlie Schultze and Dick Cooper. I will
attempt to get their comments in the morning; they were unavailable at
any time tonight.
As a result of the meeting this evening with Dr. Burns, Secretary
Blumenthal, Charlie Schultze, Dick Cooper, Tony Solomon and others,3
both Charlie and Dick Cooper are now apparently convinced that a
statement along these lines should be issued. As you are aware from
the memorandum which I forwarded to you earlier4 that this was not
their previous position.
While the Department of Energy does not appear to be enthusiastic
about such a statement, since it effectively announces new energy
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
President has seen,” and Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Stu—OK only after
Schultze & McIntyre have ok’ed it. Clear any significant changes with me. J.C.”
2 Attached but not printed. For the text of the December 21 statement on the U.S.
balance of trade and payments announcing measures to improve the U.S. trade position,
see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1977, Book II,
3 No other record of this meeting was found.
4 See Document 85.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
policy with virtually no Congressional consultation, they will go along
with it if there is indeed a crisis situation which requires a statement to-
morrow. It seems to me that there is a risk in that the statement may be
seen as pressuring the conferees. Moreover, it is unclear to me that the
type of statement attached hereto will have any measurable impact on
exchange markets. However, in light of the very strong feelings on the
part of Blumenthal and Burns, I certainly defer to their expertise re-
garding the need for this statement.
The only substantive change suggested is that the Department of
Energy would prefer no specific dollar figure be mentioned in terms of
the expected improvement in our trade position, or at least that a range
standing alone will lead reporters to attempt to compute the amount of
Prudhoe Bay oil which must be produced, which in turn may lead re-
porters to surmise that we are considering a Japanese swap.
I have notified Jody to expect release of this statement in the
morning—if you so desire. It will be released around 11:30 and the
Treasury people will do a briefing at that time at the Treasury
Department.
I might add my own view that an additional day be provided for
Congressional consultation, particularly on the new energy pronounce-
ments so that we are not perceived to be taking precipitous action
without review. Perhaps you might call Blumenthal in the morning to
determine whether a 24-hour delay in issuing the statement to provide
for this review would be acceptable.
87.
Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of
State1
19510. For Under Secy Cooper from Amb Mansfield. Subject:
US-Japan Economic Talks. Ref: State 302526.2
D770474–1116. Confidential; Immediate; Exdis.
kuda about the U.S. response to the economic proposals delivered by Ushiba during his
recent trip to Washington (see Document 81). (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770473–0268)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
1. Summary: Ambassador conveyed talking points to Prime Min-
ister Dec. 20. Fukuda outlined drastic fiscal policy measures he was
taking to reach 7 percent growth target and expressed hope they would
meet core of U.S. concerns. He was not specific on current account
target. He said Ushiba would continue work on specific measures
about which he had conveyed latest U.S. views to FonOff earlier.
Meeting closed with expressions of hope that issues would be resolved
to make mid-January Strauss visit possible. End summary.
2. Ambassador saw Prime Minister afternoon Dec. 20 to convey
points in reftel.
3. Prime Minister thanked Ambassador for his help in preparing
Ushiba mission and securing access for him to so many important
Americans. He said he felt the visit had promoted good U.S.-Japan rela-
tions. Some issues remain to be dealt with but he is doing his best to re-
solve them by the end of the year or early next year.
4. Fukuda said his basic problem is how to deal with Japanese
economy for next year. The seven percent growth target is the highest
of any of the industrial democracies and he was now busily at work
trying to develop measures to achieve it. He said his basic thinking was
that Japan could not rely on exports but had to stimulate domestic de-
mand. There are real problems in knowing how to best create domestic
demand; long term investment which would usually be the major pillar
is not too promising; consumption, while it will grow at a stable rate
cannot be the leading factor; therefore the government sector must pro-
vide the main stimulus. He is therefore planning drastic emergency
measures in fiscal policy to bring Japan to the seven percent target.
Japan will be covering a 37 percent deficit by issuing bonds. Fukuda
sees these measures as quite exceptional in the international commu-
nity but since he sees the current situation as a real emergency he is
planning major stimulus which will increase imports. As to exports,
government cannot legally control them in a free market economy but
he hopes for “correct” export practices assisted by the strong yen. A
possible oil price hike might also affect import prices and all together
should have a favorable impact on the current account balance. He said
he hoped U.S. would agree that he was making extraordinary efforts
responsive to the core of U.S. concerns on the macro-economic level.
5. He noted that Ushiba would be continuing to work on the other
issues outside the macro-economic field.
6. Prime Minister made no specific comments on Ambassador’s
presentation except to inquire what timing we envision for Strauss
visit. Ambassador confirmed that if mutually satisfactory progress was
made we would envision a visit around middle of January.
7. Prime Minister also inquired about prospects for U.S. domestic
economy and trade balance for 1978.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
8. Embassy had conveyed detailed USG views to FonOff early af-
briefed on them.
Mansfield
Ushiba’s proposals. While welcoming Japan’s 7 percent growth rate target for the coming
year, the United States urged Japan to issue a policy statement on its intention to reduce
its current account surplus; to offer “deeper than formula cuts on products of specific in-
terest to the US and other countries” in the MTN; to enact structural changes in its trade
policy; and to take steps to encourage imports, including the liberalization of selected
quotas. The telegram suggested that it would help “Japan’s image as a liberal trading na-
tion” if Japanese decisions on ways to reduce its current account surplus were “an-
nounced, perhaps in conjunction with Ambassador Strauss’ visit, as part of a set of meas-
ures aimed at implementing Japan’s intent to move into a current account deficit position
and to increase access to Japan’s domestic markets.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D770473–0269)
88.
Message From the President’s Deputy Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Aaron) to President Carter1
WH70679. Subject: Message From Helmut Schmidt.
Attached is an urgent message from Chancellor Schmidt which
seems to have no immediate operational implications. We will continue
to monitor the international monetary situation and if there are any
sudden developments will notify you immediately. We will also pre-
pare an appropriate response to the Chancellor concerning his views
on the timing of the upcoming summit. I will share the relevant por-
tions of this message with Secretaries Blumenthal and Vance.
Federal Republic of Germany
The Federal Chancellor
His Excellency
Mr James Earl Carter,
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 6, Germany, Federal Republic of: Chan-
immediately. Carter, who initialed “C” at the top of the page, was in Plains, Georgia.
(Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
President of the United States of America,
Washington, D.C.
Mr. President,
Dear Jimmy,
The development on the foreign exchange markets during the past
few months fills me with growing concern. From the public statement
you made yesterday, 21 December 1977,2 I take it that you have similar
worries. I therefore hurry to give you directly and without delay my as-
sessment of the situation.
From my discussions with my colleagues in the European Council
I know that they, too, share this concern. In my view, this development
is not just a transitory disturbance but possibly the beginning of a crisis
of considerable dimensions.
If this development continues it may lead to a renewed recession
and grave structural distortions, initially in the countries mainly af-
fected, but ultimately with an adverse effect on the whole world eco-
nomic system. This gives the problem a crucial political significance
over and above its economic repercussions.
As regards the economic problems, I quite appreciate that it will
not be possible for the United States Government to predict an early re-
duction of its current account deficit. A decisive factor in this respect is
your energy programme, which I hope will soon be adopted by the leg-
islative bodies. Otherwise, I see a danger of capital flows from the
OPEC countries slowing down as well, money which, up to now, has
financed part of the US deficit.
As you know, a considerable proportion of the US current account
deficit has been financed not by the reflow of capital to the United
States by the private financial markets but by central banks, principally
in Europe. To support the exchange rate they have bought in 1977 more
than 30 billion dollars and channelled them back to the United States.
Should the central banks stop absorbing these dollars then there would
be a great danger of liquidity in the Asian and European dollar market
being further inflated, which would mean an alarming growth of the
present world-wide inflation potential.
Further pressure on the dollar could, moreover, ruin our joint ef-
forts to exhort the OPEC countries to pursue a moderate price policy
for the sake of the world economy which appear to be successful at the
present time.
The overvaluation of some currencies as a consequence of dollar
undervaluation raises the danger of recessive world economic tend-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
encies regaining the upper hand. This applies to Europe particularly
and is by no means restricted to the Federal Republic. It would foil our
jointly elaborated growth strategy and I fear it might give more
stimulus to protectionist tendencies. In such a process the European
snake3 would also be in danger—with all the risks this entails for the fu-
ture of the European Community. I am deeply convinced that the nec-
essary leading role of the United States and the strength of the Amer-
ican currency are inseparably linked with one another. I am confident,
Jimmy, that you share this view. Our common interest therefore makes
it necessary in public as well we should very seriously plead the cause
of a strong dollar. I therefore welcome what you said on this point yes-
terday. A high rate of employment and reasonable economic growth
are still priority objectives of my government’s economic policy. The
Federal Government has already drawn the necessary consequences
from this and embarked on a considerably more expansive course of
credit and financial policy. The combined deficits of the public budgets
for 1978 have therefore been put at a good 4 per cent of the GNP. We
hope that this policy will also help improve the international balance,
in the way you intend with your energy policy and proposed tax pro-
gramme. In keeping with this, further success on the price front should
continue to be our aim because it is precisely inflationary tendencies
which undermine confidence in the currency.
Secretary Blumenthal has informed me about your proposed eco-
nomic policy measures.4 I welcome them just as much as the fact that in
the meantime further contacts have taken place between our Ministers
of Finance and Central Bank Governors. I have encouraged the German
Central Bank President and Finance Minister Apel to keep on fostering
this fruitful co-operation.
With regard to the date for the next Economic Summit, it seems to
me at the moment, as I explained in my talks with Mr Brzezinski5 and
Secretary Blumenthal, that mid-July would be the best time. I am pre-
public of Germany, France, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg—announced that after
March 16 the values of their currencies would jointly float vis-a`-vis the value of all other
currencies, while remaining relatively fixed vis-a`-vis one another. That is, their cur-
rencies would form a “snake,” whose value in relation to non-snake currencies would be
determined by market forces.
4 Blumenthal met with Schmidt in Bonn on November 2. A memorandum of con-
versation of the meeting is in the National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff,
Records of the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper,
5 Brzezinski met with Schmidt in Bonn on September 27. A memorandum of con-
versation of the meeting is in the Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff,
rope. It is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western
Europe.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
pared to suggest Bonn as the venue. Before July it would hardly be pos-
sible to make a genuine reassessment of economic prospects for 1978/
79 since all governments are currently doing their best to enter 1978
with a vigorously expansive economic and financial policy. July would
also suit the British and French Prime Ministers, with whom I dis-
cussed the matter on their recent visits to Bonn. For the time being it
would perhaps be better not to make our plans for a meeting of heads
of state and government public so that, as on previous occasions, we
shall be able to make our final decision in, say, May in the light of the
preparatory work undertaken by our personal representatives, without
being committed.
Your visit to the Federal Republic, Jimmy, without any connection
with an Economic Summit, would be most welcome to me, the Federal
Government and the citizens of this country, already in the first half of
1978 if this is convenient to you, and I wish to renew herewith my cor-
dial invitation to you which you have, in principle, accepted.
Should you not be in a position to schedule your visit to the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany for the first half of the year, may I suggest
that you perhaps make a two-day visit directly before the next world
Economic Summit?
Finally, I want to tell you how very much I admire the energy with
which, in spite of unavoidable setbacks and delays, you continue to
pursue your policies, not only in the economic sphere. I very much
want to see you succeed because Europe, too, depends upon reliable
and credible American leadership.
With kind regards,
Yours ever,
(sgd.) Helmut Schmidt
89.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, December 23, 1977
[Omitted here is discussion of FRG-Brazilian nuclear develop-
ments and Berlin.]
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Christmas. Cy.” Below his note, Carter wrote “cc Cy. J.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
3. European Protectionism: I am increasingly apprehensive over the
degree to which European governments are succumbing to protec-
tionist pressures. If the trend of recent events continues, there will
shortly be no credibility left in the Downing Street commitment to re-
ject protectionism. This has serious implications internationally as well
as for our ability to meet your domestic economic objectives.
The Europeans have just agreed in the EC Council to a steel pro-
gram2 which, if carried out, will tend to undermine domestic support
for Tony Solomon’s market-oriented approach which you approved.
Our program was intentionally designed to deal with dumping and to
have minimal interference with trade. Our steel industry will see the
EC plan as more restrictive than ours and will press us to imitate.3
Although the EC has agreed to renewal of the Multifiber Agree-
ment, it is doing so only after negotiating highly restrictive bilateral
textile agreements with the LDC exporters. We can fully expect our tex-
tile industry to bring considerable pressure on us to seek equally re-
strictive agreements. The Nordic countries and Canada are already re-
sponding to this kind of domestic pressure.
In the MTN it looks as if the French and the UK will prevent the EC
from meeting the commitment to table by January 15 a substantial tariff
cut offer—on the order of 40 percent. They are also insisting on
freedom of action in taking discretionary import relief actions. This will
brake the substantial progress which was so arduously worked out by
Bob Strauss over the past few months.
These actions reflect a growing pessimism in Europe over gov-
ernments’ ability to deal with the serious economic problems and ad-
justments brought on by the recession. The risk is that this protectionist
mood will now gather steam, threatening to overwhelm our efforts to
stimulate the economy and reduce unemployment. Such a develop-
ment will have profound adverse effects on international political as
well as economic relations. Most importantly, it will greatly reduce
your own political flexibility in dealing with our own economic
difficulties.
program involving import controls, EC-wide price increases and market restraints, and
industrial reorganization. Telegram 19130 from USEC Brussels, December 21, trans-
mitted the EC press release detailing the new steel program. (National Archives, RG 59,
cember 20, discussed the import controls. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
the measures to be taken within the EC. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770476–0394)
3 Carter wrote “We should protest strongly” in the margin adjacent to this
paragraph.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Bob Strauss has done a first-rate job in deflecting protectionist
pressure here and, thereby, keeping your international commitment to
resist protectionism. Unless Europe shows courage and leadership,
these efforts could well prove to have been in vain. I believe that you
will have to bring home the serious implications of their recent actions
to the European leaders you meet on your forthcoming trip.
Since these developments occurred after the preparation of your
briefing papers, I am sending over through Zbig additional points to
add to your briefing materials.4
[Omitted here is discussion of Belize, Ethiopia, Indian nuclear
policy, and Philip Habib.]
4 Not found.
90.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1
Washington, December 27, 1977
SUBJECT
Steel Decisions
Two important steel decisions were not dealt with by the Solomon
Task Force—(1) the question of continuing specialty steel import
quotas and (2) our disposition of a complaint by the steel industry
under section 301 of the Trade Act against the EC/Japanese voluntary
agreement that restricts Japanese steel exports to the EC. Both of these
issues have been reviewed through our interagency process and the at-
tached memoranda present recommendations for your review on the
respective cases. If you accept our recommendations, I would plan to
announce the decisions simultaneously in order to minimize any ad-
verse reactions domestically or internationally. The specialty steel rec-
ommendation would be favorably received domestically but not inter-
nationally. The section 301 case recommendation would generate the
opposite reaction.
“The President has seen,” and Carter wrote at the top of the page: “cc Strauss. JC.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
Attachment
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter2
Washington, December 27, 1977
SUBJECT
Section 301 Complaint by the American Iron and Steel Institute
Background
In October 1976, the American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI) filed a
formal complaint with the Office of the Special Representative for
Trade Negotiations (STR) under section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974.
The complaint alleges that the European Community (EC) and Japan
had entered an agreement on steel that restricted steel exports from
Japan to the EC and resulted in a substantial deflection of Japanese ex-
ports to the United States. In June 1977, the AISI proposed that quanti-
tative restrictions be imposed on U.S. steel imports from both Japan
and the EC as the appropriate remedy for the deflection problem.
Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974 confers a right to petition the
President through the Special Trade Representative for the elimination
of unfair practices of foreign governments that burden U.S. commerce.
Under the authority of this section you may take whatever retaliatory
action (e.g. quotas, tariffs) you think is appropriate to achieve removal
of such unfair practices. In general, there is no internationally accepted
framework for such actions, as there is in the case of “escape clause”
cases like footwear and color television receivers. Thus, retaliation
would most often be contrary to our international commitments, and
could result in counter measures being taken against U.S. trade.
We have reviewed the AISI allegations on the basis of publicly
available data (including briefs filed in this case) and private discus-
sions with representatives of the EC and Japanese Government. Our
findings have been reviewed by the interagency Section 301 Committee
consisting of the Departments of State, Treasury, Commerce, Labor, In-
terior, Agriculture, and Defense.
The length of time taken to prepare recommendations on this case
reflects a fundamental dilemma as to how to cope with both the meas-
urement as well as the remedy for a deflection problem. Despite the
logic of the case we have been unable to clearly establish a causal rela-
tionship between the EC/Japan understanding and the surge in Japa-
2 Limited Official Use.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
nese steel exports to the United States. We communicated our concerns
informally to the AISI last spring and indicated that dumping appeared
to be the industry’s major problem. While the causal relationship could
not be established, we were reluctant to discontinue the case on the
basis of insufficient evidence because that finding would seriously
undermine our continuing criticisms of the EC’s efforts to do similar
deals with other countries and in other product areas and we were not
certain that we would not have to resort to some action under section
301 in the face of the worsening steel situation.
Findings
1. The AISI allegation that an agreement exists between the EC and Japan
to restrict Japanese steel exports to the EC is essentially correct. While there
is no formal or written agreement there is a clear understanding be-
tween the two governments. This understanding was reached origi-
nally in late 1975 during their regular semi-annual steel consultations,
and has been extended regularly in ensuing consultations. It called for
a 5% cutback from 1975 shipments by Japan to the EC. On November
28, 1977 the two governments agreed to extend the restriction through
tons). The restriction is implemented through a Japanese cartel ap-
proved by the government, consisting of the six largest Japanese steel
companies (which account for about 70% of Japanese steel exports).
The small Japanese companies are not directly restricted although the
large companies and the government probably try to influence their
behavior.
2. The AISI allegation that this restriction has caused a substantial deflec-
tion of Japanese steel exports to the U.S. market cannot be substantiated. Japa-
nese steel exports to the United States did increase dramatically in 1976
and have remained at those record high levels in 1977. However, Japa-
nese steel exports to the world have behaved in the same fashion, prin-
cipally reflecting the internal pressures to produce for export because
of large overcapacity in relation to depressed domestic steel demand in
Japan. Further, Japanese steel exports to the United States of the
products covered by the restriction to the EC generally did not increase
more rapidly than U.S. demand for those products. Finally, the Japa-
nese cartel shipped substantially less than the agreed amount to the EC
suggesting the understanding did not have a substantial restrictive ef-
fect. Our conclusion is that if there was any deflection as a result of the
understanding, it was very minor. The surge of Japanese exports to us
was basically the result of dumping and stronger demand conditions
here as compared with other markets.
3. Even if it could be clearly established that the EC-Japanese under-
standing had created substantial deflection to the U.S. market, given the facts
in this particular situation a more appropriate remedy would be antidumping

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
procedures. The Treasury Department has already concluded that there
is sufficient basis to believe there is a pervasive dumping problem in
steel trade to justify implementation of a trigger price system on all
steel imports. It is likely therefore that any trade restriction, such as the
Japanese cartel for exports to the EC, would only increase the likeli-
hood of dumping in other markets. If the dumping is stopped, there
would be little basis for a claim of deflection since one would expect
U.S. imports to increase from more competitive producing countries,
whether or not other markets are restricted.
Recommendations
I recommend that STR announce discontinuance of its review of the AISI
section 301 complaint on the grounds that the Treasury Department’s
trigger price system to deter dumping will eliminate any unfair burden
on the U.S. steel industry which may be resulting from the EC-Japanese
understanding.3 I would indicate that while we were able to determine
that such an understanding exists, we were unable to measure its im-
pact. We had kept the case under review, however, because significant
diversion would have posed a threat in the deteriorating domestic steel
situation. As it became clear that widespread dumping was the central
trade problem, we turned to antidumping remedies. With the trigger
price system, we believe that any unfair burden in U.S. trade due to the
EC-Japanese understanding will be remedied. I would announce fur-
ther that we continue to believe that such informal arrangements are
not in the interests of the world trading system and should be brought
under better international discipline.
The Departments of State, Treasury, Commerce, Agriculture, Inte-
rior, Labor, and the Council of Economic Advisers concur in the above
recommendation. Eizenstat and NSC also concur.
There may be some adverse reaction from the domestic steel in-
dustry and the Congress to discontinuing this case, however, it may be
riskier not to dispose of it. There are already legislative proposals to put
statutory deadlines on our handling of section 301 cases, which would
limit our flexibility to achieve solutions in these cases, because they
usually involve extended negotiations. The adverse domestic reaction
should be ameliorated by the implementation of the trigger price
system by Treasury.
The EC and Japan would, of course, welcome dropping the case. It
is regrettable that we have no better international rules available to us
to cover the arrangement in which they have participated. We are
working on a safeguard code in the Multilateral Trade Negotiations
3 A typed notation in the margin adjacent to this sentence reads: “See Tab A.” See
footnotes 15 and 16 below.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
which may bring greater discipline to the use of such voluntary export
restraints.
RECOMMENDATION: Discontinuance of section 301 case com-
plaining of adverse impact of EC-Japanese steel restraint agreement.
Approve4
Disapprove
Please discuss with me
Other
Attachment
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter5
Washington, December 27, 1977
SUBJECT
Review of Specialty Steel Import Relief Program
Background
In May 1977, you decided to review the existing specialty steel im-
port relief program and to initiate the procedures required by law prior
to reducing or terminating import relief.6 On your behalf, I requested
that the U.S. International Trade Commission (USITC) and the Secre-
taries of Commerce and Labor provide you with advice on reduction or
termination of import relief. The statute requires that you have this ad-
vice before making a decision to modify the quotas, but the advice is
not binding. Also, your decision to review the quotas does not commit
you to modifying them.
The USITC reported to you in October the results of its study of the
probable economic effect on the domestic specialty steel industry of re-
ducing or terminating import relief.7 Two of the four USITC Commis-
sioners who voted on this issue advised against reduction or termina-
tion of relief. A third Commissioner advised that termination of relief
4 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation and initialed “JC.”
5 Limited Official Use.
6 See Document 29.
7 The USITC decision on the specialty steel case was announced on October 11.
(Brendan Jones, “U.S. to Push Trade Talks And Attempt to Aid Steel,” The New York

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
would not have a substantial adverse impact on the domestic specialty
steel industry. The remaining Commissioner advised that moderate
(6.7%) increases in the second and third year quotas for each product
category would not have a serious adverse economic effect.8
In December, the Secretaries of Commerce and Labor reported to
you their advice regarding reduction or termination of relief.9 The Sec-
retary of Labor determined that such action would have a deleterious
effect on domestic specialty steel employment, and thus advised that
no change be made in the status of import relief. The Secretary of Com-
merce also recommended that the existing import restraints not be ter-
minated or modified at this time, stating that such action would have a
detrimental effect on the domestic industry.10
The picture that emerges of the recovery of the domestic industry
from the 1975 recession is mixed, with some segments showing sub-
stantial improvement and others remaining depressed. Employment
increases have generally lagged behind gains in shipments and pro-
duction. Price performance has also been mixed with some products
showing no downward flexibility while others have moved up and
down in line with demand conditions. Profits have improved but re-
main low relative to earlier peaks and the overall manufacturing av-
erage. There have been substantial increases in investment by the in-
dustry since the quotas were put into effect.
While there has been considerable grumbling by other countries
about the quotas, there is little expectation that the quotas will be elimi-
nated in view of the overall domestic U.S. steel problem. At the mo-
ment, the major concern abroad is with the trigger price system for
carbon steel (specialty steel will not be covered).
There is no provision for a Congressional override of your decision
on this issue. However, there has been considerable Congressional in-
terest in this case, especially from representatives of steel-producing
states such as Pennsylvania, Ohio, New York, and Maryland. At least
100 members of the Congress have written you or me on this issue and
they almost unanimously support no modification of the quotas. In ad-
dition, there have been submitted to us petitions signed by over 100,000
Pennsylvanians as well as petitions and resolutions from numerous
other communities urging no change in the quotas.
paragraph.
9 These reports were not found.
10 Carter wrote “Labor Keep, Com[merce Keep]” in the margin adjacent to this
paragraph.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Recommendations
The interagency Trade Policy Staff Committee (TPSC) has re-
viewed the USITC, Commerce, and Labor advice regarding reduction
or termination of relief. The TPSC (acting on behalf of the Cabinet-level
Trade Policy Committee) has a statutory responsibility to make recom-
mendations to you on import relief actions. Set forth below for your de-
cision are the options recommended by one or more TPSC agencies.
No TPSC agency recommended that you terminate specialty steel
import relief. All TPSC agencies recommend that you remove chipper
knife and RM 81 (band saw) steel from coverage under the alloy tool
steel quotas. These two minor products are available only in limited
quantities from American manufacturers, and shortages are currently
endangering the operations of domestic firms which consume these
materials. The domestic specialty steel industry supports exclusion of
chipper knife steel and only two firms might oppose exclusion of band
saw steel. Sweden has expressed particular interest in the exclusion of
chipper knife steel from the quotas.
All TPSC agencies further recommend that, to compensate for the
removal of chipper knife and band saw steel from quota coverage, the
Swedish and EC third year quotas be reduced. We would consult with
the EC and Sweden before making such an adjustment. This adjust-
ment would be small in relation to the total specialty steel quotas due to
the small import volume of these two products in the base period but
would reduce adverse domestic reaction to the exclusions.
Option I: The TPSC recommends the following action:11
Retain the specialty steel quotas for all product categories at their
current levels.
I support this recommendation along with the Departments of
Treasury, Commerce, Labor, Interior, Defense, and Agriculture. Eizen-
stat concurs.
The TPSC recommends no increases in quotas for the following
reasons: (1) domestic specialty steel employment conditions have not
fully recovered from depressed 1975 levels; (2) most of the domestic in-
dustry economic recovery has occurred during the first half of 1977 and
this recovery was not sustained in the third quarter of 1977; (3) produc-
tion levels in the third quarter of 1977 were the lowest since 1975 and
11 A typed notation in the margin adjacent to this sentence reads: “See Tab B.” See
footnotes 15 and 16 below.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
unused capacity ranged from one-fourth to three-fifths of total capa-
bility depending on the segment of the industry; (4) increased imports
resulting from modifying the quotas could significantly reduce the
profitability of domestic firms, many of whom are making efforts to ad-
just to import competition; (5) we would get little credit internationally
for modest quota increases and the anti-inflation benefits would be lim-
ited; (6) the reactions of the industry, union, and the Congress to even
small quota increases would be highly critical. The domestic reaction
could well lead to efforts to legislate limits on the President’s ability to
modify import relief, and (7) a decision against reduction or termina-
tion of relief would not endanger the positive climate on steel created
by the Solomon program in the Congress, domestic steel firms, the steel
workers union and steel communities.12
Option II: The Department of State and the Council of Economic
Advisers recommend the following action: as do OMB and NSC:13
Increase the second year quotas for stainless sheet and strip, bar,
and rod by seven percent. Increase the third year quotas for these three
products by an additional ten percent (which includes the three percent
growth factor already contained in the current third year quota levels).
Leave the quota for stainless steel plate at its current levels.
Agencies favoring Option II recommendations argue that these
moderate quota increases (1) are warranted due to the recovery in the
domestic industry that has occurred since the imposition of the quotas;
(2) would demonstrate our concern about inflationary impact of do-
mestic specialty steel pricing developments; and (3) would generate
some favorable international reaction by demonstrating our will-
ingness to relax restrictions as economic conditions improve.14
For your information, I am attaching a copy of the analytical paper
upon which the TPSC based its recommendations (Tab A). I am also at-
taching copies of the USITC, Commerce, and Labor advice regarding
reduction or termination of import relief (Tabs B, C, and D).15
Once you have reached a decision, I will prepare the necessary
papers to announce and implement your decision.
12 Carter indicated his approval of this option and wrote: “Why not remove quotas
on chipper knife & band saw steel? JC.”
13 A typed notation in the margin adjacent to this sentence reads: “See Tab B.”
14 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this option.
15 An unknown person struck through the word “attaching” both times it appears
in this paragraph. Tabs A–D are not attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Tab A
Paper16
Washington, undated
TAB A—Section 301 Complaint
The Treasury Department supports discontinuance of the steel in-
dustry’s complaint against the EC/Japanese agreement, but objects to
Strauss’ statement that the Administration’s new trigger price system
“will eliminate any unfair burden on the U.S. steel industry.”17
STR and Treasury have since worked out mutually acceptable lan-
guage for announcing this decision, according to Stu.18
Tab B
Paper19
Washington, undated
TAB B—Specialty Steel Quotas
Option I:
Eizenstat concurs with Strauss et al, and cites this additional
argument:
• liberalization of the quotas would again subject the Administra-
tion to charges of inconsistency in our economic actions—on the one
hand, we develop a trigger price system to protect the domestic steel in-
dustry from foreign competition in basic steel, and on the other, we re-
16 No classification marking.
17 In a December 28 memorandum to Carter, Solomon explained Treasury’s opposi-
tion to this statement: “We have found no such burden resulting from the agreement.
Rather, our recommendation that this review be discontinued is based on the fact that the
U.S. steel industry has been unable to substantiate its allegation that the EC/Japanese
agreement has caused substantial deflection of Japanese steel to the U.S. market. This was
agreed at the staff level and conveyed to the steel industry last spring, well before the
trigger price system had been developed. I therefore recommend that, in discontinuing
this review, STR simply explain that investigation has shown the industry’s allegation of
injury to be unfounded. I recommend against making any connection between discon-
tinuance and the Administration’s new trigger price system.” (Carter Library, Anthony
18 Carter wrote “ok. J” below this paragraph.
19 No classification marking.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
duce the amount of protection the steel industry has against foreign
competition in specialty steel.
Eizenstat recommends, in addition, that you instruct Ambassador
Strauss to reflect our concern about inflationary price increases either
in his formal announcement of this decision or in private communica-
tions with specialty steel manufacturers.20 We should let the industry
know that we expect its continuing economic recovery to be based on
the expansion of production—and not just inflationary price increases.
Option II:
OMB and NSC concur with State and CEA.
• OMB: “the recommended relaxation would be a positive indica-
tion to domestic and foreign observers alike that the Administration is
serious about eliminating unfair imports and minimizing restrictions
on imports entering fairly.”
• NSC: According to ITC Commissioner Minchew, a moderate in-
crease in quotas would not have an adverse impact on the domestic in-
dustry, and would show our trading partners that the US is prepared to
reduce import relief when economic conditions improve. Firms pro-
ducing stainless steel sheet and strip, bars and rods have substantially
recovered from the 1975 recession.
20 Carter drew an arrow to this sentence and wrote “ok. J.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
91.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, December 28, 1977
SUBJECT
Year-End Review
Last summer I sent you my views about the Administration’s first
six months’ foreign policy.2 Here are some thoughts about the first
year, and also about the lessons to be drawn for the year ahead. I have
concentrated on the area I know best: Economics may not be the most
glamorous aspect of foreign policy, but few things so directly affect the
average man and woman.
1. Overall Economic Policy
(a) Domestic Targets. The London Summit marked an advance in
fixing domestic growth and stabilization policies internationally. Ger-
many and Japan failed to achieve their 1977 Summit targets, but there
would have been less growth in both countries in the absence of
Summit commitments and of post-Summit consultations. The Summit
agreement also strengthened the ability of the French, British and
Italian governments to hold to needed and painful stabilization pol-
icies. We should build on this good start in 1978: keeping the pressure
on Germany and Japan to follow expansionist policies, and focusing
1978 Summit growth commitments on 1979—which is far enough in
the future for Summit-induced policies to take greater effect.
(b) Balance of Payments. The Japanese did not fulfill their Summit
commitment to bring their external accounts into better balance, but re-
cent U.S.-Japanese consultations foreshadow some progress on this
point. Meanwhile, you are on the right track in trying to reduce the U.S.
deficit by pressing Germany and Japan to follow more expansionist
policies, by urging Japan to open up its import markets, and by seeking
a more effective U.S. energy policy—instead of treating the symptoms
by raising interest rates or intervening in money markets (except to
counter disorder).
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 121, Trade: 1977. Confidential. Sent for action. Carter
wrote at the top of the page: “Good memo. J.” Brzezinski also initialed and wrote:
“Concur.”
2 Owen sent Carter an August 26 memorandum entitled “Foreign Policy: The First
Six Months.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
(c) U.S. Our ability to press other governments to follow sensible
economic policies will depend partly on how well we do at home our-
selves. As you know, I feel that a plausible and effective anti-
inflationary program in 1978 will be the key to sustained growth. I also
believe that such a program is most likely to come about if it is placed in
the hands of a politically savvy person who does nothing else but
manage and negotiate its implementation with the interest groups con-
cerned—like Bob Strauss in the trade field. This would have the added
advantage of dramatizing your interest, at home and abroad.
2. International Indebtedness
The new IMF Witteveen facility foreshadowed at the Summit is
being established, to help countries meet external deficits while they
work out long-term domestic adjustments. The task in 1978 will be to
get this agreement through the Congress without crippling changes.
3. Trade
At the start of 1977, few people expected trade negotiations to have
progressed as far as they have. A lot of the credit goes to Bob Strauss; he
is the first to say that the Summit commitments you persuaded your
London colleagues to accept and your post-Summit support were es-
sential to his success. There are large obstacles ahead: We will have to
keep the heat on foreign governments (especially France) to ensure that
we get not only deep tariff cuts but also extensive non-tariff agreements
in time to go to the Hill in early 1979 with a sufficiently balanced and
comprehensive agreement to head-off protectionism. This issue will
come to a head at the 1978 Summit, when the trade negotiations will be
reaching their climax.
4. Energy
Your decision to make energy the centerpiece of your policy in
1977 was a wise and necessary one which should pay off over the
longer term.
(a) Conventional Energy. The recent OPEC oil price freeze that you
helped to secure3 gives us more time to seek the increased energy pro-
duction and reduced energy consumption agreed at the Summit. If the
heads of government whom you visit on your forthcoming trip4 can be
persuaded to speak publicly about the need for an effective U.S. energy
program, this may help to give your energy proposals a push when you
return to the U.S. U.S. action would set the stage for pressing other
4 Carter visited Poland, Iran, India, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, France, and Belgium

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
countries also to do more; an interagency group is being set up to con-
sider whether new proposals for international cooperation to increase
energy output can be developed, which you might advance at the 1978
Summit.
(b) Nuclear. The International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation Pro-
gram which you persuaded the Summit to launch is making good
progress. But it will only head-off proliferation if it leads to agreement
on some way of internationalizing the nuclear fuel cycle that will offer
importing countries an alternative to reliance on dangerous nuclear
technologies. The U.S. will have to take the lead if such an initiative is to
be developed. You will have to keep pressing if the U.S. Government is
to develop such a proposal in 1978 instead of focusing on more
short-term and less difficult goals.
5. North-South Relations
Aid levels set or foreshadowed in 1977 are going up, in fulfillment
of Summit commitments. You have also fixed the right priorities for
1978: fulfilling our pledges to the IFIs, and reforming the bilateral U.S.
aid program, in preparation for a substantial expansion of that pro-
gram in 1979. These goals will only be achieved if we can learn how to
consult more effectively with the Congress on the IFIs, and if we can get
the executive branch to agree on proposals for major reforms in the
present bilateral aid program. Your leadership will be essential on both
points if there is to be progress.
6. U.S.-European-Japanese-Relations
You put more emphasis on the U.S.-European-Japanese relation-
ship in 1977 than any U.S. President in recent years. We made good
progress in strengthening NATO and promoting economic cooperation
among industrial countries.
Nonetheless, serious problems persist in U.S. relations with both
Europe and Japan. It will be important in 1978 to address not only these
specific issues, but also the ways in which they interact to affect the
U.S.-European-Japanese relationship as a whole. It would be useful to
do this at the next Summit. To the same end, it would be useful to invite
the President of the European Community (a position that rotates every
six months among European heads of government) and the President
of the European Commission (Jenkins) to come to Washington twice a
year for a broad review of U.S.-European relations. This would not take
up more of your time, since each of these leaders is likely to come to
Washington anyway; it would show your interest in European unity, as
well as in U.S.-European relations.
7. Conclusion
In your first year you have set the right goals and priorities, ad-
dressing underlying problems that were long neglected. In the year

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
ahead, the need will be for follow-through. This will require not only
persistence but innovation, which comes hard to most governments, in-
cluding our own. Without your continuing leadership in most of the
areas mentioned in this memo, it won’t happen.5
5 On December 21, Lake sent to Vance a paper prepared by the Policy Planning Staff
entitled “Foreign Economic Policy: The Last Year and the Next,” which offered the De-
partment of State’s take on the Carter administration’s foreign economic policy achieve-
ments and challenges. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Executive Secretariat, Offi-
92.
Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of
State1
19974. Pass STR electronically. Subject: US-Japan Economic Talks.
1. Summary: Latest Japanese response appears meet basic U.S.
concerns. With some possible final polishing, it should provide good
basis for a successful Strauss visit in January and the closing out of cur-
rent phase of what in any case must be a continuing process of close
U.S.–Japan consultation. End summary.
2. GOJ package transmitted with reftel goes far to meeting U.S.
concerns expressed over recent months. We have reviewed key points
and offer following comments on them in the order followed by GOJ
paper transmitted in reftel. Agriculture quota measures are covered in
septels.3
Confidential; Immediate; Exdis.
U.S. agricultural trade requests. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
cultural quota measures. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
3. BOP statement covers both current account and growth policy.
Statement on growth has all the elements we suggested and seems
satisfactory.
4. We pointed out to Ushiba that statement in paper on achieving
current account deficit did not appear to be as forthcoming as U.S.
paper of Dec. 20 had envisioned. Ushiba did not make direct reply but
Motono, who was not present at meeting, called EC Min at midnight to
assure us that GOJ statement represented maximum possible at this
stage and had been hard won over hesitations of many in GOJ. Motono
raised possibility that Amb. Strauss would be free to put more favor-
able cast on GOJ undertaking in public statements he might make fol-
lowing visit here.
5. Much of para. 1 of Japanese statement, read carefully, is close to
our desiderata. It recognizes that accumulation of large surplus is not
appropriate and that Japan’s persistent surplus is undesirable. It later
spells out what looks to us like a reasonable current account projection
for 1978 and 1979 insofar as results are susceptible to policy manage-
ment. Given GOJ’s by now understandable reluctance to have its pro-
jections portrayed as commitments, it will be hard to get language that
smacks more of a policy commitment to reach a deficit. However, sen-
tence, that reads “If current account deficit occurs in such a proc-
ess, GOJ is prepared to accept it,” is particularly unfelicitous. We
would hope a Washington wordsmith could find a more satisfactory
formulation.
6. Regarding tariffs and MTN, when we asked Ushiba about pos-
sible use of words “deeper than formula cuts,”4 he referred to last sen-
tence in para. 3 which he said is responsive to U.S. concerns. We believe
Japanese bureaucracy is also still working along lines discussed with
Lande and that some further private statement may be forthcoming.
7. Para. 5 of Japanese paper on import financing can be described
as indication of positive Japanese reaction to world situation. Since we
are not aware of any complaints that exports to Japan are being ham-
pered by shortage of credit, there is not much we can ask.
8. Government procurement statement is probably also as much as
we can expect. Announcement of JNR award to IBM with substantial
U.S. input is hopeful sign that Cabinet decision will produce tangible
results.
9. Export credit paragraph does not say much but can be described
as helpful recognition of Japan’s need to slow rate of increase in export
credits.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
10. On non-tariff measures, paper says the right things about re-
cent positive actions, renews pledge to make Trade Facilitation Com-
mittee work5 and to cooperate on code in MTNs.
11. On logs and lumber, GOJ has picked up our suggestion of spe-
cial study group.
12. On aid, reply sounds generally responsive within constraints of
the possible.
13. Conclusion takes the healthy up-beat tone we should en-
courage, sets proper tone for a Strauss visit and looks to continuation of
essential close consultations.
14. We think time has arrived to close off this set of discussions, to
schedule Strauss visit and start work on the papers needed for it. De-
spite Japanese holidays, there is time for a few clarifications.
15. We have thought we should plan a joint statement to be issued
probably by Strauss and Ushiba at conclusion Strauss visit plus an up-
beat airport departure statement. In addition we should collaborate on
an agreed classified check list that recapitulates various Japanese un-
dertakings over recent months. In all this we should recognize that we
have some flexibility about saying somewhat more at home than we or
the Japanese can in Japan. Further, Japanese officials and Amb. Strauss
can exchange unpublicized assurances on other items.6
Mansfield
5 In mid-September 1977, U.S. and Japanese officials agreed to form “a joint
Japanese-US group to examine ways of facilitating trade.” (Telegram 223396 to Tokyo,
1128) Kreps and Japanese Minister of International Trade and Industry Tatsuo Tanaka
formally agreed to the establishment of the Trade Facilitation Committee during a Sep-
tember 27 meeting in Tokyo, at which Tanaka “welcomed establishment of Trade Facili-
tation Committee both to find ways to increase U.S. sales and to ‘wipe away’ image of
“Secretary Kreps Warns Japanese Trade Imbalance Is Unacceptable,” The New York Times,
latest Japanese proposals, suggesting that “while a number of individual aspects of
package require clarification to be considered adequate, we believe that these responses
can serve as the basis for concluding the current round of US–Japan consultations.” Wolff
was to lead a small negotiating team to Tokyo in the second week of January to work on
the remaining areas of disagreement, to be followed by Strauss a few days later. (National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
93.
Letter From President Carter to West German Chancellor
Schmidt1
Washington, December 30, 1977
Dear Helmut:
I am grateful for your letter of December 22 and your expressions
of support.2
I wholly share your view about the importance of a strong dollar.
Like you, I was concerned in recent weeks about the possibility that
disorder in the foreign exchange markets affecting the dollar, the
deutschmark, and the yen might reach proportions that would ad-
versely affect the world economy. These concerns led to my statement
of December 21.3 It was designed to assure the world that the United
States is deeply concerned about the value of the dollar, and is pre-
pared to counter disorderly conditions that may appear in exchange
markets.
I hope that my statement has eliminated any misconception about
U.S. policy. Minister Apel’s supporting comments were most wel-
come.4 The success of our diplomatic effort to dissuade OPEC from in-
creasing the price of oil has also been helpful. But the primary tasks for
the United States are still ahead.
We must obtain legislation that will reduce our excessive depend-
ence on imported oil. I will do all I can to persuade the Congress to take
necessary action as soon as possible; I am confident the Congress will
respond.
The United States will meet the growth targets for 1977 that I
stated at our meeting in London. The tax reductions and other eco-
nomic policies that I will propose in my messages to the Congress in
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 6, Germany, Federal Republic of: Chan-
letter to Schmidt for his signature under cover of a December 28 memorandum in which
he noted that the letter had been cleared with the Departments of State and Treasury.
Owen commented: “This is a long reply, but the subject is important and complicated,
and it is one in which the Chancellor has a deep interest. This reply is about the same
length as the Chancellor’s incoming letter.” (Ibid.) The letter was sent for delivery in tele-
Policy File, P840072–1258)
2 See Document 88.
4 An article in the December 23 edition of The New York Times noted that Apel, “who
has warned that the dollar’s recent slump could damage Europe’s economic recovery
from the recession welcomed Mr. Carter’s new assurances about the dollar.” (Paul Lewis,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
January should assure continuing healthy, non-inflationary U.S.
growth through 1978 and into 1979. While slower domestic growth
would no doubt reduce our trade deficit, I doubt that it would
strengthen the dollar on the foreign exchange markets; investors will
have more confidence in a dynamic rather than a stagnant United
States. Moreover, an expanding U.S. economy is necessary if we are to
overcome the twin dangers of trade protectionism in industrial coun-
tries and lagging growth in developing countries.
It is important that vigorous U.S. growth be matched by expansion
in the other strong industrial economies, as we agreed at London, if the
U.S. deficit is to be reduced.
I have been encouraged by the growth targets that Prime Minister
Fukuda has set for Japan in 1978 and his commitment to reduce the Jap-
anese current account surplus. He has recognized the need to put aside
traditional limitations on Japanese Government borrowing to finance a
budgetary deficit, and has substantially increased the degree of gov-
ernmental stimulus. Whether these actions will be sufficient to enable
Japan to realize its goals remains to be seen, but the direction is cer-
tainly right.
I welcome your statement that a high rate of employment and rea-
sonable economic growth are priority objectives of German policy, and
am glad that you have adopted a more expansive credit and financial
policy. If it appears that these measures will not have the desired result,
in terms of domestic growth or international balance, I trust that you
will be prepared to consider whether further stimulus measures by the
Federal Republic would be helpful. Higher German growth is needed
to reduce the problems we face in foreign exchange markets, while con-
tributing to the economic well-being of the entire industrial world.
If the United States can adopt a strong energy program, if Japan
can achieve its announced growth targets, and if the Federal Republic
can fulfill its growth potential, I am confident that the U.S. current ac-
count deficit will decline and that disorder in the foreign exchange
markets will subside. We must, as you point out, be continually alert to
the danger of inflation, which could undermine all this good work.
A successful conclusion of the MTN and refraining by European
Community nations from protectionist actions will also be of great help
in assuring a stable economic system. I will be discussing this with
President Giscard d’Estaing next week.5
I share your views about the importance of continued close inter-
national cooperation and consultations on these issues. The periodic

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
meetings of our Finance Ministers, both bilaterally and in small groups,
have been helpful. It is good that we are able to communicate with one
another directly, both by letter and by periodic visits.
Mid-July sounds fine to me for a Bonn Summit. I agree that this
date should not be made public until preparatory work by our personal
representatives has progressed further. I am glad to hear from Henry
Owen that Dieter Hiss will call a meeting of these representatives in
Bonn sometime early next year, to start work on the Summit agenda. I
hope that we can find a place on that agenda for a broad review of the
European-Japanese-American relationship, in addition to addressing
the specific problems that our countries confront. The fact that we have
six months in which to prepare for the Summit should give our repre-
sentatives time to search out imaginative approaches to these
problems, as you suggested to Mike Blumenthal when he was last in
Bonn.
It was good of you to renew your invitation to visit Germany. If the
Summit is in July, I would be glad to come two days ahead of that
meeting for the visit. I look forward very much to continuing and ex-
tending our association.
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
94.
Editorial Note
In December 1977, Under Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary
Affairs Anthony Solomon proposed to West German officials that the
U.S. Treasury and Bundesbank conclude a 1-year $1-billion swap ar-
rangement. In an undated message to the President’s Assistant for Na-
tional Security Affairs, Zbigniew Brzezinski, Solomon argued that the
“arrangement will back up President’s statement on balance of pay-
ments and exchange rates, and explicit Treasury involvement will indi-
cate this is a full U.S. Government effort and not just Federal Reserve
activity.” Secretary of the Treasury W. Michael Blumenthal, the Federal
Reserve Board, and Brzezinski all concurred in this initiative. (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 5,
On January 3, 1978, Blumenthal sent a message to President Jimmy
Carter, who was abroad on a 9-day multinational trip, of the “very dis-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
orderly” conditions of that day’s exchange markets, noting that “the
dollar has depreciated sharply against the other major currencies fol-
lowing several days of persistent decline.” Asserting that “exchange
rate movements of these magnitudes are a cause of considerable con-
cern, and I am quite worried about them,” Blumenthal reported that
the Bundesbank had agreed to the swap arrangement with the U.S.
Treasury, which would be announced no earlier than the morning of
January 5 at the request of the West Germans. Blumerthal also assured
Carter that his “economic advisors are consulting on the situation and
options,” promising him “a further report and recommendations
within 24 to 48 hours.” Carter initialed Blumenthal’s message. (Mes-
sage WH80047 from Blumenthal to Carter, January 4; Carter Library,
Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential File, Box 66,
On January 4, the U.S. Treasury and Federal Reserve Board an-
nounced a series of measures to shore up the value of the dollar, in-
cluding the new swap arrangement with West Germany. (Clyde H.
Farnsworth, “U.S. Will Intervene to Protect Dollar; Currency Re-
day, in remarks in Paris before the Palais des Congre`s on the challenges
facing the world’s democracies, Carter spoke about the global economy
and asserted, among other things, that “America’s efforts will be di-
rected toward maintaining the strength of the dollar, continuing steady
progress against unemployment and inflation, and stimulating private
investment.” (Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy
On January 5, Blumenthal sent a message to Carter (who was still
in France) in which he noted “that the sharp decline of the dollar has at
least temporarily been reversed. Your statements in Europe and activa-
tion of the swap line have worked as well or better than we could have
expected. Nevertheless, I continue to be very concerned about the situ-
ation of the dollar. There is absolutely no assurance that another major
assault on the dollar could not take place at any time. Our resources
could be rapidly depleted. We are surveying other steps which could
be taken. None are very attractive and all have high domestic political
costs impinging on your other priority programs.” Asserting that “one
reason for the recent problems has been the deadlock over the energy
program,” Blumenthal urged Carter, upon his return to the United
States, to use the issue of the dollar’s weakness “to create a sense of ur-
gency in the Congress and the country in support of early passage of
your energy legislation” and suggested several concrete actions Carter
could take to this end. On a cover sheet attached to Blumenthal’s mes-
sage, Carter noted his agreement. (Message from Blumenthal to Carter,
January 5; Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
On January 13, in a memorandum to Blumenthal and the
Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, Charles Schultze,
Carter noted that he wanted “to be informed and involved in the prepa-
ration of plans to deal with the dollar problem should further diffi-
culties arise” and requested “a joint memorandum which identifies the
options open to us in meeting contingencies that might occur during
the period ahead,” to be submitted by January 18. In particular, Carter
requested information on foreign currency-denominated securities is-
sued by the U.S. Treasury, an idea suggested to him by the Chairman of
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Arthur Burns;
further means of curtailing oil imports, if necessary; and “other options
you think we ought to consider.” Carter promised to meet with Blu-
menthal and Schultze to discuss their memorandum once he had re-
viewed it, proposing that they “also discuss what our basic objectives
ought to be, under various circumstances.” (Carter Library, Anthony
95.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic
Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) and Robert Ginsburg of the
Domestic Policy Staff to President Carter1
Washington, January 9, 1978
SUBJECT
Strauss Memorandum on Steel Decisions
Section 301 Complaint
We agree with the unanimous recommendation of Ambassador
Strauss and the interagency committee that the STR discontinue its re-
view of the steel industry’s Section 301 complaint.2
The essence of the complaint is that the EC/Japanese voluntary re-
straint agreement on steel has caused the diversion of a substantial
amount of Japanese steel exports from the EC to the U.S. However, the
interagency committee has not found a causal relationship between that
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files,
Box 283, Steel (O/A 6237). No classification marking. Ginsburg did not initial the
memorandum.
2 See Document 90.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
agreement and the sharp increase in Japanese steel exports to the U.S.
in 1976–1977—that increase seems to have been more the result of
dumping and stronger demand for steel in the U.S. than elsewhere.
In his memorandum to you, Tony Solomon concurs with Ambas-
sador Strauss’ recommendation for discontinuance but disagrees with
the proposed rationale, i.e., that the trigger price system can handle any
unfair burden resulting from the EC/Japanese agreement.3 We under-
stand that Treasury and STR have since worked out mutually accept-
able language (which we will review) for announcing this decision—so
there is no longer any disagreement.4
Specialty Steel Quotas
We also agree with Ambassador Strauss’ recommendation that the
specialty steel quotas be retained at their current levels (Option I).
In addition to the reasons given by Ambassador Strauss (the do-
mestic industry has not recovered fully, the political cost would far out-
weigh any benefit, etc.), we are concerned that liberalization of the
quotas would again subject the Administration (unfairly) to charges of
inconsistency in our economic actions—on the one hand, we develop a
trigger price system to protect the domestic steel industry from foreign
competition in basic steel and on the other hand, we reduce the amount
of protection the steel industry has against foreign competition in spe-
cialty steel.
We also agree with the unanimous interagency recommendation
to remove two minor products available only in limited quantities from
American manufacturers—chipper knife steel and RM81 band saw
steel—from coverage under the quotas.
However, we do think it would be worthwhile to let the specialty
steel industry know that we expect its continuing economic recovery to
be based on the expansion of production and not just inflationary price
increases. A substantial part of the industry’s present recovery is due to
price increases. While this should be no surprise under a quota system,
it is not inevitable and we do not have to give the impression that we
are indifferent to the industry’s aggressive pricing practices. Accord-
ingly, we recommend that you instruct Ambassador Strauss to reflect
our concern about inflationary price increases either in his formal an-
note 17, Document 90.
4 The White House announced the dismissal of the Section 301 complaint on Jan-
p. D3)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
nouncement of this decision or in private communications with the
specialty steel manufacturers.5
5 The White House announced the retention of the specialty steel quotas on January
p. D3)
96.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, January 18, 1978
SUBJECT
Tokyo Round
The United States and other countries participating in the multi-
lateral trade negotiations are scheduled to table their detailed tariff-
cutting offers in Geneva this Friday.2 Bob Strauss’ status report is
attached.
The working hypothesis of the tariff negotiations is that each
country will make offers to cut its tariffs an average of 40%, with high
tariffs to be cut proportionately more than the low tariffs. The US offer
about to be tabled would reduce tariffs on the average by about 45 per-
cent. If the other countries were to match our offers, the negotiations
would result in deeper cuts than the Kennedy Round (35 percent). This
is not likely to be the case, for reasons indicated below:
The Council of the European Community agreed yesterday to in-
dicate that the EC would be prepared to begin negotiations on the basis
of an average tariff reduction of 38 percent. But the Council qualified
this statement by making an entry in the Council minutes indicating
that the reduction of the EC external tariff should be between 25 and 35
percent.3 This means that the EC, prodded by the French, will be
looking for excuses to back off from its initial offer.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
the page: “ok. J.”
2 January 20.
Council decisions on the multilateral trade negotiations. (National Archives, RG 59, Cen-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
The US offer will provide opportunities for the EC to do this.4 Be-
cause of political sensitivities in this country, about 8 percent of US
total dutiable imports of non-agricultural and non-petroleum products
will be excepted from the initial US offer, and another 5 percent will be
subject to less than 40 percent tariff cuts. These exceptions will be
mainly apparel, leather, electronic, and other light manufactured
products. Some of these products are of interest to EC member states.
Thus France and others will be able to insist that the EC respond to
these US exceptions by pulling back on some items of interest to the
United States. This will probably mean that the tariff-cutting results of
the Tokyo Round will be less far reaching than realized in the Kennedy
Round.
Developing countries will argue that the US offer fails to give them
the special and differential treatment agreed on in the Tokyo Declara-
tion. They will also point out that the US offer would result in an av-
erage cut of about 33 percent on products of primary interest to them,
substantially less than the offer we are making on products of interest
to the industrialized countries.
In reply, US negotiators will cite the limited reciprocity offered by
the developing countries and stress that our tariff-cutting offer on items
of interest to the LDS,5 other than textiles and light manufactures, will
range from 46 to 77 percent. Nonetheless, we can expect the LDCs to
take every opportunity to put pressure on us to be more forthcoming.
I see no practical alternative to going ahead on the current basis.
Even if we had enough time to improve our offer marginally, and even
if this could be done without unacceptable domestic political risk, the
overall configuration would not be altered materially. Thus I conclude
that the US offer, as it now stands, should be tabled in Geneva this
Friday.
4 Dodson noted in a January 11 memorandum to Hutcheson that “State, Treasury,
and CEA are suspicious of the EC’s intentions and are concerned that the U.S. not table an
offer that will make it easy for the EC to pull back from its agreement in principle to table
an average tariff cut of 40 percent.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 89, Economics/International:
5 Carter underlined the abbreviation “LDS.” “LDS” appears to be a typographical
error and should read “LDCs.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Attachment
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter6
Washington, January 9, 1978
SUBJECT
U.S. Offers in the Multilateral Trade Negotiations
This is a brief report on the status of the multilateral trade negotia-
tions (MTN) in Geneva, particularly with respect to the tabling of U.S.
and other countries’ offers in mid-January, which will mark the begin-
ning of the negotiating stage. You will recall that last summer we
agreed with the European Economic Community (EC) to a timetable
for getting the negotiations under way.7 This timetable required that
offers on tariff and nontariff measures would be tabled during the
week of January 15, 1978. The tabling of such offers would set the stage
for the months of hard bargaining that will be necessary to conclude an
agreement.
The countries participating in the MTN have agreed that offers on
agricultural tariffs and nontariff measures would be made in response
to specific requests from other countries. Offers on particular industrial
nontariff measures would also be made in response to such requests
and would be additional to multilateral negotiations that are directed
toward the development of general rules or codes on government pro-
curement practices, subsidies and countervailing duties, product
standards, customs valuation, quantitative restrictions, and import li-
censing. Outlines or texts of draft agreements on these subjects have
been developed to serve as negotiating documents.
An informal understanding has been reached that tariff offers by
developed countries on industrial products would be tabled according
to a harmonization formula proposed by Switzerland that requires
larger reductions on high rates of duty than on low rates of duty and
that would result in an average tariff cut of 40 percent. It appears, how-
ever, that the EC will not be in a position to table a detailed offer to
achieve this result. In fact, as you know from your discussions last
week in Paris and Brussels,8 the EC’s ability to table any tariff offer, in
6 Limited Official Use. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page.
7 See Document 43.
8 Memoranda of conversation of Carter’s meetings with Giscard in Paris and
Jenkins in Brussels, both on January 6, are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
the light of the French elections in March, will depend on the outcome
of a Council of Ministers meeting on January 17. However, we antici-
pate that Japan and Canada will table a detailed and comprehensive
offer at the same time as the United States.
During the course of the negotiations there will undoubtedly be
some slippage from this 40 percent average cut. The Kennedy Round,
for example, resulted in an average cut of 35 percent even though the
original objective was 50 percent.
Over the past several months we have been preparing the U.S.
offers to be tabled during the week of January 15. These offers have
taken into account the recommendations of the industrial, agricultural,
and labor advisory committees; the advice of the U.S. International
Trade Commission with respect to economic sensitivity; the public
hearings conducted by this Office; consultations with Members of
Congress; and various correspondence from the private sector. They
are now being reviewed and within a few days should be approved by
the interagency Trade Policy Committee structure.
U.S. offers will be well within the authority granted to you by the
Congress under the Trade Act of 1974.9 Careful account has been taken
of the potential effects that these offers, if implemented, would have on
U.S. production and employment. As required by the Trade Act, no
tariff ofers will be made on petroleum and petroleum products, certain
ceramic dinnerware, stainless steel and alloy tool steel, ball bearings,
non-rubber footwear, and color television sets. Because of their eco-
nomic sensitivity, no offers, or very limited offers, will be made on
many textile, glass, and leather products. Furthermore, for various
reasons offers are being deferred on benzenoid chemicals and rubber
footwear, which are subject to the American Selling Price basis of
customs valuation, and on all pending escape-clause cases—ferrochro-
mium, nuts and bolts, stainless steel flatware, CB radios, and slab zinc.
The U.S. offers to be tabled during the week of January 15 will
mark only the beginning of the negotiations. In addition to receiving
overall reciprocity from other countries, the maintenance of many of
these initial offers is conditioned on receiving specific tariff and non-
tariff concessions. Consequently, some U.S. offers will undoubtedly be
withdrawn during the course of the negotiations. Additional U.S. offers
might also be made in response to the requests of other countries in ex-
change for additional trade concessions on their part.
During the next few months I shall try to work out the best pos-
sible deal. Before concluding any agreement I will consult closely with
9 Among other things, the Trade Act of 1974 granted the President the authority to
negotiate changes in tariff and non-tariff barriers and conclude trade agreements with
foreign countries.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
the Congress and will submit the final package of U.S. and foreign tariff
and nontariff concessions to you for your approval.
97.
Memorandum From the Director of the Office of
International Monetary Affairs, Department of the Treasury
(Syvrud) to Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal1
Washington, January 17, 1978
SUBJECT
United States-Japan Trade Talks—An Insider’s Assessment
In the U.S./Japan trade talks on January 9–13 Ambassador Strauss
laid on the line his personal credibility with the U.S. Congress in return
for the Japanese commitments described below.2 He made it clear that
the credibility of the U.S. Delegation and specifically his own personal
credibility was at stake in these talks. He wanted to insure that the Japa-
nese commitments would permit him to counter effectively the
growing protectionism in the U.S. Congress. I don’t think Strauss was
completely convinced that the statement he went home with achieved
this purpose but he knew that the alternative of not having an agreed
statement was even less acceptable.3
Ambassador Strauss recognized publicly that the agreement did
not eliminate protectionist pressures in the United States but those
forces, he said, would have been stronger without the agreement.4 So
1 Source: Department of the Treasury, Office of the Secretary, Executive Secretariat,
a handwritten notation indicating that Solomon initialed the original. Copies were sent to
Bergsten, Widman, Hufbauer, Karlik, Junz, Leddy, Cross, and Fisher (not further identi-
fied; possibly Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury Richard W. Fisher).
2 Wolff and other U.S. officials met with Japanese officials for two days of trade
from Tokyo, January 10; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
3 The statement issued at the end of Strauss’ discussions with Japanese officials in
Tokyo was printed in The New York Times on January 14. (“Text of Communique Issued
4 According to a report published in The New York Times on January 14, Strauss said
of the growth of American protectionism: “I do not think we have eliminated these
forces, but had we not reached agreement, they would have become much stronger.”
(Andrew H. Malcolm, “U.S. and Japan Reach an Accord on Easing of Tensions in Trade,”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
the significance of the agreement lies as much in what we avoided as in
what we achieved. We avoided confrontation in trade issues with the
Japanese. We possibly avoided an increase in protectionist pressures in
the United States, and we certainly avoided a sharp deterioration in
U.S.-Japanese relationships.
The Joint Statement announced by Ambassador Strauss and Am-
bassador Ushiba on Friday, January 13, covered three important areas:
macro-economic policies, multilateral trade negotiations and some bi-
lateral trading issues. (copy attached)5
Macro-economic Policies
The Japanese committed themselves to a 7 percent growth target
and to reducing the current account surplus considerably (to $6 billion)
in fiscal year 1978, aiming at equilibrium by the end of FY 1979 and
thereafter, with a deficit accepted if it should occur. (The Japanese fiscal
year is from April 1 to March 31.) While the Japanese had previously
announced the 7 percent growth target, their previous commitment
was for “around 7 percent”. The commitment is now firmed up for 7
percent and the economic policies are directed toward achieving that
target.
During the talks, there was some skepticism raised about the
ability of the Japanese Government to meet its 7 percent growth target.
There is some justification for this skepticism since a great deal de-
pends upon private sector consumption and investment. I have sug-
gested that we publicly avoid raising skepticism since it would tend to
affect adversely the confidence factor and in a self-fulfilling way bring
about that lower growth rate.
The focus of the Japanese economic program is on domestic de-
mand. This means a structural shift in the Japanese economy away
from the export-oriented growth, resulting in additional bankruptcies,
unemployment, and a lower growth rate than otherwise would be the
case, but it is clearly an emphasis which is consistent with the needs of
the international economy and should be welcomed.
The language on the current account reflects a significant shift in
the Japanese position. I was told that this position was approved by
Prime Minister Fukuda. What it really means is that, in the medium-
term, Japan’s objective has shifted from equilibrium on basic balance to
an equilibrium on current account.
MTN
Ambassador Strauss’ STR team (he was accompanied by his
number two man, Alan Wolff, his number three man and chief negoti-
5 Attached but not printed. See footnote 3 above.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
ator at Geneva, Alonso McDonald, and his General Counsel) focused
heavily on achieving Japanese commitment to a partnership in the mul-
tilateral trade negotiations which begin next week. They sought part-
nership with the Japanese to achieve basic equity on their trading rela-
tions by the end of the MTN period, eight to ten years. (See paras 5–7 of
Statement) Strauss emphasized that the objective of parity in the levels
of bound tariffs (para 6) was the only non-negotiable element in the
statement.
Bilateral Relations
On the bilateral side, the Strauss team sought specific commit-
ments on a range of trade items: oranges, hotel beef, citrus juice, timber,
etc. This group of commitments on the part of the Japanese was esti-
mated in value to not more than $100 million of total Japanese imports,
of which perhaps the United States would benefit from $30 million. It is
obviously peanuts in terms of amounts, but Ambassador Strauss
placed heavy emphasis on the symbolic importance of these items.
They are the kinds of things that the unsophisticated understand much
more than the current account commitment. Moreover, they are of in-
terest to specific Congressmen in key committees.
Follow-Up
There are many areas of follow-up to these trade talks. We did not
use the word “monitor” or “surveillance” but obviously the implemen-
tation of Japanese commitments and the performance of the Japanese
economy is vital to the achievement of our objectives. There are a
number of study groups and purchasing missions to the United States
to follow up on the bilateral issues, listed in paragraph 8 of the Joint
Statement. These involve Agriculture and Commerce. The Subcabinet
Group involving State and Treasury is expected to meet in the spring in
Washington to review macro-economic developments. There will also
be a follow-up in the MTN with Ambassador McDonald and his Japa-
nese counterpart instructed to work hand in hand throughout the ne-
gotiations. Ambassador Strauss and Ambassador Ushiba will be
present in Geneva to begin the proceedings and the Joint Statement in-
cludes an agreement that they will meet again in October to review the
progress under this agreement.
Some Questions
The major unanswered questions are:
(a) The probabilities of achieving the 7 percent growth target?
(b) The probabilities of achieving the $6 billion current account
surplus?
(c) The seriousness of the Japanese commitment to opening up
their markets?

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
(d) The effectiveness of the exercise in stemming protectionism in
the United States?
Summary Comment
Ambassador Strauss is correct in his assessment that the signifi-
cance of this agreement with the Japanese is that it is a longer-term
commitment for opening Japanese markets and that it will stem the rise
in protectionism in the United States Congress from what it otherwise
might have been. He has taken on what I believe to be a significant risk
to his credibility but I think the risks are clearly worth taking, and he
should be given every support.
I believe that this agreement represents a consensus within the Jap-
anese Government, including the Finance Ministry, the Economic Plan-
ning Agency, the Foreign Ministry, and possibly other ministries, to
open the Japanese markets to imports. Once this consensus is achieved
in the Japanese decision making process it is likely to be reflected in
many policy areas which are not included in the statement.
98.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal
and the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers
(Schultze) to President Carter1
Washington, January 19, 1978
SUBJECT
Contingency Planning with Respect to the Dollar
You asked for a memorandum identifying the options open to us
in meeting contingencies with respect to the dollar.2
Our basic objective with respect to the dollar and our balance of
payments is to maintain a position which enables us to pursue our do-
mestic economic objectives both in the short run and in the longer term
within a healthy world economy.
Contingencies
The fact that we are growing faster than most other industrial na-
tions, in combination with our large oil imports, has tended to put
downward pressure on the dollar.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
2 See Document 94.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
The contingency we need to worry about is not a modest and or-
derly further depreciation of the dollar. That should cause no major
problem for us, although some other countries—Germany in partic-
ular—would complain. Given an outlook that shows no improvement
in the U.S. trade balance over the next two years, we do not want to
close the door on gradual exchange rate adjustment as a means of ulti-
mately reducing the deficit.
We would be in serious trouble, however, if there should occur a
massive capital flight from the dollar and a sharp depreciation of its
value in foreign exchange markets. Failure to get an energy program
might lead to this result. And, given the nature of foreign exchange
markets, it could conceivably be set off by events we cannot now
foresee.
Such a development could:
—Depress economic growth and reduce unemployment abroad by
adversely affecting business investment and consumer spending.
—Create major disturbances in money, capital and commodity
markets that could threaten the stability of the domestic and interna-
tional financial systems.
—Detract from U.S. ability to exercise leadership in world affairs,
both political and economic. Foreigners equate a strong country with a
strong currency.
—Exacerbate inflationary pressures in the United States by in-
creasing import prices.
—Increase protectionist pressures as sentiment grew to curb im-
ports as a means of aiding the dollar.
—Lead OPEC to raise the price of oil and shift to other currencies
for oil investments.
We must avoid such developments.
Current Situation
Since the beginning of 1977, the dollar has declined by more than
20% against the Swiss franc and Japanese yen, and by 10% against the
trade weighted average. The bulk of this change occurred in the fourth
quarter when there was downward pressure on the dollar in the
markets reflecting:
1. growing awareness of the size of the U.S. trade and current ac-
count deficits;
2. a perception that no effective actions were likely to be taken to
halt and later reverse the deteriorating trend—and in particular, doubts
that an effective U.S. energy policy would be introduced;

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
3. recognition that with the German economy (and others)
growing very slowly, our exports were not likely to show much expan-
sion; and
4. a perception that the U.S. was not concerned about its exchange
rate.
Recently the situation has stabilized as a result of:
—your December 21 statement that we would intervene in the
markets to the extent needed to counter disorderly conditions;4
—announcement of a new Treasury swap facility with the German
central bank, providing us with additional DM for intervention;
—a greater perception of U.S. concern about the dollar exchange
rate;
—more U.S. market intervention: since December 21 we have sold
foreign currencies (Deutschemarks) to the extent of $977 million. Re-
cently the problem has been particularly the DM–dollar rate.
The markets have been calmer lately. Nonetheless it is not clear
that the psychology has turned, and the situation could deteriorate rap-
idly at any time. Our options:
More Intervention in the Exchange Markets
We are considering several techniques to obtain more foreign cur-
rency to finance intervention:
A. Expand short-term Fed and ESF swaps with the Bundesbank and pos-
sibly other foreign central banks. A problem is that intervention expands
the German money supply, which worries the Bundesbank. Treasury
and the Fed are exploring possible ways to mitigate this effect, which
could increase the Bundesbank’s willingness to enlarge the present
$3 billion of swap arrangements.
B. Sell special drawing rights for foreign currency. The U.S. could use
acquire foreign currencies. Preliminary discussions with the Germans
suggest some willingness to sell us DM for SDR, up to several hundred
million dollars.
C. Issue medium-term, DM-denominated Treasury securities, as pro-
posed by Arthur Burns. There are two possibilities: issues on the market
or to official holders. This approach could provide us with substantial
intervention resources that would not have to be repaid in the short-
term. But there are major disadvantages:
—Such issues would imply long-term support of the exchange
rate, which we do not want to commit and which could draw substan-
tial Congressional criticism;
—If the terms were attractive enough to induce foreigners to pur-
chase the securities, the offer could induce exchange transactions in the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
wrong direction, by encouraging dollar holders (including Americans)
to sell their dollars to switch to this new DM asset;
—U.S. willingness to issue such bonds would trigger strong de-
mands by OPEC and others for exchange rate guarantees on their large
dollar holdings—OPEC has been pressing for such “indexation” for
some time;
—Specially attractive Treasury issues for foreign investors would
bring strong U.S. public and Congressional criticism; and
—Although perhaps of relatively minor importance, such issues
would expose the Treasury (the Fed would not be involved) to poten-
tially very large exchange rate losses—the U.S. went this route once be-
fore in the 1960’s and is still paying off the debts at substantial cost.
We may in the end need to sell a limited amount of such issues to
foreign officials—specifically the Bundesbank—if market conditions
do not permit reversal of outstanding swaps within one or two years.
Refinancing the swaps would provide a defensible rationale for con-
fining such guarantees to one or a very few countries and currencies.
But we believe the serious problems with foreign currency issues in
general argue strongly against such issues except in this limited contin-
gency situation.
Another possibility, which we do not recommend for consider-
ation at this time, is a U.S. drawing on the IMF. We have a reserve posi-
tion in the IMF of about $5 billion, which could be drawn upon a formal
representation of balance of payments need. Large U.S. drawings, how-
ever, would virtually eliminate the IMF’s balances of usable currencies,
would raise serious questions about U.S. participation in the Witteveen
Facility and could trigger an adverse market reaction as a sign of U.S.
weakness.
Other Possible Actions
Although it is not a source of foreign exchange, we are planning to
initiate modest gold sales as you have authorized. Such sales might re-
duce net U.S. gold imports by $400 million or more per year. We have
not decided on the timing, in part because of the forthcoming French
elections. Again, however, any implication that gold sales were being
instituted as a desperate measure to defend the dollar could have a per-
verse market reaction.
At this point we are hopeful that expectations can be changed so as
to reduce the market pressures on the dollar. Much will depend on
early Congressional approval of an energy program, public appraisal
of the economic policies you will be announcing in the next few days5—
5 Carter’s message to Congress accompanying the President’s Economic Report, his
message transmitting the FY 1979 budget to Congress, and a message to Congress on tax
reduction and reform, all January 20, are printed in Public Papers of the Presidents of the

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
and prospects for European economies (e.g., growth in Germany and
political developments in Italy). Fukuda’s 7% growth target is helpful,
but German unwillingness to take more expansionary measures is very
discouraging and damages the prospects.
What Else, If necessary
If developments are not favorable—if Congress fails to pass an en-
ergy bill—the market situation could worsen seriously at any time in
the months ahead. Market intervention in such event would probably
not be adequate. There is too much potential for shifts in the timing of
payments for our trade (running at $300 billion per year) and for shifts
of financial assets out of dollars. We would have difficulty financing
the intervention, and other countries (most specifically Germany)
would not want the impact on their domestic money supply.
Should such a situation develop, we might need to consider much
more significant moves in the energy area—such as a temporary im-
port fee on oil. The fee would be designed to remain in effect only until
a satisfactory energy bill were in place. Such an action might help to
galvanize public pressure for action on the energy legislation.
Another possibility would be to suggest a more rapid build-up of
the wellhead tax on domestic oil.
Some More Extreme Steps
If these various measures failed and we came face to face with an
imminent threat of massive capital movements, we would have to
consider
—controls over international capital movements,
—a surcharge on all (or most) imports, or
—sharp reduction in our domestic growth rate.
Any of these actions would have severe negative consequences.
Capital controls would, moreover, probably be ineffective in stopping
capital flight. The other alternatives might stop the exchange market
pressure but would themselves pose threats to world trade and eco-
nomic growth almost as serious as those posed by an exchange market
crisis. We should not consider them except in a serious emergency. Cer-
tainly reducing our domestic growth rate through significantly higher
interest rates because of dollar problems should be last on our list.
A final point: it seems to us that any major additional steps taken
by the U.S. in coming months to stabilize the dollar should be accompa-
nied by a renewed effort to convince Chancellor Schmidt to speed up
growth rate as a companion action. The Germans share responsibility
for the DM/dollar exchange rate. They are also the key to growth in all
of Europe—the French, for example, have said that if the Germans
would grow faster they would also be willing to do so. Nothing we

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
could do would have as positive an impact on that rate as an announce-
ment from their side that they are increasing their target for economic
growth above the present inadequate level.
Summary
We are proceeding with exploring expanded swaps and sales of
special drawing rights, as well as planning gold sales. We do not plan
to issue foreign-denominated securities at this time.
Any significant action on oil will be dictated principally by the
pace of progress on the energy legislation.
We do not contemplate any of the more drastic steps at this time—
these further steps would, of course, involve major Presidential
decisions.
99.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1
Washington, January 26, 1978
SUBJECT
U.S.-Japanese Economic Relations
While the joint communique with the Japanese on the above-
captioned matter2 is a dramatic breakthrough in setting some new di-
rections and spelling out a new philosophical thrust for Japanese trade
policies, it is only a first step. The extent of economic impact of the pol-
icies and measures that the Japanese agreed upon will be entirely de-
pendent on our ability to constantly review their progress, both in
terms of their efforts and their achievements.3
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
President has seen,” and Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Bob—Whom do you sug-
gest? J.”
3 During a January 26 Trade Policy Committee meeting, Strauss asserted “that
Japan had made a very far-reaching statement on what was to be done in order to bring
about an adjustment in her trade relationship with the rest of the world. At the same time,
the statement resulted in very little in the form of concrete actions that would have an im-
mediate impact. The value of the exercise will depend on the extent to which the political
commitments in the communique are implemented by the Japanese government. The
U.S. government will need to monitor Japanese policies on a continuing basis and to hold
regular consultations with Japanese officials.” (Summary minutes of the Trade Policy

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
We had four main objectives:
1. Obtain formal Japanese commitment to a high level of economic
growth. This, of course, was a unilateral, sovereign decision of their
Government but was substantially influenced by your meeting with
Minister Ushiba when he was in Washington4 and my continuing nego-
tiations. There is reason for skepticism as to their ability to attain this
target but at least it will make them aim higher and increase their ex-
pansionary measures if we continue to monitor.
2. To obtain their commitment to reduce their current account bal-
ance from the present surplus of $11 million. They agreed to reduce
to $6 million during 1978 and to equilibrium the following year, if
possible.
3. We obtained a Japanese commitment to achieve parity with us
through the implementation of the Geneva trade talks in terms of their
market being as open as our own. This to be accomplished over a pe-
riod of years.
4. To immediately open the Japanese market to certain imports
through a series of specific trade acts and measures.
While politically the ten-fold increase in beef quotas and the
three-fold increase in citrus quotas made headlines here, in terms of
meaningful, long-term, substantive trade significance to us, it is more
likely that the Japanese pledges to reduce their barriers to parity in the
MTN, to liberalize their foreign exchange control system, and to open
up their government purchasing to foreign bidders are surely the most
significant steps. What we can accomplish here remains to be seen and
requires the monitoring to which I referred. Also very important is the
work of our Trade Facilitation Committee set up by Juanita Kreps and
headed by Frank Weil which has the job of helping individual U.S.
companies get their products into Japan.5 Weil understands this
problem and what needs to be done.
The bottom line, Mr. President, is that we have only set forth what
they say they will do and now we need to put the necessary political
will into the program or it will revert to what it was after a few
“one-shot” purchasing deals.
Committee meeting, January 26; Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic
Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 88, Trade Policy Committee)
4 Carter met with Ushiba, Togo, Strauss, and Brzezinski in the Oval Office on De-
Daily Diary) No memorandum of conversation was found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
It is my judgment you now need to instruct someone in the Gov-
ernment6 to begin and then follow through regularly, with vigor, on a
continuing monitoring and review process, with periodic reporting to
you and to the Congress.7
6 Carter underlined the phrase “someone in the Government” and drew a bracket
in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
7 In a February 21 memorandum, Carter instructed Strauss “to assume responsi-
bility for ensuring that the Japanese take all reasonable steps to reach the goals contained
in the January 13 Joint Statement.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
100.
Memorandum From John Renner of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 31, 1978
SUBJECT
The Dollar and Oil Imports
At the present time, the Administration is trying to deal with the
weakness of the dollar and our oil imports as if they were completely
separate issues. The Treasury Department has used traditional mone-
tary measures in an effort to stabilize the dollar. But they have not been
able to deal with one of the main underlying reasons for the weakness
of the dollar, our enormous oil imports, because this matter falls within
the competence of the Energy Department.
In my judgment it is essential to fashion an integrated approach to
these interrelated issues. This would benefit the development of both
monetary and energy policies. The dollar should begin to strengthen
when money managers become convinced that the United States has
taken and will continue to take hard measures to reduce oil imports.
Relating more explicitly the strength of the dollar to the level of oil im-
ports should make it easier to persuade Congress and the country to
make the sacrifices necessary to reduce consumption of oil and to de-
velop alternative sources of energy.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
To begin to integrate these policies, I recommend that you talk to
the President and send out the memorandum at Tab A.2 I have talked at
length to Treasury, State, and CEA. They would welcome such a mem-
orandum. It is possible that DOE will protest. Accordingly, it is essen-
tial that the President know why he is being asked to send out this
memorandum.3
Henry Owen agrees.
2 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated and unsigned draft memorandum
from Brzezinski to the Secretaries of State, Treasury, and Energy, the CEA Chairman, the
OMB Director, and the President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs and Policy entitled
“The Dollar.”
3 A handwritten notation at the bottom of the page reads: “A memo to the President
is being prepared in response to your request.” According to the NSC Correspondence
Profile, the memorandum was subsequently redrafted. (Carter Library, National Security
final version is printed as Document 105.
101.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, February 4, 1978
SUBJECT
Germany and the Summit
1. In the wake of German Economics Minister Lambsdorff’s visit
last week, we are developing what may be a promising strategy to get a
higher rate of German growth. This strategy is similar to the one we
adopted in dealing with Japan. That strategy had two key elements:
a. Offering the Japanese something they wanted: an across-the-
board agreement that would relieve both the tension in US-Japanese re-
lations and upward pressure on the yen.
b. Making clear to the Japanese that they could only get this out-
come by making specified concessions—particularly a higher (7%)
growth target.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
attached note from Brzezinski to Owen reads: “The P[resident] & Mike spoke at the last
Cabinet meeting in this general vein.” At the bottom of the same note, Brzezinski wrote:
“OBE or call me.” (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
2. Our German strategy also offers the FRG something it wants: a
mid-July Summit in Bonn, with a Presidential visit to Germany thrown
in. And it makes clear that they are most likely to get this outcome by
adopting policies that will create better growth prospects in Germany.
You made this point implicitly in your last letter to Chancellor
Schmidt;2 the Vice President and I indicated to Lambsdorff that it
would not make sense for any of our countries to go into a mid-July
Summit unless the spring review of the Summit Preparatory Group in-
dicated a good growth outlook in key countries. He got the point and
did not take offense.3
3. State (Dick Cooper), Treasury (Tony Solomon), and CEA
(Charlie Schultze) agree with this strategy. I believe the French will
favor it. The British may too. I will be in touch with my opposite
members in these countries to that end.
4. This strategy needs to be pursued quietly and with tact. If
Schmidt were made to feel that he was being overtly or publicly threat-
ened, he could well over-react. We should avoid public or private lec-
turing of the Germans on economic policy. It’s unnecessary; it makes
them resistant to change; and it worsens US-German relations. You
may want to speak in this sense at an early Cabinet meeting.4
2 Apparently a reference to Document 93.
3 In a February 13 letter to Stoessel, Owen noted that Lambsdorff responded to this
approach by saying “that although the German Government was taking the public posi-
tion that there would be no further German governmental stimulus measures, in fact
there would be an internal review of German economic prospects in the spring and a de-
cision then as to whether further stimulus measures were needed. I urged him to ensure
that this internal German review was completed in time for its results to be reflected in
the Preparatory Group’s report to heads of government, and in the heads of gov-
ernments’ decision about Summit timing.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
uary 27 memorandum to Carter, Blumenthal suggested that the United States “indicate
that the next Economic Summit, in Bonn, should not be held until all governments have
shown substantial progress toward the Downing Street commitments.” (Carter Library,
Carter agreed “that we should plan for another Summit in mid-July. The final decision
should await a review of our personal representatives’ preparatory work—including
their assessment of economic policy and prospects in the Summit countries, since we
want to be sure that another Summit can be followed by useful results.” (National Ar-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
102.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1
Washington, February 7, 1978
SUBJECT
Escape Clause Case on Bolts, Nuts, and Large Screws
Background
On December 12, 1977 the U.S. International Trade Commission
(USITC) reported to you under section 201 of the Trade Act of 1974 its
findings that the domestic bolt, nut and large screw industry was in-
jured or threatened with injury due to increased imports. Three of the
four Commissioners participating in this case recommended that you
proclaim increased tariffs for a five-year period. These tariffs would be
30 percent in the first two years, phasing down to 20 percent in the fifth
year (current duties are less than one percent on nuts and bolts and
your decision will be subject to Congressional override by joint resolu-
tion of a majority of those present and voting in both houses—in which
case the USITC remedy would take effect.
Action Required
By February 10, 1978 you must decide and announce whether im-
port relief for the domestic nut, bolt, and large screw industry is in the
national economic interest. If you decide relief is appropriate you must
also announce at the same time what form of relief will be given. Relief
must then be proclaimed within 15 days of the announcement, unless
you decide to negotiate orderly marketing agreements in which case
you have 90 days to proclaim relief.
Key Factors
This is the second escape clause case filed by the domestic industry
in the last three years. In 1975, the USITC found that the industry was
not being injured or threatened with injury due to increased imports by
a 3–2 vote. Subsequent developments leading to the present case per-
suaded one Commissioner to switch his vote, resulting in a 3–1 deci-
sion in favor of the industry.
U.S. imports of bolts, nuts, and large screws have increased their
share of the U.S. market in each year since 1969, rising from a 21 percent

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
more than half of U.S. consumption. The value of imports involved was
$229 million in 1976.
Japan is the largest foreign supplier to the U.S. market, repre-
senting about three-fourths of total imports. Canada is the second
largest supplier with about eight percent of the total (Note: Canada also
ships a substantial volume of these products under the bilateral Auto-
motive Products Trade Agreement2 which is not covered by the USITC
injury finding). Other sources of imports are the European Community
(EC), Spain, Taiwan, and India.
The domestic industry consists of a large number of small and me-
dium sized firms operating about 180 plants. These operations are con-
centrated in Ohio, Illinois, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Connecticut.
More than two-thirds of the industry’s shipments are to original equip-
ment manufacturers (OEMs) and the remainder to distributors. About
one-fourth of the total U.S. market and a higher proportion of domestic
shipments is accounted for by the automotive industry where there is
very little import competition. Domestic fastener producers also have
little import competition in sales of specialized fasteners to other
OEMs.
Domestic production and shipments by the industry are off sub-
stantially in the last three years as compared with the 1969–74 period.
There has been some improvement since 1975 due mainly to strong au-
tomotive demand. Employment is also down significantly and has not
recovered. Since 1974 about 4,500 production worker jobs have been
lost, representing about one-quarter of industry’s production worker
employment (which is now approximately 13,000 persons). Many un-
employed fastener workers are now receiving Trade Adjustment As-
sistance benefits. According to Department of Labor data, over 4,000
bolt, nut, and large screw workers had received adjustment assistance
funds, through September 1977. The Department of Labor predicts con-
tinuing erosion in employment if relief is not granted.
Despite these setbacks, the industry remains reasonably profitable
with a return on sales in excess of the average for all manufacturing, al-
though it should be noted that a number of firms have ceased opera-
tions. According to the industry, the most profitable segment of its
business is the automotive industry and returns are much lower in
other markets where import competition is more severe. Firms that do
not serve the automotive industry are said to be much worse off than
those who do.
2 The 1965 Automotive Products Trade Agreement, also known as the Auto Pact,
governed trade in cars, trucks, buses, and automotive parts and facilitated the integration
of the U.S. and Canadian automotive industries.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
The implementation of the trigger price system for steel imports by
the Treasury Department this month is expected to have an adverse im-
pact on the domestic bolt, nut, and large screw industry. It is estimated
that 25 percent of the steel used by the fastener industry is imported
and that the trigger price system could increase import prices by about
20 percent. Depending on the assumptions used, this could raise total
costs of production of bolts, nuts, and large screws by 10–16 percent for
firms relying solely on imported steel.
The Federal Preparedness Agency (FPA) has just completed a staff
study of fastener requirements during a national emergency.3 The
scope of the study is broader than the products covered by the escape
clause case and the results are preliminary. It concludes that under cer-
tain conditions, notably restricted access to foreign supplies, the U.S.
would face serious shortages of fasteners in a wartime emergency.
These findings have become publicly available and a number of Con-
gressmen have already written to you stressing national security as-
pects of the case.
We have been contacted by about 50 Congressmen and 12 Sen-
ators, almost all of whom have expressed support for the industry’s
case. The Congressional delegations from Ohio, Michigan, Illinois,
Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Indiana, and Missouri account for most of
these contacts.
Recommendations
The Trade Policy Staff Committee (TPSC), acting on behalf of the
Cabinet level Trade Policy Committee (TPC), recommends without any
agency dissent that you direct the Secretary of the Treasury to undertake an
expedited national security investigation on iron or steel bolts, nuts, and large
screws under section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962. Such an inves-
tigation would define our national security interests in this industry
and could lead to appropriate actions by the U.S. Government (in-
cluding trade actions) to protect those interests.
I recommend that you approve this TPSC recommendation.4
The Trade Policy Staff Committee split on the question of granting
import relief in this case. Labor, Commerce, Interior, and STR recom-
mend that you grant import relief in the form of a tariff rate quota.
State, Treasury and Defense recommend that you deny relief on the
grounds of national economic interest. Agriculture has not taken a po-
sition on this case.
3 Not found.
4 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to the recommendation.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Option 1: Tariff Rate Quota
Labor, Commerce, Interior, and STR recommend that you pro-
claim a three-year tariff rate quota based on 1976 import quantities for
three product categories—nuts, bolts, and large screws (including lag
screws). Imports up to the 1976 level would be dutiable at the present
large screws) while imports in excess of that level would be charged a
30 percent duty on bolts and large screws and a 40 percent duty on nuts
(see Attachment 1 for details).5
These agencies feel that if the domestic industry has not already
been seriously injured, it is certainly threatened with serious injury.
The proposed remedy is not designed to roll back the situation but to
prevent further deterioration. In conjunction with the recommended
national security investigation, this relief would prevent any erosion of
domestic industry production capability that we might find costly to
our national security interests as a result of that investigation. By ap-
plying additional duties only to volumes in excess of the 1976 import
level (which is only slightly less than the 1977 level), the costs to con-
sumers through inflation is minimized. Imposition of this tariff rate
quota system could create some additional jobs although fewer jobs
would be created than under USITC’s proposed remedy. Adjustment
assistance, in the form of income maintenance, has already been made
available to many of the unemployed workers in this industry allevi-
ating pressures on those who would remain out of work. The foreign
policy implications of this proposal are judged to be much less serious
than under the USITC recommendation. The Japanese Government has
in fact informally indicated it would probably not retaliate against a
moderate remedy such as this one.
The proposed tariff rate quota remedy falls far short of the do-
mestic producers’ expectations. However, their criticism would be
much harsher if no relief were given and the receptivity of Congress to
the industry’s case would be much greater in the absence of relief.
I am personally very concerned about the political sensitivity of
this case. To deny relief to the industry on its second attempt while at
the same time substantially increasing its costs through the steel trigger
price system, could be perceived as unfair by many members of
Congress. With the additional element of national security concerns in
the background, the industry might find considerable support in the
Congress for an override. By granting the moderate relief provided by
the tariff rate quota, these pressures would be substantially defused
5 Attachment 1, attached but not printed, is an undated chart entitled “Three-Year
Tariff Rate Quota System.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
and the climate in the Congress for trade agreements we hope to bring
back from the MTN would be more favorable. (Note: The Chairmen of
both the House and Senate Trade Subcommittees have substantial fas-
tener production in their areas.)
State and Treasury have indicated that they believe this approach
would minimize the adverse domestic economic and foreign policy
costs of relief, although it would weaken our general commitment to
reject protectionism.
I recommend that you proclaim the tariff rate quota proposed by
Interior, Commerce, Labor, and STR.6
Option 2; No Import Relief
State, Treasury, and Defense recommend that you determine im-
port relief is not in the national economic interest. They argue that there
is insufficient economic justification for import relief. The industry has
remained quite profitable despite depressed production and employ-
ment. The costs of relief to consumers would be substantial. It is esti-
mated that relief would result in a net job loss to the overall economy
due to the drain on consumer expenditures for other goods and serv-
ices. A significant portion of the industry does not face serious import
competition and might receive windfall profits if relief is given. The 20
percent appreciation of the yen during 1977 is expected to alleviate
competitive pressures from Japan. (Note: Import prices for a small
sample of items were found by the USITC to range from 43 to 93 per-
cent of U.S. producers’ prices in the first half of 1977.) Finally, it is not
clear that the industry would undertake major adjustments during a
period of import relief to improve its competitiveness.
The foreign policy consequences of granting relief are judged by
these agencies as adverse. The U.S. Government would be seen abroad
as moving away from its general commitment to reject protectionism.
Benefits to developing countries under the Generalized System of Pref-
erences (GSP) would be removed if relief is given (though these ben-
efits are nominal due to low tariffs on the products involved). The Gov-
ernments of Japan, Canada, Australia, India, and the EC are opposed to
relief and the Canadians have threatened retaliation if action is taken.
These agencies support a national security investigation under sec-
tion 232 as the appropriate way to determine our national security in-
terests and feel the industry will not deteriorate so rapidly that we
cannot wait on the results of that investigation.
6 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to the recommendation.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
For these reasons State, Treasury and Defense recommend you de-
termine relief is not in the national economic interest.7
Views of Other Agencies
Three agencies outside the TPSC structure have expressed an in-
terest in this case. CEA and OMB support Option 2 (No Relief). FPA
supports import relief.
Implementation
Attached are drafts of the necessary documents you would need to
direct the Secretary of the Treasury to initiate a national security inves-
tigation (Attachment 2);8 and to report your decision to the Congress
and in the Federal Register should you choose the tariff rate quota option
should you choose it.
If you decide to grant relief we will prepare the necessary Presi-
dential Proclamation for your signature within 15 days of your
decision.
Also attached for your staff is the TPSC report on this case.10
7 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to the recommendation. On
February 10, however, he notified Strauss, Blumenthal, and Congress of his decision
against the provision of import relief on economic grounds. He also directed the
launching of an investigation into U.S. fastener imports from the point of view of national
security. For the texts of Carter’s memorandum to Strauss and letters to Blumenthal, the
Speaker of the House, and the President of the Senate on his decision, see Public Papers of
8 Attachment 2, attached but not printed, is an undated and unsigned draft letter to
the Secretary of the Treasury.
undated and unsigned draft letters, one to the Senate and one to the House of Repre-
sentatives, submitting the President’s report on “Import Relief Action.” Attachment 4 is
an undated and unsigned draft memorandum to the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations.
10 Attached but not printed is a February 6 Trade Policy Staff Committee Action
and Large Screws of Iron or Steel,” which covers a 39-page report.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
103.
Letter From President Carter to West German Chancellor
Schmidt1
Washington, February 9, 1978
Dear Helmut,
I am extremely pleased that you were able to arrange to see Mike
Blumenthal. I asked for this meeting because of the concern that I share
with you about prospects for the world economy.2 A liberal trade and
payments system will be harder to sustain without economic growth to
reduce unemployment and to maintain a viable pattern of international
payments. The political as well as the economic future of the Atlantic
Alliance will be powerfully shaped by the outcome.
We in the United States are doing all we can do to foster necessary
growth. Mike will describe what I hope to achieve with the economic
policy and tax proposals that I have put before the Congress,3 as well as
the status of our efforts to get a strong and effective energy policy. And,
as you know, the Treasury and Federal Reserve have, in close coopera-
tion with German monetary authorities, acted forcefully to restore a de-
gree of order to the exchange markets.
But action by the United States, alone, will not be enough. Indeed,
there is a real question as to whether we can make meaningful progress
in improving our current account position in the absence of faster
growth abroad. And it will be difficult to strengthen the dollar without
broadly-based growth, which would contribute to exchange rate
stability.
I wholeheartedly agree with your recent statement to the Bun-
destag that this non-inflationary growth can only be achieved if shared
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 6, Germany, Federal Republic of: Chan-
ture under cover of a February 9 memorandum from Owen, who noted that “Mike Blu-
menthal would like to carry a letter from you to Schmidt when he sees the Chancellor
next week.” (Ibid.) In a January 27 memorandum to Carter, Blumenthal, noting that West
Germany’s “very sluggish” growth would likely continue and that Schmidt’s gov-
ernment refused “to consider major new stimulative measures,” reported that the EPG
had decided “to bring home to the FRG, in a confidential but firm manner, the world eco-
nomic need for faster German growth.” (Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff
in which Carter asked Schmidt to receive Blumenthal in Bonn on February 13 “for a gen-
eral review of economic prospects, and exchange of views.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D780052–0212) For Blumenthal’s report on the meeting, see
Document 111.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
by several countries.4 Mike will brief you on the outcome of our recent
discussions with the Japanese Government about its efforts to achieve
more rapid growth. I hope that you will share with him your view as to
future prospects and policies regarding German economic growth, and
that both of you can exchange thoughts about how to generate more
growth in other countries.
Timing is of the essence, since it is important for all our countries
that prospects for broad-based economic growth improve before our
Summit meeting. German and American close concert in this endeavor
could be the key to its success.
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter5
4 Apparently a reference to Schmidt’s January 19 policy address before the Bun-
destag. (John Vinocur, “Schmidt Rebuffs U.S. Anew on Calls to Spur Economy,” The New
5 Below his signature, Carter added the handwritten note: “Best wishes—J.”
104.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council of
Economic Advisers (Schultze) to President Carter1
Washington, February 9, 1978
SUBJECT
Ambassador Warner’s letter on U.S. Treasury borrowing of Swiss Francs
You asked for my comments on a letter to you from Ambassador
Warner.2 The Ambassador’s letter reports on an offer by private Swiss
bankers to make a Swiss franc loan to the U.S. Treasury.3
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency
page.
2 Attached but not printed is a February 3 letter from U.S. Ambassador to Switzer-
land Warner to Carter. Carter wrote at the top of Warner’s letter: “Schultze—I see you
have a copy—any comment?”
3 Warner explored this offer more fully in a January 31 letter to Blumenthal and in-
cluded a copy of telegram 491 from Bern, January 30, which provided further details. The
proposal involved a $2 billion loan by the four largest Swiss banks to the United States,
in a February 22 letter: “The specific suggestions in your letter troubled me however. The
question of sale by the U.S. Government of foreign-currency-denominated securities is

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
In our January 19 memo to you (copy attached),4 Secretary Blu-
menthal and I identified a number of disadvantages to the Treasury’s
borrowing in foreign currencies. Borrowing from the private market
has even more serious problems. Hence, we rejected this approach for
now and considered it a future option only for borrowing from foreign
official institutions if market conditions did not permit an unwinding
of foreign currency swaps within one or two years.
The Ambassador’s letter suggests that borrowing in Swiss francs at
3½ percent would save money for the Treasury. It would not. Swiss
franc interest rates are generally in the neighborhood of 3½ percent, in
part reflecting the low inflation rate in Switzerland. If we borrow in
Swiss francs, given low Swiss inflation, we would probably have to
repay more dollars because of an appreciating Swiss franc. In general,
borrowing in the currency of foreign countries with low interest rates
would probably cost about as much as in dollars, but the risk is clearly
greater.
The Ambassador has already received a reply through Secretary
Vance to his earlier cable to the Secretary concerning the proposals of
the Swiss bankers.5 The reply gives our view that foreign currency bor-
rowing would not be effective. I suggest you do not reply to the letter
you received, but forward it to Secretary Vance for appropriate
handling.
one which we have examined thoroughly but found both ineffective and undesirable. We
are not prepared to use such securities and hope that discussion of this idea will quickly
die out. Please do not encourage it in any way.” Both letters are in the Department of the
4 Printed as Document 98.
gram 31572 to Bern, February 7. (Department of the Treasury, Office of the Secretary, Ex-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
105.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, February 14, 1978
SUBJECT
The Dollar
Secretary Blumenthal and Chairman Schultze are worried that per-
sistent flabbiness of the dollar could provoke unfair trade practices,
lead to competitive devaluation of currencies, make international eco-
nomic cooperation more difficult, and undermine U.S. foreign policy.
In a recent memorandum to you (at Tab A)2 Secretary Blumenthal
and Chairman Schultze examined macroeconomic, monetary, and
trade options open to us in meeting contingencies with respect to the
dollar. Wishing to avoid being forced to consider some of the more ex-
treme measures, mentioned in this memorandum, they think that an
Administration wide effort should be put in motion to assess the extent
of the problem in 1978 and beyond. In view of the importance of oil im-
ports in the current account deficit, this assessment would be based on
an up-to-date estimate of future U.S. oil imports. The exchange rate im-
plications of alternative current account developments would also be
examined.
Henry Owen and I share their concern and agree with their pre-
scription. In our judgment, your endorsement is needed to ensure that
the agencies involved assign a high priority to this effort and devote
sufficient resources to it. We recommend that you approve my sending
the memorandum attached at Tab B.3
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
tion reads: “The President has seen.” Schultze, Solomon, Cooper, Robert Ginsburg, and
Edward Randy Jayne (OMB) all cleared the memorandum. (Memorandum from Dodson
to Hutcheson, February 14; ibid.)
2 Printed as Document 98.
3 Printed as Document 106. Carter indicated his approval and initialed “J.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
106.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 15, 1978
MEMORANDUM FOR
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Secretary of Energy
Director, Office of Management and Budget
Chairman, Council of Economic Advisers
Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs and Policy
Director of Central Intelligence
SUBJECT
Outlook for U.S. International Payments and Exchange Rates
The President is concerned about the continued large current ac-
count deficit. To get a better fix on the full extent of the problem and
to begin examining possible solutions, the President requests the
following:
—Projections of the U.S. current account position in 1978 and be-
yond, under a range of reasonable assumptions about economic pol-
icies here and abroad. Considering the importance of oil imports in the
current account deficit, an up-to-date estimate should be made of the
value of foreign oil the United States will import in 1978 and beyond
under the oil supply, demand, and price conditions likely to prevail
during this period. The exchange rate implications of alternative cur-
rent account developments should also be provided.
The Secretary of the Treasury should take the lead and work with
the Department of State, the Department of Energy, the Council of Eco-
nomic Advisers, the National Security Council, the Domestic Council,
the Office of Management and Budget, the Director of Central Intelli-
gence and other agencies as required.
The President would appreciate having a report by April 30.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
107.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs (Bergsten) to the Under Secretary of
the Treasury for Monetary Affairs (Solomon)1
Washington, February 15, 1978
SUBJECT
U.S. Policy Toward SDRs—A New Approach
A compelling new factor motivates me to suggest that we rethink
our policy toward SDRs: they are the only means of creating liquidity
through the IMF which does not require new legislation.
I therefore recommend that we reassess sympathetically our posi-
tion on possible SDR creation beginning next year. I have always
thought there was a straightforward case for doing so: the huge shift in
payments balances occasioned by the increased price of oil created a
clear need for additional world liquidity to finance the ensuing
imbalances.
It is true that this argument was stronger in 1974 than in 1978. On
the other hand, concern about the inflationary impact of additional
SDR creation caused much greater concern then than would be logical
now. Structural payments imbalances remain large, and the world
economy remains sluggish—for the fourth straight year. There is thus a
strong rationale for SDR creation.
The practical consideration is that, under existing Congressional au-
thorization, the U.S. can participate in each basic period of SDR creation up to
the level of the U.S. quota at the Fund. As soon as the Sixth Quota Increase
comes into effect, our Fund position will rise from SDR 6.7 billion to
SDR 8.4 billion. It is difficult to see how anyone could argue a need for appro-
priations to let us receive SDR, and the existence of adequate authorizing
legislation would even avoid any occasion on which that issue might
naturally arise.
This means that the U.S. could take SDR 8.4 billion in each basic
period of SDR creation without further Congressional action. Hence
about SDR 40 billion could be created on a global basis over each succeeding
five years, if that were to represent the “basic period” as originally in-
tended. (The only “basic period” to date was for three years, which
would enlarge even further the scope for action.) This would permit a
1 Source: National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
classification marking. Drafted on February 14. Copies were sent to Cross, Leddy,
Widman, and Jacklin.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
sizeable expansion of liquidity over the next few years—obviating our
need to return to Congress for any IMF transactions for the foreseeable future.
I recommend that we give very serious attention to the possibility
of meeting expanded IMF liquidity needs through SDR creation. The
substantive case is there and the politics are right. You might want to
call an IMG meeting on the topic shortly.
108.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, February 22, 1978
I have come to the conclusion that things have reached a point
where it is essential for you to take vigorous action to halt the drift of events
on energy and on the dollar. The cost of going on as we are is now danger-
ously high and I urge that you act now.
On energy, I do not believe that you can any longer afford to wait
while Congress continues its interminable debate. Domestically, all
sense of urgency about the energy problem is being lost, and your Ad-
ministration will increasingly be seen to have failed in a critical area. Fi-
nally, if things continue as is, what you are likely to get in an energy tax
bill (if you get one at all) will be so weak and so unlikely to save much
energy, that it may well be considered a failure anyway.
Internationally, all the “swaps” in the world and all additional
“bridging actions” to slow down the deteriorating position of the
dollar, really will not help over any extended period. Nothing works
unless the world feels that you are willing to act decisively to halt the
increasing consumption and imports of energy; that you have set your
goals, and that you will achieve them—if not in one way, then in
another.
My recommendation is that you act decisively and do so as soon as
possible, along the following lines:
My recommendations are as follows:
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Schultze brief assessment. JC.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
1) Arrange to sign into law those parts of the energy legislation
that Congress has already agreed on.2
2) Urge Congress to continue work on natural gas deregulation
and a strong and effective energy tax package that will really save en-
ergy, pledging to step up your personal involvement in this effort.3
3) Use your powers to immediately impose an oil import fee. Make
it as high as you can but in any case no less than the equivalent COET
tax would be.4
4) Indicate that the fee will remain in effect until a satisfactory en-
ergy tax bill is enacted.
5) Possibly, promise more steps and proposed legislation at an
early date to further reduce energy imports and to promote domestic
production.
You will achieve important benefits, domestically and internation-
ally, merely by being seen to be acting decisively to achieve your policy
goals. In that sense some of the details of the action are not all that im-
portant. The central ingredient would be the oil import fee and your in-
tention to stick to it for as long as necessary.
The details of the program lend themselves to endless debate and
controversy among your economic and energy advisers. I therefore
hope that you will set a very short fuse deadline, holding the matter
closely and enabling you to decide and act quickly.
If you move, we would of course also need a couple of days for in-
ternational preparations, such as briefing the Saudis and others, as well
as getting maximum leverage out of this action with the Europeans and
the Japanese.
W. Michael Blumenthal5
2 Carter wrote “not passed by Congress” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
3 Carter wrote “ok” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
4 Carter wrote “later?” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
5 Blumenthal signed “Mike” above this typed signature.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
109.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, February 22, 1978
SUBJECT
Package to Strengthen the Dollar
1. I have seen Mike Blumenthal’s memo of February 22, proposing
that you now take specified steps in the energy field, and that you ask
Germany, Japan, and others to step up their growth policies in return—
all with the object of halting the downward drift in the dollar.2
2. I am not competent to judge the merit of the energy steps that
Mike proposes, although they sound sensible. If they are, I believe that:
a. we might be able to get some German and Japanese economic
pledges in return for a promise to take immediate energy action;
b. the combination of energy action in the US and of stepped up
growth pledges abroad would strengthen confidence in economic pros-
pects generally, and in the dollar specifically, at home and abroad;
c. your role as a leader would be enhanced, in the US and overseas.
3. If this idea seems to you worth exploring, I recommend the fol-
lowing scenario:
a. Ask Mike to work urgently with DOE and other agencies to de-
velop a detailed proposal, which could go to you (with any dissents) in
the next few days for review and decision.
b. If you approve that proposal, Treasury should urgently consult
Germany, Japan, and perhaps other countries, to see if they would
pledge to take needed expansionist actions, in return for the promise of
quick US energy action.
c. After consultation with these countries and the Congress, we
would move simultaneously to take the specified energy actions at
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
a February 25 note from Hutcheson (ibid.), which also forwarded Schultze’s February 25
memorandum, Document 112.
thal had given him a copy of his February 22 memorandum, asking that Owen and Brze-
zinski “do what we can to support this initiative.” Noting his belief that Blumenthal’s
proposal “makes sense internationally,” Owen hoped that Brzezinski would endorse his
own memorandum to Carter. Owen asserted: “This is urgent and important—an oppor-
tunity for effective leadership which could, if exploited urgently, do a lot to enhance the
Administration’s standing at home and abroad—in addition to halting the continuing
slide of the dollar.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Sub-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
home and to have other countries announce these growth actions
abroad.
4. There may be a large opportunity here, if the energy steps are
feasible—and if we can move quickly.3
3 Brzezinski wrote at the bottom of the page: “I concur. ZB.”
110.
Memorandum From Timothy Deal of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 24, 1978
SUBJECT
Export Credits: Gentlemen’s Agreement
On February 22, the 20 member states participating in the present
“consensus” on export credits (the Gentlemen’s Agreement) concluded
a new international Arrangement on Officially Supported Export
Credits, which will take effect on April 1.2 The arrangement provides
for some improvement over the existing “consensus” in reporting re-
quirements, definitions, and procedures for notification of other partic-
ipants when a country intends to derogate from the guidelines.
We did not achieve our goals on minimum interest rates. Origi-
nally, we had proposed an increase in the rate structure, particularly
for longer term credits (more than 8.5 years) to developing countries.
The EC would not buy that proposal. The EC also refused to provide
annual reports on mixed (those with a substantial grant element) and
tied credits, which we had sought. Nonetheless, we did succeed in
closing some troublesome loopholes.
Other participants were simply unwilling to raise minimum in-
terest rates and shorten repayment terms. They were concerned about
the reaction among LDCs. Forcing through tougher standards, even if
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
2 The original “consensus” on export credits was reached in 1976. It was designed to
regulate the terms under which governments would offer official financial assistance for
exports in order to avoid excessive competition in the realm of export financing.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
possible, would have been an illusory achievement. The EXIMBANK
would observe the guidelines but our competitors would not. As under
the existing “consensus,” the Italians, French, Japanese et al would ig-
nore their commitments if the price were right. But the expanded re-
porting requirements will at least force governments to notify other
participants so that they may offer matching terms.
The Arrangement applies to credits for both rich and poor coun-
tries as well as Communist states, most of which fit in the so-called “in-
termediate” category. The main objective of the “consensus” was to
avert counterproductive competition in providing export credits to the
USSR and East Europe. It largely accomplished its purpose, although
most of the reported violations of the “consensus” involved sales to the
Soviet Union. As the financial value of these transactions is frequently
large, and because the Soviets are especially hard bargainers, there will
be continuing pressure on the Europeans to shave interest rates and
lengthen repayment terms to meet the demands of the Soviet bor-
rowers. The Arrangement we have just concluded will not stop such
practices entirely, but it will force them out into the open—maybe.
111.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, February 24, 1978
SUBJECT
My Discussions with Chancellor Schmidt
I have given you an oral report last week on my discussions with
Chancellor Schmidt. It may nevertheless be useful to supplement this
with a written summary of the principal points, particularly since this
relates to what we do in our relations with the Europeans and with the
Germans over the next few months, the tactics on preparing for the
Summit, and how we handle any energy actions you may decide to
take.
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
notation reads: “The President has seen,” and Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
1. German Growth Prospects
After delivering your letter,2 I inquired about German growth
prospects for 1978, but did not put any pressure on Schmidt to accel-
erate these efforts nor directly ask for a raising of the 3.5% target they
have set for 1978. Obviously the Germans assumed I would be doing
some of these things and the Chancellor almost immediately gave a
very defensive analysis, making three points:
(2) he thought the chances of achieving this number were rela-
tively good;
(3) while he might consider a further stimulus if the economy per-
formed badly, he was unwilling to so indicate now.
I restricted myself to noting that 3.5% was a relatively modest
target; that he was starting practically from a no-growth situation, and
that, therefore, to get a 3.5% average implied an increase in the German
economic growth rate to 4.5% by year end. I also said that bringing
about that kind of result would be quite an achievement and would
constitute considerable progress over 1977.
2. The Summit
The Chancellor raised this issue with a 20-minute lecture on the
political importance of the Summit. He said it was obvious that these
meetings may be called Economic Summits, but that they are really po-
litical. The London Summit had been useful for reasons quite apart
from the discussions of economic issues, and the need for a similar
meeting was urgent for it would provide opportunities to discuss such
matters as the Middle East, the Horn of Africa, SALT, and other polit-
ical matters. I agreed that a Summit meeting between world leaders
provides opportunities for discussions beyond economics, but reiter-
ated our position that there was no escaping an “economic” label, and
that the Summit, with no hope of success in that area, would be coun-
terproductive. The conclusion here is obvious: the Chancellor is vitally
interested to insure that the Summit does take place in Bonn in July. If
handled well, it does give us some leverage with him.
3. The Need for German “Leadership” in Europe on Economic Matters
I told the Chancellor that I thought Germany had a responsibility
to provide leadership, particularly to help other European countries
emerge more quickly from the recession of the mid-1970s. The U.S.
could not be expected to provide such “leadership” alone.
This argument caused the Chancellor to engage in another lengthy
lecture on the dangers of Germans taking the lead on anything. The
main point was that the fear of Germany remains great and war-time
2 See Document 103.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
memories are long. I did not debate this issue with him but merely ac-
knowledged that I understood the problem while gently suggesting to
him that the trick was to find the fine dividing line between not causing
new animosities by overaction on the one hand, or rekindling the same
animosities because of lack of action on the other hand.
4. U.S. Economic Policy
I described your economic program to the Chancellor, empha-
sizing the point that you were doing your best to meet your commit-
ments and growth targets while working hard to reduce unemploy-
ment and keeping inflation under control. I also outlined the strenuous
efforts you are making to secure passage of the energy legislation. The
Chancellor had no specific criticisms of U.S. policy and acknowledged
that we had been doing well on the growth and unemployment front.
He did continue to point to the lack of energy legislation as a major
problem, a point of view with which I agreed.
5. Collaboration in Exchange Markets
The Chancellor voiced no disagreement or criticism of U.S. action
over recent months to help stabilize exchange markets. We agreed in
the joint judgment that U.S.-German collaboration to help smooth out
excessively rapid movements was working well and we noted the tech-
nical work being done to think through possible additional “bridging
actions” for the future. The Chancellor accepted without argument my
statement that we were not contemplating issuing foreign currency
denominated Treasury bonds and my explanation why such a step
might in any case turn out to be counterproductive. There was an
agreement that the solution to exchange rate instability lay in the fund-
amentals, which he defines as U.S. action on energy imports and in
which I included satisfactory growth rates in Germany and elsewhere.
6. Public Debate and Controversy
I told the Chancellor that I thought public criticism and finger-
pointing because of the weakness of the dollar was not helpful to any-
body. I emphasized that no U.S. official from the President on down
had publicly criticized the Germans for a low growth rate. While not di-
rectly saying so, I implied that the same had not been true on the
German side with regard to U.S. actions on the dollar. This point
seemed at least implicitly accepted by the Chancellor and we agreed
that public criticism from either side was to be avoided in the future.
COMMENT
If the Germans did really achieve an average of 3.5% real growth
with an even higher level at year end, this would improve our position
moderately. But this is not a realistic assumption, and it is a high possi-
bility that the Germans will not act to take additional measures until it
is too late to have any impact this year.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
There is now, however, increasing evidence that the pressures on
the Germans are becoming very great—not so much from us as from
other Europeans. We have also had recent evidence of differences of
view on this subject within the German Government itself. With an EC
meeting of heads of government coming up in April,3 I think there is
therefore an increasing possibility that some German action may be
forthcoming in spite of the Chancellor’s strong protestations to the con-
trary. With the leverage of the Summit meeting in the background, we
have therefore no reason to give up as long as we avoid public debate
on this subject.
Most importantly, I believe that there is an opportunity for a deal,
if you decide to move on the energy front. It may be possible to nego-
tiate a European-German statement committing to coordinated actions
for more growth. While taking some steps that are advisable for do-
mestic reasons alone, you could therefore get considerable credit for
resolution of an international problem. It is well worth trying and our
informal contacts indicate that it may be doable.
W. Michael Blumenthal4
4 Blumenthal signed “Mike” above this typed signature.
112.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council of
Economic Advisers (Schultze) to President Carter1
Washington, February 25, 1978
SUBJECT
Import fee on crude oil: Secretary Blumenthal’s memo2
I have talked to Jim Schlesinger and Frank Moore about this. We
agree on the following approach:
1. First, get the natural gas compromise nailed down;
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
February 25 note from Hutcheson (ibid.), which also forwarded Owen’s February 22
memorandum, Document 109.
2 See Document 108.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
2. Then, immediately assess the prospects for COET;
3. If it appears either that a long delay will occur or that the chances
are against getting COETat all, we should be prepared to impose a fee on
oil imports as a means of seizing the initiative on energy.
The import fee should be set so as to imitate as closely as possible
the effect of COET on petroleum prices and consumer incomes. Too
large a fee would raise prices sharply, and drain income from con-
sumers, thereby raising inflation and reducing economic growth. We
should also be prepared to modify our tax proposals to return the pro-
ceeds of the fee back to consumers, as we promised to do with the net
proceeds of COET. (Unfortunately, we can’t begin returning the funds
until October—the effective date of the tax bill.)
Several other considerations have to be taken into account.
• Before we move we should inform the Saudis; we need to be sure
they won’t react the wrong way—i.e. “why shouldn’t we get the higher
prices instead of the U.S. Treasury.” With the proper explanation they
will, I believe, react favorably.
• Blumenthal and Solomon think there is at least an outside chance
we can use such an action to influence the Germans—i.e. we take
strong action, via the fee, to help the dollar; they take some action to
promote greater German economic growth.
Much technical work needs to be done: What is the proper size of
the fee; should it apply to petroleum product imports as well as crude
oil; etc.? We also need to think through the political ramifications, the
timing, the specific conditions under which it should be invoked, and
how we sound out the Germans without a leak.
Recommendations
I suggest you ask Eizenstat, Schlesinger, Moore, Blumenthal,
Vance, and Schultze to submit to you, by Tuesday, March 7, a paper
which spells out:
• a specific scheme for an import fee;
• an assessment of the conditions under which it would be desir-
able to impose one and the timing of the action;
• an evaluation of the political, legislative, and economic
consequences;
• a scenario for international consultation, including an assess-
ment of the possibility of a German “deal.”
I am attaching a draft directive to the above-named people.3 Either
Schlesinger, Blumenthal, or I could chair the group. The draft names
Schlesinger, but it’s a close call.
3 Attached but not printed is an undated draft memorandum. Carter signed a re-
typed version of the memorandum, which is dated February 27. (Carter Library, Records

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
113.
Memorandum From John Renner of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the Special Representative
for Economic Summits (Owen)1
Washington, February 27, 1978
SUBJECT
International Economic Policy
The public airing of differences between the United States and
Germany over economic policy is having adverse effects. This per-
sistent policy dispute has created a feeling of uncertainty and uneas-
iness about future developments. Chief Executive Officers are wary
about large investment projects. The stock market is nervous. Interna-
tional money markets are in disarray. Every time we urge Germany to
expand further and Germany refuses, the dollar falls and the stock-
market gets more jittery. Every time Germany points the accusing
finger at our huge oil imports while the energy bill remains stalled, the
mood of money managers and investors gets blacker.
We should act now to break this downward spiral. What is needed
to change the psychological climate is to give the impression that gov-
ernments are acting in harmony in pursuit of agreed objectives.
Let us stop urging the Germans to be an economic locomotive. Re-
gardless of the merits of our case, Germans of all political and economic
persuasions are united in opposing this role. They disagree with our
economics (however sound), resent our pressure (however gently ap-
plied), and cannot resist the political credit from standing up to us.
We can pursue the same objectives more indirectly. Most gov-
ernments want to increase economic growth and at the same time not
fan inflation. Differences arise mainly over means and degree, not
ends. Perhaps we could defuse the policy dispute and create a more
positive atmosphere by approaching the problem together with Ger-
many, Japan, and other OECD countries.
I realize that this matter has a long history, that many ideas have
been tried, and that by now no one’s motives are considered to be pure.
But what is needed is a new beginning.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
tial. Sent for information. Copies were sent to Solomon, Bergsten, Widman, and Junz
(Treasury); Cooper, Katz, Vine, and Hormats (State); Schultze, William Nordhaus, and
J. Shafer (CEA); and Hunter (NSC).

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
I would favor trying:
—To persuade the Germans that we are no longer going to push
them to expand more than they think they should and to convince them
to stop taking public pot shots at us. We would also try to work out
with them a unified approach to the following problems. Blumenthal
started this process in his recent talk with Schmidt.2 So the ground is
prepared.
—To get agreement in the OECD to study the relationship between
growth and inflation, with specific reference to the extent to which and
the manner in which each OECD country could increase its rate of eco-
nomic growth without provoking general price increases. The OECD
study should concentrate on how best to increase investment in each
country. It would also be useful to have an OECD study of the current
account consequences of all OECD countries simultaneously ex-
panding their economies to the prescribed extent.
—Exploring with the key OECD countries their experience with
and ideas about encouraging non-inflationary economic growth by
stimulating investment in areas that need additional capital in order to
solve other pressing problems such as conserving energy, developing
alternative sources of energy, and improving the environment. It might
well be politically feasible to adopt policy measures to encourage
business investment for these ends without also stimulating final de-
mand to an inflationary extent.
—To examine and evaluate the long experience the Europeans
have had with intervention in the money markets. We could at the
same time explain our concerns about systematic intervention to sup-
port a given exchange rate. We should also reassure the other OECD
countries that we do not want the dollar to fall further. The President
has already done this. So has Blumenthal. But the other countries still
are not sure of our intentions.
In conjunction with these steps, the President could make a major
speech to explain our domestic and international economic policy, indi-
cate our strategy and priorities, and show how we see the interrelation-
ship between growth, inflation, money, trade, and energy.
This series of interrelated actions should help tighten the gloomy
economic mode, contribute to a more cooperative atmosphere, take a
few steps toward solving some of the hard problems, and set the stage
for a positive, constructive meeting of the heads of governments at the
Bonn Summit. Unified movement in this direction, even if cautious,
2 See Document 111.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
could help settle the foreign exchange markets and give Wall Street a
positive boost.3
3 In a February 22 memorandum to Brzezinski on “the continuing spate of reports
about quarrelling with the West Germans,” Hunter suggested the “need for a re-think of
some basic attitudes.” Specifically, he questioned whether the United States should con-
tinue to pressure West Germany by linking the success of its efforts at economic expan-
sion to the timing of the next G–7 Summit, proposing that Brzezinski reconsider this
tactic with Carter, Vance, Owen, Blumenthal, and Strauss. At the top of Hunter’s memo-
randum, Aaron wrote: “I tend to agree.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff
114.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Telephone Call to FRG Chancellor Helmut Schmidt
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
FRG Chancellor Helmut Schmidt
The President and the Chancellor exchanged greetings.
The President said that he had called to say he had read with care—
and deeply appreciated—the Chancellor’s recent speech in Hamburg.2
It reflected the President’s sentiments exactly, and would show that re-
ports of disagreement between them are false. He just wanted the
Chancellor to know that he cherishes the deep friendship between
them and between our peoples.
1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 1,
from the Oval Office. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “ok. J.”
2 On March 8, Brzezinski sent Carter a copy of Schmidt’s remarks on U.S.–FRG rela-
tions during a March 3 speech in Hamburg. In his cover memorandum, Brzezinski noted
that Schmidt, although recognizing that the United States and West Germany were
bound to disagree sometimes, had emphasized the importance and overall strength of
the relationship. Brzezinski also provided talking points for Carter’s telephone call to
Schmidt. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File,
Owen suggested that Carter urge Schmidt to agree to a proposed U.S.–FRG statement on
measures to support the dollar that would “create a strong public impression of the two
countries’ determination to act forcefully.” (Ibid.)

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
Chancellor Schmidt replied that it was kind of the President to say
this. This morning, he had given his annual “state of the union” speech,
and in it there were two or three pages devoted to the deep-seated and
deep-rooted relations between our two peoples, and the historical ties.
He would like the President to have the full text, and would arrange for
the U.S. Ambassador to get one.3
The President said he knew they were thinking alike on this; and he
asked how things are going in Germany.
Chancellor Schmidt replied that, in terms of the domestic situation,
there are two complexes of different factors. On the one hand, there is,
stronger than before, the problem of labor disputes, since they have
about 1 million people out of work. But on the other hand, the eco-
nomic situation is going up. In the last quarter of 1977, they had a real
increase in growth of 6%, calculated on the “Anglo-American” yard-
stick. This was an enormous upswing, though he could not say
whether it would endure into the first quarter of 1978. But the domestic
outlook is fine. The foreign outlook, however, is not as good, especially
with exchange rates and currency. (The President agreed.) U.S. officials
from Treasury, and German officials from the Finance Ministry, will be
working together this weekend, on a common communique,4 which
should show the market what we jointly would do. We should do all
that we can to defend the dollar.
The President said he looked forward to seeing the communique,
and was sure it would be very positive. On energy, we are moving for-
ward here. On natural gas, we should have a result shortly. He is in-
voking the Taft–Hartley Act,5 with regard to the miners. Some coal pro-
duction is going up—though the miners are certainly an independent
lot. He cannot predict the outcome of the strike.
on Schmidt’s March 9 “Report on the State of the Nation” before the Bundestag. (Na-
4 An unknown person underlined the phrase “will be working together this
weekend.” On March 13, the United States and West Germany announced a joint dollar
support program that included increasing the U.S.–FRG swap from $2 billion to $4 bil-
lion; U.S. acquisition of $740 million in marks through SDR sales, as well as the sugges-
tion that the United States would seek up to $5 billion in IMF assistance if necessary; and
a shared commitment to “continuing forceful action,” as well as “close cooperation,” to
combat “disorderly” exchange market conditions. The joint U.S.–FRG statement also
noted that exchange market stability hinged “on a climate of confidence and a high de-
gree of stability in the world economy. Although progress has been made in some re-
spects, these conditions have not yet been adequately met: growth rates in some coun-
tries are still lower than desirable; unemployment remains too high and inflationary
pressures persist in many parts of the world, hampering more growth-oriented policies.”
(Clyde H. Farnsworth, “Plan is Announced by U.S. and Germany to Stabilize Dollar,” The
5 The 1947 Taft–Hartley Act, officially the Labor-Management Relations Act, regu-
lates the activities of labor unions.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Chancellor Schmidt asked about a natural gas vote in the Senate.
The President replied that a compromise proposal had come out of
the Senate conferences, and was going to the conferees of the House.
Following that there would be a vote. This is the first breakthrough in
months on energy.
Chancellor Schmidt returned to the subject of currency. Their
chances would be great of convincing the market, if there were no limit
on the instruments and the quantities that would be employed. The
smaller the quantities available, the less convincing would be their ef-
fect. They need to make the market believe that enormous quantities of
resources are available, and then they probably won’t have to use them.
The President said that he understood. Perhaps this could be re-
flected in the communique this weekend.
Chancellor Schmidt said that this was a consequence of his meeting
with Mike Blumenthal, recently.
The President said that that was a productive talk. And he said that
we were happy to have had the Finance Minister here. He is looking
forward to having the Chancellor here in May for the NATO Summit.6
But if in the meantime there are any problems, at any time, the Chan-
cellor should send a dispatch or phone him, and they would get it
resolved.
Chancellor Schmidt said he would do so if necessary. He thinks that
on currency questions, SALT, and the neutron bomb, we are having
very close consultations, for which he is personally gratified. These are
very deep consultations.
On the other hand, at the time of the NATO Summit, he would be
going for two days beforehand to the UN Special Session on Disarma-
ment to give a speech. There would be some time in between—perhaps
ident thinks it would be worthwhile to have a private chat, he would be
happy to come by, perhaps just to slip into the White House for a talk.
The President said that this was very good, but they should see how
things go. He does not have his schedule with him, but that they could
work it out, if it seemed advisable.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to currency issues.]

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
115.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, March 14, 1978
SUBJECT
Message from Callaghan
At Tab B is an incoming message from Prime Minister Callaghan,
concerning his talks with Chancellor Schmidt this past weekend.2 He
reports the Chancellor as pessimistic on economic prospects, and that
he “sees no prospect of agreement between us on the way through the
problem of low growth and high unemployment.” Schmidt also sug-
gests that the swap-line between us and the British be activated, on a
token basis, in order to promote confidence.
Specifically, Callaghan:
—asks whether officials of our two countries should talk about the
swap proposal;
—asks to see you—mainly or wholly tete-a-tete—on March 23, for
as long as possible and extending through lunch;
—suggests discussion of a British package of ideas for collective
action at the 7-Nation Summit, to restore confidence, generate growth
and develop world trade. Each nation, in different ways, would take
steps on commitments to growth, the maintenance of world trade, cur-
rency stability, the long-term use of capital surpluses, and conservation
of energy.
—is willing to send you a paper on these ideas, which might form
the basis of the British contribution to the March 31 meeting to prepare
the Summit.
At Tab A is a draft message of reply.3 It has been cleared in sub-
stance with Scheduling, Treasury, and Henry Owen.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 20, United Kingdom: Prime Minister
handwritten.
2 Tab B, attached but not printed, is a March 13 message from Callaghan to Carter.
3 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated message from Carter to Callaghan,
at the end of which Carter wrote “ok.” In the message, Carter agreed that “a package of
collective action would be in everyone’s interest” and suggested “low-key” discussion of
a U.S.–U.K. swap (which Carter characterized as problematic) and a multilateral swap.
Carter accepted Callaghan’s suggestion that they meet on March 23, agreeing “that we
cannot sit back and let the free world economies drift downwards” and adding his “hope
that the agreement that the U.S. and German governments worked out over the weekend
will be an effective start on common action.” Carter indicated that in the meantime, he
“would very much welcome” a British paper on the economic situation. On March 16,
Callaghan sent Carter a proposal entitled “International Action on Growth, Currency,
Stability, Energy and Other Matters.” (Letter from Callaghan to Carter, March 16; Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
RECOMMENDATION:
1. That you approve the message to Prime Minister Callaghan at
Tab A.4
2. Do you want us to ask whether Mrs. Carter would like to invite
Mrs. Callaghan to lunch on March 23?5
4 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation, but
see footnote 3 above.
5 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation, writing “but leave it up to
her.” Beneath this, Brzezinski wrote: “R[ick] I[nderfurth]—check with Mrs. Carter.”
116.
Memorandum From John Renner of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the Special Representative
for Economic Summits (Owen)1
Washington, March 14, 1978
SUBJECT
Upcoming Choice for the President on Economic Policy
At this afternoon’s meeting of the International Monetary Group
battle lines were drawn for a future fight about economic policy.
Solomon and Wallich (Federal Reserve) argued that the dollar
crisis cannot be terminated satisfactorily without following somewhat
more restrictive fiscal and monetary policies. They contended that the
dollar continues to fall because of the sour psychological mood of the
money managers and that nothing less than a hard-nosed anti-inflation
program would work.
Nordhaus (CEA) said that more restrictive fiscal and monetary
policies would halt US economic growth and freeze unemployment at
present levels. He preferred to see the dollar depreciate further.
I supported Solomon on foreign policy grounds and advocated the
adoption of a comprehensive program along the lines of my memo to
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
information. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
you of this morning.2 On the basis of Solomon’s presentation of the ex-
tremely gloomy mood among money managers, I would add to the list
of measures I recommended moderately restrictive fiscal and monetary
policies. This means at a minimum not allowing the budgetary deficit
to increase and raising interest rates slightly.
It seems to me that the President will soon be faced with a tough
decision:
Option 1: In order to stabilize the dollar and avoid a deterioration
of our national security position, take measures to restrain economic
growth and freeze unemployment at the present level with the resul-
tant undesirable domestic economic and social consequences.
Option 2: In order to keep the economy growing and unemploy-
ment falling, let the dollar continue to depreciate with the risk of a
major flight from the dollar with all of the serious economic and polit-
ical repercussions that would follow.
The policy dilemma is put in stark terms for clarity. In reality, I
think that economic growth could be restrained somewhat and unem-
ployment held at present levels without serious economic or political
consequences. A higher rate of economic growth and lower level of
unemployment could be pursued after the dollar had stabilized and
after the current account disparities had been reduced to tolerable
proportions.
I recommend that you give serious consideration to my recom-
mendation that the President create a “council of war” to consider and
decide on an integrated, comprehensive program to stabilize the dollar.
2 In his March 14 memorandum to Brzezinski, Renner proposed a number of meas-
ures, in addition to an oil import fee, to stabilize the dollar: the convening of “a ‘council of
war’” to devise a comprehensive stabilization program; a Presidential effort to encourage
the energy bill’s passage; a subcabinet investigation into executive action to accelerate oil
conservation; a report from Blumenthal on increasing U.S. foreign exchange reserves so
as to augment the government’s ability to intervene in the exchange market; Treasury
market intervention “to stabilize the dollar in an acceptable range;” foreign government
cooperation; wage and income guidelines to stem inflation; and a major Presidential
statement. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File,
Owen a revised version of the program (which omitted the report from Blumenthal, but
suggested that Carter “clamp a firm ceiling on the budgetary deficit,” as well as a mod-
erate interest rate increase by the Federal Reserve); in his cover memorandum, Renner
noted Solomon’s “100 percent” agreement with the proposals. (Carter Library, National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
117.
Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Economic and Business Affairs (Katz) to Secretary of
State Vance1
Washington, March 15, 1978
Effects on our Foreign Relations of Administration Inaction on
Energy and Inflation
The market is losing confidence in the dollar. It is persuaded that
the US is drifting, unable to take the critical measures to reduce its large
oil bill or to keep price increases in its economy under control. Capital
is moving out of the US, private capital inflows have fallen off, and
OPEC is shifting out of dollar-denominated assets into non-dollar de-
posits in the Euromarket. In the absence of corrective action, these
movements out of the dollar will intensify. Intervention alone will not
check these movements, as the market reaction to the US-German state-
ment on Monday demonstrated.2 Indeed, unless we take early decisive
action on energy and inflation—which are essential to restore market
confidence in our ability to manage our affairs—we may be confronted
at any time with a flight from the dollar that could swell to panic
proportions.
Inaction by the Administration to check a steep decline in the
dollar would have disastrous consequences for our foreign policy:
—The pressure on OPEC to raise oil prices directly or by denomi-
nating oil prices in SDR’s would become irresistible. The US—not
OPEC—would be blamed by all other importing countries for this
result.
—The MTN would be halted in its tracks. Our trading partners,
who are already complaining that the depreciation of the dollar is ex-
cessive, indeed deliberate, and gives the US an unfair competitive ad-
vantage, would be quite unwilling to reduce tariffs or cooperate on
non-tariff barriers.
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of Cyrus
“CV” are stamped at the bottom of the page.
New York Times on the U.S.–FRG dollar stabilization program noted that the program’s
announcement had “failed to impress foreign exchange markets. The American currency,
which had shown strength early in the day in Europe on high hopes that significant steps
would be announced, tumbled after the measures were made public.” (Clyde H. Farns-
worth, “Plan is Announced by U.S. and Germany to Stabilize Dollar,” The New York

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
—Protectionism in other countries would be given a powerful
fillip and would be justified by the steep and “unfair” decline in the
dollar.
—Our domestic objective of steady, stable growth at home would
be undermined. Business confidence would erode, the stock market
would sag, inflation would intensify as the dollar price of US imports
rose and induced a further rise in the prices of US domestic goods that
compete with imports, capital outflow could become feverish, and in-
terest rates would rise.
—Economic activity abroad which is on a rising trend would be
depressed as uncertainty about the economic outlook intensified and
gloom became contagious.
—Depressed economic activity in the developed countries, which
the increase in the price of oil would exacerbate, would hurt devel-
oping countries whose import costs would rise while their earnings fell
off.
—The US would be blamed for converting a slow but steady re-
covery to a world-wide recession.
—Furthermore, the dollar is not only a major trading currency but
the world’s most important reserve asset. The US would be accused by
oil-exporting countries, the non-oil LDCs, and many developed coun-
tries who hold all or a substantial portion of their reserves in dollars, of
serious mismanagement of its affairs that had caused severe losses in
the value of their reserve assets, inadequately compensated by interest
payments on the dollar. The accusation would be all the sharper be-
cause the US has resisted efforts by others to strengthen the SDR as an
alternative reserve asset.
—The dollar costs of our military establishment overseas would
mount. The rising budgetary burden of maintaining these forces would
face us with difficult decisions: to curtail domestic social programs, to
retrench on our defense expenditures, or to increase our budgetary def-
icit with adverse effects on domestic inflation.
—US leadership of the Western military and political alliance
would be undermined. The weight of the US in the world economy is
so great that our major allies perceive themselves as helpless to protect
their own interests in the face of US drift. Leadership requires decisive
action. In its absence, recriminations will intensify and cooperation
with our major allies, on which our strength and security ultimately de-
pend, will weaken.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
118.
Summary of Conclusions of a Presidential Review
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Dollar Crisis
PARTICIPANTS
State
Council of Economic Advisors
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Charles Schultze
Richard Cooper
Federal Reserve Board
Under Secretary
William Miller
for Economic Affairs
White House
Defense
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Secretary Harold Brown
David Aaron
Treasury
Henry Owen
Secretary Michael Blumenthal
David Rubinstein
Anthony Solomon
NSC
Under Secretary for
Timothy Deal
Monetary Affairs
Energy
Secretary James Schlesinger
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
The group agreed that we have a potentially serious problem on
our hands. In recent months, the dollar’s depreciation against major
currencies has accelerated and markets have become increasingly dis-
orderly. The trend is continuing despite public efforts to turn the tide.
We have used up $3 billion through intervention in exchange markets.
Additional intervention by other countries has totaled $20 billion. Pri-
vate capital is beginning to flow out of the US, and in the 4th quarter of
1977 net capital outflows amounted to $10 billion. New purchases of
US securities by Saudi Arabia and other OPEC states have declined
markedly.
The main factors behind these developments are: (1) our large
trade and current account deficits, and (2) a lack of confidence abroad
in the US economy, relating to concerns about both energy and infla-
tion. The US trade deficit will probably deteriorate further this year
to $30–32 billion despite earlier more optimistic forecasts. The US
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 68,
White House Situation Room. Brzezinski sent the Summary of Conclusions to Carter
under cover of a March 18 memorandum in which he noted “that Schultze and Schles-
inger agree with Blumenthal on the recommendations.” (Ibid.)

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
business and banking community and foreign investors are not confi-
dent that the US is able or willing to deal with the dollar crisis. In their
view, we are not acting forcefully to correct fundamental problems.
The group saw the following possible consequences if the US
could not halt the dollar’s decline:
1. OPEC would increase oil prices. OPEC might either raise them di-
rectly or begin to denominate them in non-US currencies. Either action
would have an adverse impact on the US and world economy.
2. Domestic inflationary pressures would intensify. A depreciating
dollar raises domestic prices. (Depreciation to date in 1978 is projected
to raise prices by 0.5% by the end of the year.) The dollar’s decline is
partly responsible for the stock market’s malaise. These developments
could further erode business confidence and dampen private invest-
ment flows. Eventually, depreciation-induced inflation might have a
snowballing effect leading to still further adverse consequences.
3. US leadership abroad in economic policy and foreign affairs would
suffer. The trade negotiations would probably fail; the North/South di-
alogue would deteriorate. The international economic system would
enter into a decline with a serious impact on Allied solidarity and the
probability of adverse social and political consequences in key Allied
countries.
The group agreed that the Administration must act now to deal
with the dollar problem. We cannot afford to wait until self-correcting
forces (e.g., a depreciating dollar leading to increased exports) take
hold. Immediate action would forestall more drastic measures later.
The group agreed on the following steps to deal with the dollar crisis:
1. Energy. The President should next week call in appropriate Con-
gressional leaders and energy conferees and inform them in general
terms that because of the deteriorating international economic situa-
tion, if they are not able to agree on an energy tax program by late
April, he will be compelled to restrict oil imports by other means. The
public announcement of such a meeting should be carefully phrased to
avoid the appearance that the President has given Congress an ulti-
matum, and should be linked to the other measures described below. If
the Congress does not act in a month or so, we should be prepared to
impose a fee on imported oil. The group agreed that there are strong
national security grounds for this action. Consequently, if we present
our case effectively and give Congress advance warning of our inten-
tions, the risk of Congressional action to withdraw the President’s
power in this area should be manageable.2
2 Carter wrote “?” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
2. Anti-inflation program. The President should announce an anti-
inflation program. The group agreed that this program should empha-
size the anti-inflation controls in our original economic strategy and
would not entail any basic change in our overall economic objectives.
We would continue on a growth path designed gradually to reduce
unemployment.3
3. Export promotion efforts. The Administration would announce a
series of measures to stimulate exports.
Next Steps: The President will be given separate action memoranda
recommending anti-inflation steps, export promotion measures, and
the meeting with Members of Congress. The PRC recommended that
the President announce all three actions simultaneously.
3 Carter wrote “ok” in the margin adjacent to this and the next two paragraphs.
119.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Cabinet Economic
Policy Group (Blumenthal) to President Carter1
Washington, March 21, 1978
SUBJECT
Measures to stem oil imports and improve exports
The Policy Review Committee of the NSC unanimously agreed on
March 16 that strong actions to fight inflation and to improve our trade
deficit (chiefly through limiting oil imports) are urgently needed to
avert a possible international financial crisis connected with the failing
dollar. The PRC minutes (attached at Tab A)2 reflect the unanimous
view that there is an immediate need for a statement by you on new
anti-inflation measures and on the possibility of Executive action to
stem oil imports.
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
page. Eizenstat discussed Blumenthal’s memorandum in a March 23 memorandum to
Carter. (Ibid.)
2 Tab A is attached but not printed; see Document 118.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
discuss possible actions.4 We are sending you a separate decision mem-
orandum on the anti-inflation measures considered by the EPG.5 The
present memorandum deals with measures to improve the trade
deficit.
Oil Imports
All agencies recommend that you call in the Congressional leader-
ship6 before your foreign trip7 and urge expedited action on the Energy
Bill—and in particular on COET—in view of the mounting dollar crisis
and associated domestic economic problems, and that you then make a
public statement reflecting your discussion with the leadership.
(Talking points and a draft statement are attached at Tabs B and C.)8
Decision
Agree to meeting9
Date/time10
Disagree
However, two EPG agencies—DOE and DPS—dissent from the
view that you should mention the possibility of administrative action
on oil imports at this meeting and in the subsequent public statement.
These agencies believe:
3 In attendance were the Vice President, Stu Eizenstat, Secretaries Blumenthal, Mar-
shall, and Kreps, OMB Acting Director McIntyre, Ambassador Strauss, Ambassador
Owen (NSC), CEA Member Gramley, Under Secretary of State Cooper, CWPS Director
Boswoth, and DOE Assistant Secretary Alm. [Footnote in the original. Alvin Alm was the
Assistant Secretary of Energy for Policy and Evaluation from 1977 until 1980.]
4 Cooper provided his impressions of this meeting in a March 22 memorandum to
Vance. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the Under
Memorandums from RNC to Secretary, Deputy Secretary, 78)
5 A March 21 memorandum from Blumenthal to Carter contains the EPG recom-
mendations on anti-inflation initiatives for Carter’s decision. (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 16, Economic Policy Group Execu-
6 Suggested list of members is at Tab B. [Footnote in the original.]
8 Tab B, attached but not printed, consists of an undated paper, “Talking Points for
Use with Congressional Leaders, Protecting the Dollar by Acting on Oil Imports,” and
another undated paper, “Suggested attendees for meetings on energy and the dollar.”
Tab C, attached but not printed, is an undated paper, “Press Conference Statement.”
9 Carter indicated his approval of this option, writing in the adjacent margin:
“While I’m gone, you, Miller, Cy can brief 3 or 4 key members of Congress. J.”
10 Carter wrote “any time after my trip—sooner/better” above this option.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
• that substantial progress in passing COET is not possible by
May 1;
• and that mention of administrative action may disrupt negotia-
tions on a natural gas compromise and will likely persuade Congress to
shelve COET and allow you to take sole responsibility for raising do-
mestic oil prices.
All other agencies (Treasury, State, CEA, OMB, NSC, and Com-
merce) endorse the PRC recommendation that you inform the leader-
ship, and announce publicly, that the dollar crisis may force you to
limit oil imports through administrative action if substantial progress
on COET is not forthcoming by the end of April. These agencies
believe:
• that the mounting dollar crisis could well compel early adminis-
trative action, and that in fairness the leadership should be told this as
soon as possible;
• and that a firm, public commitment to early administrative ac-
tion, in the event of Congressional stalemate, is now necessary to re-
duce the risk that the dollar may soon come under sudden and exces-
sive selling pressures, possibly triggering increases in capital outflows,
an OPEC price rise, an increase in domestic inflation, and a sharp rise in
domestic interest rates, with consequent damage to the domestic eco-
nomic recovery and to all elements of our foreign policy.
Decision
Mention possibility of administrative action (Treasury, State, CEA,
OMB, NSC, and Commerce recommend)11
Avoid mention of administrative action (DOE and DPS recommend)
Export Policy
All EPG agencies agree that you should now call for a national
policy to improve our export performance. We recommend that you di-
rect Secretary Kreps to organize a Presidential Task Force and report to
you by May 15 on how government policy in the following areas might
be rationalized to enhance the capacity of U.S. business to sell its goods
and services abroad:
• export financing
• export development
• government regulation
• taxation
• research and development
• anti-trust
11 Carter wrote “I’ll decide before mtg.” above this option.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
A draft statement on exports is attached at Tab D.12 You should
know that this step may further dim prospects that Congress will ac-
cept the phased elimination of DISC proposed in our tax reform bill.13
However, the urgent need to address the trade deficit requires that we
at least attempt to develop a coherent policy toward exports.
Treasury believes the statement on exports, to be credible in the
dollar markets, should be made only in the context of a strong state-
ment on limiting oil imports.
Decision
Agree to task force and export statement (all agencies recommend)14
Disagree
12 Tab D, attached but not printed, is an undated paper stamped “Draft,” entitled
“Proposed Statement by President Carter on the Need for a National Export Policy.”
13 For the text of Carter’s January 20 message to Congress proposing a series of tax
reduction and reform measures, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States:
14 Carter indicated his approval of this option. On April 11, Carter announced his
anti-inflation policy before the American Society of Newspaper Editors in Washington.
Among the measures he proposed was the creation of a task force on export promotion,
which would be led by the Secretary of Commerce. For the text of Carter’s remarks, see
120.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, March 21, 1978
SUBJECT
Prime Minister Callaghan’s Forthcoming Visit
I have just seen Prime Minister Callaghan’s March 16 letter to you
and his accompanying proposal for a five-part “package” agreement
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
cover of a March 20 memorandum from Bergsten, who noted that the memorandum had
been prepared at Blumenthal’s request. Bergsten also noted Solomon’s concurrence in the
memorandum, as well as Cooper’s and Owen’s support for the Treasury Department po-
sition. Bergsten observed that “Cooper is not as worried as I about the implications of the
Callaghan proposals and thus is more inclined toward a stance of ‘listen and defer judg-
ment.’” (National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for In-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
among the major countries as a means of restoring confidence in inter-
national economic leadership.2
Callaghan’s call for commitments to take specific measures on
growth looks reasonable, although his proposal that we jointly pres-
sure Chancellor Schmidt to commit before mid-May on further
stimulus measures would go beyond the recent U.S. agreement with
the Germans and is unlikely to be accepted by Schmidt. Callaghan’s
points on long-term capital flows, energy and trade seem generally
unobjectionable, although I do not find anything new in them likely to
have much impact.
The new significant proposals are in Callaghan’s fifth point—“cur-
rency stability.” I strongly advise that we not commit ourselves to the ac-
tions in the currency area which he proposes. Unless tailored carefully, they
could start us down a road back toward fixed exchange rates, which in
turn could place a strait jacket on U.S. domestic economic policy and
create huge exchange losses for us if the dollar were to weaken further.
If we act on the fundamentals, particularly energy and price sta-
bility, the exchange markets will take care of themselves. If we fail to do
so and a major crisis becomes imminent, we can re-examine the feasi-
bility of multilateral currency operations. But implementation of any such
scheme should begin with the Germans, and perhaps the Japanese, not the
British. I therefore believe that you should make no commitment to
Callaghan.
I think it is also extremely important that you reject Callaghan’s pro-
posals for longer term reform of the international monetary system.3 New au-
thority for the International Monetary Fund, agreed upon two years
ago,4 will become effective in the next few weeks. These new IMF pro-
and the accompanying proposal to Carter. In his cover memorandum, Owen summa-
rized and commented upon the British proposal, which included measures to stimulate
domestic growth; increases in the flow of long-term capital and aid; more energy conser-
vation and investment; encouragement of trade liberalization and disavowal of protec-
tionism; and multilateral measures to stabilize the dollar, such as a widening of the swap
network, U.S. sales of SDRs, and a U.S. drawing on the IMF. (Carter Library, National Se-
curity Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 15,
3 The British proposal suggested the need to address several questions concerning
the evolution of the international monetary system, including “whether the US author-
ities are going on a continuing basis to ensure that the dollar functions appropriately as
the only important international reserve asset; and how the other main powers—and the
markets—are going to react over time if the dollar does not fulfil this function. Linked
with these questions there will also be that concerning the viability of the present ex-
change rate regime.”
4 In January 1976, the IMF Interim Committee agreed on a program of international
monetary reform; see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXI, Foreign Economic Policy,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
visions will provide the right framework for the improved manage-
ment of the system which is needed. Callaghan’s proposals raise major
substantive problems but, beyond that, any proposal to reopen long-term
system questions at this time of currency instability would be very disruptive
and damaging to world confidence.
I will provide you with additional material on the Callaghan pro-
posals before your meeting Thursday,5 but I wanted to let you know
now of my concerns about his currency proposals.
W. Michael Blumenthal6
5 March 23.
6 Blumenthal signed “Mike” above this typed signature.
121.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting with UK Prime Minister James Callaghan
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Vice President Walter Mondale
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Secretary of the Treasury W. Michael Blumenthal
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Ambassador Kingman Brewster, U.S. Ambassador to the United Kingdom
Ambassador Henry Owen
Robert Hunter, NSC Staff Member (Notetaker)
UK Prime Minister James Callaghan
Ambassador Peter Jay, British Ambassador to the United States
Sir John Hunt, Secretary of the Cabinet
Kenneth E. Couzens, Treasury
William S. Ryrie, Minister (Economics), British Embassy, Washington, D.C.
Kenneth Stowe, Principal Private Secretary to the Prime Minister
T.D. McCaffrey, Press Secretary to the Prime Minister
Thomas McNally, Political Adviser to the Prime Minister
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
inet Room. Callaghan was in Washington on a private visit.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
vately in the Oval Office, then joined the others in the Cabinet Room, as
follows.)
(The President, the Vice President, and the Prime Minister began
by discussing the recent biography of President Truman.)
The President said (in a jocular way) that he and the Prime Minister
had not had enough time alone. They make constructive and frank
comments to one another, and they needed more time for their
conversation.
He is very thankful to have the Prime Minister here. The economic
subject is an important one; and it is important that they address it, as
well. To give a brief analysis, the Prime Minister sees that we should let
the world know that the Summit Conference nations will act in concert,
whenever they can reach a common approach. There are five areas to
be considered: economic growth, long-term capital flows, energy,
trade, and resisting protectionism (sic!). The Prime Minister had sent
him a separate presentation, which the President had studied and
learned from.2 The Prime Minister’s associates had worked on it for
several months. The Prime Minister had told him that one can’t press
Germany to act against its own interests. We had pressed Schmidt to
the limit of his ability to move. He (Schmidt) is concerned over U.S.
failure to act effectively enough to stabilize the dollar. We recognize
that there are different responsibilities. But it is good to express oneself
clearly, if a leader feels that one nation is not acting in the interests of
others. The Prime Minister has described well our own concern, and
world concern, with the role of the dollar. When the U.S. economy is in
good shape, we pay no attention to the dollar. But when we have
problems, we react with consternation at the comments of others. We
must learn to see that issues of the dollar are not just domestic matters,
but also international. Secretary Blumenthal is worried half to death
about the dollar! It is important that the dollar play a strong role.
It is important that we (all) use the time between now and July to
prepare the Summit carefully, and see what we can do separately and
collectively.
The Prime Minister had suggested (the President continued) that
when each of the Summit nations act—on inflation, etc.—they should
do so within a common framework. They would undertake to consult
with one another—though not to give a veto. When the President
thinks he must do something, then the Prime Minister says (and he, the
President agrees with him) that he should send a private dispatch, to
2 Carter is referring to the proposal that Callaghan sent him on March 16; see foot-
note 2, Document 120.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
get suggestions, and to reassure our major trading partners. The Prime
Minister said that he would be calling Schmidt—and he would not do it
to ask him (about this?), but only to tell him that, when the U.S. acts, it
will tell him (Schmidt). The world economic situation has deteriorated,
and bold and decisive action is needed, or it will deteriorate further.
He (the President) had no further details at the moment. He would
like to have the Prime Minister’s comments. They should talk frankly:
there are no sensibilities on this side of the table. He wants to thank the
Prime Minister for coming; he comes as a good friend. We are honored
to have him here. As an added bonus, the Prime Minister will see his
grandchildren. We and the world benefit from the Prime Minister’s un-
selfish work on these complex issues. This is beneficial to everyone.
The Prime Minister said thank you very much—and also expressed
thanks to all who had worked on the British paper. It had gone through
3 or 4 drafts, and was beginning to be a rigorous analysis. It is not a
plan, but areas for examination. Something needs to be done. He had
lived for years, including his time as Chancellor of the Exchequer, in
this economic world. There are now fewer signposts in international fi-
nance and economics than ever before. They had all been swept away.
We need basic, long-term signposts, new criteria by which the interna-
tional community can make judgments, as well as ourselves. This is
needed for the long-term. But in the short-term, how can we make im-
provements in the next one to two years? These matters will have pro-
found political implications unless we are careful.
That is the background for what he wants to say. Also, there is no
question of the UK’s thrusting itself into the driver’s seat. The U.S. has
the lead, with its weight in the world economy. U.S. economic strength
leads to political strength, and together they lead to Western security.
He told Chancellor Schmidt the same thing. We should ask our people
(staff) to get some proposals, together, on these subjects or other areas
we can agree upon.
What is involved is getting people to do what they do not want to
do. If we are to get Schmidt to act, it can be done only if others will also
act—from a common (position?). What should Britain do? He had
written down four things, which are not very onerous. First, there
should be more energy conservation. Britain should help with the
Common Agriculture Policy in regard to the Multilateral Trade Negoti-
ations—and will take this line in the European Community. Britain
would also help—for example if the U.S. activated an IMF drawing
(which should be big, not a piddling amount)—if so, then Britain
would itself make an early repayment to the IMF. But for immediate
steps, they have a budget in about ten days. If it could be done under
complete secrecy, they could see what could come of talks with the
U.S., talking about the budget, and make this part of the coordinated

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
plan. He would have to see whether Chancellor Healey would have
any objections. Perhaps the United States could do the same on energy?
At the root of the matter is confidence. We must all be able to
present what we do between now and July as part of a coordinated ap-
proach. What we all do, between now and July, would be greater than
the sum of the parts. Each nation could do something it does not like,
and if all would do this, then each one could. Schmidt might swallow
this. With Japan, more is needed on foreign aid, in the form of long-
term capital flows.
Now, all these nations are moving individually, often against one
another. There are no guidelines since the collapse of Bretton Woods.
Each nation takes defensive actions. But the world needs to feel that the
leading countries are taking the situation in hand. There should be no
declaration—this would fail, as with the Downing Street declaration—
but they should show that they are acting collectively. What measures
are put in the package are less important than the restoration of confi-
dence in the world, which would lead to more investment.
If he talks about the dollar, he would recommend that the U.S. not
deflate—and hopes there are other ways (to help the dollar)—for if so,
that would be the end of world trade this year. That would be a gross
waste of human resources—as last year, when world-wide trade only
went up by 4%.
He and the President and the other leaders (the Prime Minister con-
tinued) should collectively say to the technicians (who can do anything
they are asked to do) that we want to give a political impetus, and say
we want it done with regard to a group of proposals. This would give
the world a feeling that we are in charge again.
Secretary Blumenthal said that he could not improve on what the
Prime Minister had said, concerning the requirements. He agreed that
the guideposts are gone. This is true in trade and in monetary relations,
where the new system is under strain because of energy and capital
movements. He agrees that there are limits in the short-term, and that
we must primarily deal with psychology. A sense of unity would best
assure that we can inject a sense of confidence. We will really turn
around the markets by working on the fundamentals, but that cannot
be done in the short-term.
The fundamentals include energy, where we are trying hard on
getting action, and to limit our oil import bill. He is hopeful that we will
get some progress soon. Even if the numbers are low, still there would
be the psychological value. (The Prime Minister agreed.) There is also in-
ternal (?) inflation. In the U.S., the first quarter of 1978 was poor, with
the coal strike and the weather, but the growth outlook is good for
1978—though it will accelerate inflation. To keep control of inflation,
with growth, there needs to be an international component.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
These are the two fundamentals. On growth, with Germany and
Japan this is also a fundamental. Even if Schmidt goes now to reach
growth, which would be hard for anyone to do. They hesitate in Ger-
many to go forward very fast. Concerning Japan, its current account
surplus of $13 billion is very worrying. It will not be easy for Japan to
therefore, there will probably still be a $9 or $10 billion Japanese current
account surplus.
These are the fundamentals. We will do our part. We seek to limit
disorderly market conditions (working with the Germans), sometimes
with indifferent success. He had prepared some figures on the amount
spent on intervention. Since October 1, Japan had spent $11 billion, yet
the Yen is at 230 (to the dollar) and is still going down. Germany has
since the first of the year. We couldn’t get Congressional approval for a
large effort. The Exchange Stabilization Fund is limited.3 Therefore, in-
tervention is not the answer.
The Prime Minister said this is true in the short-term, if it (the
dollar?) can be turned around. He hopes the U.S. will be able to do so.
Secretary Blumenthal said that Germany would see the risk of
inflation.
The Prime Minister said he doubts that the U.S. could get a new
swap.
Secretary Blumenthal said we did get one recently, doubling the
amount, but there are still worries. We must work together on trade
and aid and to resist protectionism—it will be difficult. On the Prime
Minister’s idea about motivating the Saudis to place dollars for the
long-term in the U.S., this was good.4 And they (the Saudis) have done
a lot already.
The Prime Minister said he didn’t realize that the Saudis were
placing money for 8 years.
Secretary Blumenthal said that the Saudis were moving to the
long-term—two to five years and longer. But this is a sensitive matter,
and there is a need to be careful.
The Prime Minister asked what was offered on a stable dollar.
3 Through the Exchange Stabilization Fund, established by the 1934 Gold Reserve
Act, the Treasury Department can, among other things, intervene in the foreign exchange
market.
4 The British proposal suggested that “a clearer indication by the Saudis that they
were prepared to place funds in the US at longer term would strengthen the capital
account.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Secretary Blumenthal said that they (the Saudis) have expectations
of its improvement. They are committed to the strength of the U.S.
economy. They think it is sound. They want to stay with the dollar. If
they see energy action in Congress, and if they see that the Summit is
working, then it will be all right.
The President said that in 1978, some facts are good. Interest rates
are up, which attracts dollars. The prospect is that the differential in
growth rates will be reduced, not by the U.S. growth rate’s going down,
but by the others’ going up some. The average differential last year was
3%. Therefore, we could buy goods abroad, and they could not. He
does not see imports of oil going up. In 1977, there was a rapid rise, but
now it has leveled off, with new sources from Alaska, etc. But the basic
psychology exaggerates the underlying factors of concern. The Prime
Minister’s advice is good. Whenever the British or we act unilaterally,
this should be the result of consultations, under the umbrella of a com-
prehensive approach. Therefore, each step would be more effective. He
can act on oil imports and to control inflation. If the public knows that
he is consulting with the Prime Minister and with Schmidt, then this
will help.
The Prime Minister raised the question whether the Summit should
be held earlier. They should not hold up action until July, but they also
should not move the Summit up, because of complications with
Schmidt.
The President said he had not raised that question.
The Prime Minister said he thinks they can work along these lines
between now and July. All should do what they do not want to do.
Therefore, the U.S. should lead, though he (the Prime Minister) had put
in their pail
The President said he had noticed that! Could they talk about the
British alternative currency idea?
The Prime Minister said that there are some similarities between the
position of the U.S. dollar, and that of sterling in the mid-’60s. Treasury
Secretary Fowler5 had then helped Britain with swaps, in order to pre-
serve sterling in the front-line. He (Fowler) saw that if sterling went out
as a reserve currency, then there would be an attack on the dollar.
Britain and America worked together, therefore. But now that (attack
on the dollar) has happened. He would now speak, not as a British poli-
tician, but as a friend. He believes that the burden of having the dollar
as a reserve currency is too great—though he knows that the U.S.
Treasury people would not like him saying this! After all, the U.S. share
of world trade is smaller than it was 20 years ago. The U.S. needs a

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
greater trade share in order for the dollar to be a reserve currency. Oth-
erwise, the U.S. would either be nagged to do things that it does not
want to do, or to assist the world in ways that would not fit with U.S.
needs. There is some similarity with sterling, though in other ways the
dollar and the sterling situations are not similar—e.g. U.S. produc-
tivity. But when he sees surges against the dollar, he is moved to say
what Mike Blumenthal said 10 years ago (about sterling).6
Therefore, this is a personal matter. He believes it would be wise
for the President to reactivate SDRs; this would therefore be an act to
bring SDRs back to life. He would like, in the U.S. interest and in the
world interest, to build up SDRs alongside the dollar—though not to
replace it. The situation was different in the 1960s—then it was hard to
get SDRs accepted. The argument was about whether more liquidity
was needed. France was against increasing liquidity, and may have
been right.
Therefore, it would be tough to get his proposal accepted. But if it
were possible to get such a system, to convert part of reserves to SDRs,
along with other (?) currencies, then the U.S. would have an added
pillar.
The basis of a reserve currency is that it is a constant store of
value—or the Saudis will say what they will do. With floating rates,
there is no constant store of value. He is against floating. His belief is
for being close to fixed rates—though he knows he is in the minority!
Peter (Jay) is gritting his teeth! And all the President’s experts are doing
the same! But without a constant store of value, the U.S. will be in
trouble. Thus this (proposal on SDRs) is in the U.S. interest and in the
world interest.
The President then adjourned the meeting for lunch. (12:00)
6 Not further identified.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
122.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Luncheon with UK Prime Minister James Callaghan
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Secretary of the Treasury W. Michael Blumenthal
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Ambassador Kingman Brewster, U.S. Ambassador to the United Kingdom
Ambassador Henry Owen
Robert Hunter, NSC Staff Member (Notetaker)
UK Prime Minister James Callaghan
Ambassador Peter Jay, British Ambassador to the United States
Sir John Hunt, Secretary of the Cabinet
Kenneth E. Couzens, Treasury
William S. Ryrie, Minister (Economics), British Embassy, Washington, D.C.
Kenneth Stowe, Principal Private Secretary to the Prime Minister
T.D. McCaffrey, Press Secretary to the Prime Minister
Thomas McNally, Political Adviser to the Prime Minister
(The participants reassembled in the Private Dining Room on the
first floor of the Mansion. At 12:17, the President invited Secretary Blu-
menthal to continue the discussion.)
Secretary Blumenthal said that the Prime Minister is right that in the
Treasury there are experts and technicians who take theological views.
But he can assure him that Tony Solomon and Fred Bergsten have no
theological baggage. He sees two issues: first is the question of the
floating rate system—which we are trying to make work; second is the
question of whether the dollar alone can bear the burden in the future
as the reserve currency. There are burdens, we have learned, and a con-
nection with our domestic economy. There has been a rude awakening
with our trade percentage down—we had thought we could separate
the domestic and the international (factors?).
On fixed vs. floating rates, he joins those, in the United States and
Britain, who feel that the old fixed-rate system couldn’t work again.
The flexible rate system is best suited in a world where fundamental
changes are not finished. We need perhaps a decade of flexibility. He
feels that the flexible rate system is needed, but maybe it does not work
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
vate Dining Room on the first floor of the Mansion.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
well enough. New articles for the IMF—in the next few weeks—will in-
crease the IMF’s surveillance role. This will strengthen the IMF.
On SDRs, we are for thinking about the Prime Minister’s proposal.
The roof leaks, but we should not give cause for concern to the markets,
that we are tinkering with the whole system. This would be another ele-
ment of uncertainty in a delicate situation. Maybe the Prime Minister
has a point in the long-term; maybe this is something for the U.S. in the
long-term, but only the long-term. We must be very, very careful about
this: we can think about it, but must give no impression that we are
working on it. This is delicate.
The Prime Minister said he had planned just to note the issue, only
the President had then asked about it. He is worried, too, about the
markets. But it should be all right to talk as friends. He agrees that the
markets (?) are important; this is the psychology of the situation.
Money is like a woman’s virtue; it is most safeguarded when least
talked about. On fixed rates, he will accept what has been said. But in
the long-term, he hopes thought will be given to them. The situation is
not good. He hopes people will not think that the issue is solved, even
as we get through this present period. It will still be with us after the
U.S. amends its Constitution and the 4th Carter Administration is
beginning
The President said he hopes to get to the fourth year
The Prime Minister said that there is a problem, and that it is ba-
sically in the United States’ and the world’s interest for it to be solved.
Ambassador Jay said he agreed about that in the long-term.
Mr. Couzens said that he agreed with the Prime Minister on the
fundamentals. If they are talking of other issues, it is because there is so
much common ground between the United States and the United
Kingdom. Therefore, we should not get the issues out of proportion.
On SDRs, he agreed that it would be dangerous in the markets to say
anything. But there is really nothing to say: the proposal has already
been made. Information on it has got into the press from Witteveen.
Therefore it is in the press, and there is a debate, without our acting to
bring this about. It is best that the idea has come out in public that way.
And he hoped that the United States will think about it.
The Prime Minister asked what the proposal was that was put for-
ward by Witteveen.
Mr. Ryrie said that it would replace some reserves with SDRs.
The Prime Minister asked if there were a U.S. proposal.
Mr. Couzens said no, and that there was not a British proposal,
either.
The Prime Minister said that yes there is, he had made it this
morning! He then agreed that the two sides should “work it out.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Secretary Blumenthal said that there is an Interim Committee
Meeting next month. Would this idea come up?
Mr. Couzens said that it might come up.2
The Prime Minister said that he hoped that this would not be
worked on by countries individually. Do they talk with one another?
Mr. Couzens replied that this is going on constantly.
Secretary Blumenthal asked what could be done before the Summit
to increase growth rates. He hoped that Henry Owen would talk about
the Preparatory Meeting. It was important to have some sense of the
level of numbers before the Summit. Then there could be some level of
commitment before then. If nations would put their weight behind it,
this would be good.
Ambassador Owen said that in preparing for Bonn, one question is
how to create the needed climate with Germany and Japan. The Prime
Minister had suggested putting this into a framework, with each na-
tion’s contributing to the right approach. There should be a package,
with each contributing, and each gaining. Therefore in Bonn, the issue
will be how to fashion this approach, and how to get agreement. Be-
tween now and Bonn, we need to find how to work on all the informa-
tion (?), then have the Summit, and see what should happen next.
Sir John Hunt said that, on getting a satisfactory response at the
Summit, we will not get this from Germany without something on cur-
rency stability—something—that will convey a sense that the issue is
being tackled.
Ambassador Owen said that we should distinguish between
symptoms and the fundamentals—such as energy and inflation in the
U.S. Where should the balance be struck? Mike Blumenthal might talk
about multilateral swaps and long-term currency borrowings, which
they had not covered.
Secretary Blumenthal said that, on multilateral swaps, if we acti-
vated a line with several countries, including Britain, this would lead to
expectations for intervention on the dollar–sterling link, as well as on
the French franc, the lira, and the yen. There would be a number of se-
rious problems. First, there are not enough resources. Second, this is an
expensive process, even with one currency. Third, the key Congres-
sional chairmen are unalterably opposed even to what we are doing
now. Fourth, the market is not the real problem. Intervening on cur-
2 Witteveen’s proposal, which involved the substitution of newly-created SDRs for
dollars in national currency reserves, was slated to be discussed by the IMF Interim Com-
mittee when it met at the Ministerial level in Mexico City on April 29 and 30. (Hobart
Rowen, “Witteveen Plan Aims To Ease Dollar Pressure,” The Washington Post, April 12,
1978, p. D13; Clyde H. Farnsworth, “U.S. Resisting Witteveen’s Plan For Supplanting

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
rencies will not deal with the perception of the dollar’s instability. Fifth,
what are the costs of commitment in a multilateral system of larger
numbers of currencies?—it could be substantial.
Secretary Vance asked about the yen in terms of perceptions.
Secretary Blumenthal said that the yen is a special case: the Japanese
have a huge current account surplus. There is no way, without the
market’s seeing a rapid reduction in this current account surplus, for
intervention to work. And the yen does not pull the D-mark and ster-
ling. The D-mark pulls other European currencies, and is the key cur-
rency in the snake. Japan wants us to act. But there are no resources to
do so. And it would not be understood here, in terms of trade and pro-
tectionism, that we were trying to maintain the dollar–yen rate, with
that $13 billion Japanese current account surplus. The President would
be put in an impossible position. This is difficult for the Japanese, but
the U.S. will not agree to maintain the dollar–yen rate. Is that what the
British really want?
The Prime Minister said no. But if the U.S. says that it will not inter-
vene, then there will be political nervousness, and a reaction. How will
the U.S. deal with that? Schmidt said that getting sterling in would
help. He (the Prime Minister) is not keen on that, but he is willing for
psychological reasons to help—though he does not think it would
really help.
Mr. Couzens said that there are two sides to the issue. Britain has
not ruled out putting its money where its mouth is. This had helped in
the past. It spreads the burden. But Britain is not pressing the approach.
The Prime Minister said that if the U.S. leaves out this approach,
how will it finance its deficit?
Secretary Blumenthal said that on the 13th of March, we set up addi-
tional swap lines with Germany. We will see further what to do on
SDRs, and will draw from the IMF if need be. He hopes—in talks with
Schmidt—that Germany will use other currencies than the dollar for in-
tervention in the snake. We will have more SDRs, and the IMF ap-
proach, and work on fundamentals. We hope to have action on energy,
and there is the President’s anti-inflation program; if these are seen as
biting, this will give assurances on the course of the U.S. economy.
On the question of the sale of foreign-currency denominated
bonds, it has been his experience that there is a clamor for a new
bandaid as the answer to problems. We put on a bandaid, and there is a
new clamor. Thus, this is not the answer; it is just another way to
borrow foreign currencies, and is dangerous for the United States. First,
the Saudis—and OPEC generally—are loyal in their support for the
U.S., and stay with the dollar. Their interests are in dollar-denominated
securities. As soon as there were some in D-marks or Swiss francs, then
the Saudi finance ministry would say it now wants the same rate secur-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
ities for Saudi Arabia. Therefore, there would be a counterproductive
reaction. Second, there is total opposition to this approach in Congress.
The exchange risk is great. The Roosa bonds,3 for example, were very
costly to us.
Mr. Couzens said that they cost the U.S. an arm and a leg!
The Prime Minister mentioned Roosa—who is on Wall Street
making a fortune!
Secretary Blumenthal asked how we could account for these in the
Exchange Stabilization Fund? It was nearly broke. With the Roosa
bonds, we borrowed in Swiss francs at 4 to 1 to the dollar, and now it is
1.8 to one. The paper loss is enormous. Some people are saying that we
should borrow even more—$10–20 billion worth. They should see Sen-
ator Proxmire’s comments! Thus we don’t want to do this, and would
have difficulties if we did.
The Prime Minister agreed that we should focus on the long-term.
The Market is short-term. Therefore, how do we get from here to there?
He does not say that Roosa bonds are the answer, but with market psy-
chology, we must show we are dealing with real fundamentals. This is
a similar time to ten years ago in Britain.
Secretary Blumenthal asked whether the Prime Minister feels that, if
the U.S. is seen as acting on energy and on inflation—in believable
ways, and if people saw international concord and commitment to
reach growth targets, and with swap lines, and with U.S. drawings on
the IMF, and with SDRs, and maybe the U.S. were prepared to sell
gold—can’t we turn the situation around?
The Prime Minister replied yes—for two to three years (although
there were a lot of “ifs”). It is vital to make this the focus for July.
The President said that none of the “ifs” listed by Secretary Blumen-
thal are difficult for the U.S. to do; all are possible for us.
The Prime Minister said that other steps are needed in some (coun-
tries?). It would be tough to get Germany on board.
Sir John Hunt agreed. If the United States did all these things, this
would be a considerable help. The present problem is to relate these
steps together, as energy action is related to the wider situation—this
helps considerably.
Mr. Couzens referred to the latter part of the list—like IMF
drawings: these are goods in the shop window. They show that we are
using the international system, and not acting just bilaterally, hand-
to-mouth. This will help, if it looks like a score on the Summit list.
3 During the 1960s, the Treasury issued medium-term securities that were denomi-
nated in foreign currencies; these were called “Roosa bonds,” after Under Secretary of the
Treasury for Monetary Affairs Robert Roosa.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
On SDRs, these should be used with Germany, but linked to the in-
ternational system. Therefore, this would be less offensive to Britain
and to others. It would achieve many of the same things, but it would
not be bilateral or unilateral—rather, all would be acting together.
Therefore, there is a virtue in this approach, within the Blumenthal
context.
Secretary Blumenthal agreed, in context. He continued that, on the
IMF, we are in the middle of getting the Witteveen facility. Our IMF ac-
tion will show Congress that the Witteveen facility is not foreign aid,
since we would be using it (the IMF).
The Prime Minister said that the U.S. has to carry the technical
things on. Could Henry Owen and John Hunt tell us secretly how to
carry on?
Ambassador Owen said that, at the preparatory meeting, they would
go down the main heads for discussion from the British paper. Maybe
more preparatory work will be needed. There will be reports of the
Seven, such as how they will work out jointly on energy. The Bureau in
the OECD would look at non-inflation ideas. Then there would be an-
other preparatory meeting, and if each government were keeping to the
framework, then we could go to the Summit for a success. He will not
know about this until he sees German officials next week. There will be
a Presidential letter to Schmidt, and Ambassador Owen would be
seeing Schmidt.
Sir John Hunt said that Germany will not say yes (on growth?) or
do anything before the Summit. Part of the operation is getting others
to do what they should. Schmidt wants a good Summit. Intellectually
Schmidt thinks that Germany should not do more, but he may do it.
Therefore, next week they will get little at the Preparatory Group, but
there will be a report to heads of government on what they will have
covered. They should try to get agreement on the objectives; later, they
can try for agreement on the means. Before Bonn, there will be a Euro-
pean Summit on April 7 and 8. It is his guess that they could get help
for their approach at this European Summit. We will need top level po-
litical encouragement at each stage.
The Prime Minister said that, on Germany, he had seen Schmidt. Sir
John is right about Schmidt’s attitudes. Schmidt said that the Prime
Minister should come to see the President. Schmidt agrees on the
problems, but he disagrees on the remedy. He (the Prime Minister)
thinks we can move Germany and Schmidt, but he fears that Schmidt
will make a gesture in May, then at the Bonn Summit say that what he
did in May was his contribution. Therefore, we need to get him to act,
and can do so. Part of it is how we dress it up.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Secretary Blumenthal then reviewed paragraphs 4 and 5 of the text
of the March 13 agreement with Germany,4 to indicate that Germany—
on paragraph 4—may move. This was a German paragraph. It implies
that after the first-quarter figures are in, there may be more action.
Paragraph 5 was on energy, in which the U.S. was committed to look
further at its efforts.
The President said that we found this meeting worthwhile. It has
clarified some possibilities. The Prime Minister now understands U.S.
limits and inclinations. He seconded what Mike Blumenthal had said
about announcements by Germany before the Bonn Summit. Though
maybe Schmidt will wait until Bonn to act, in order to create an aura of
success. As we will do, these steps would be identified as part of the
overall approach. He guesses that Schmidt would like the heads of
state to leave with a sense that Germany was helping, and had made
some sacrifice. Schmidt would not want to be seen as an obstacle to
progress. On political pressure, we should not underestimate the
German ordeal in the 1920s.5 We understand.
All this has been very helpful. With the Prime Minister at Copen-
hagen, and as we also present ideas to the press, this should not be put
forward as an American and British plan. He would like to say to
Schmidt that he would like him to understand the U.S. view of the
problems and the way we are addressing them. All of us need to work
together, and ease Schmidt forward. He then asked Dr. Brzezinski to
draft a message to Schmidt, emphasizing our conviction that efforts
should be multinational, but that each nation would need to do some-
thing. The draft should say what we can do, with cooperation and
consultation.
The Prime Minister said that he will write to Fukuda.
The President said he would, too; Fukuda thinks he is left out,
sometimes.
(The President then adjourned the lunch at 1:00 for a private Oval
Office meeting with Prime Minister Callaghan, which continued to
5 Apparently a reference to the German hyperinflation during the early years of the
Weimar Republic.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
123.
Information Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury
Blumenthal to President Carter1
Washington, March 24, 1978
SUBJECT
Inflation, Energy, and the Dollar
I want to summarize for you a series of recent developments that,
taken together, heighten my concern about the inflation, energy, and
dollar situations.
Inflation
All the recent statistics are very troubling.
between the fourth quarter of 1977 and the fourth quarter of 1978. As
recently as January, our published estimate was 6.1%.
• Early indications suggest that the GNP deflator will rise at an an-
the fourth quarter of 1977.
ruary numbers will likely be equally discouraging.
• The wholesale prices of consumer foods increased by 2.9% in
February, foreshadowing sharp retail food price increases.
As statistics like this accumulate in the next few weeks, they will
fuel inflationary expectations throughout the private sector and will
impart a new, upward thrust to the wage-price spiral.
Budget
Inflationary expectations may be further aggravated by the bud-
getary situation.
In January, we proposed a $60 billion deficit for FY 1979. We de-
fended this figure as being smaller than the FY 1978 deficit. Since then,
however, we have re-estimated the FY 1978 deficit at $53 and our pro-
posed FY 1979 deficit at $59 (due in each case to spending shortfalls).
This has put us in the very awkward position of arguing that the deficit
should grow substantially between FY 1978 and FY 1979—even though
by 1979, unemployment will have fallen further, capacity and labor
1 Source: Department of the Treasury, Office of the Secretary, Executive Secretariat,
menthal asked whether the President might see this Monday [March 27], before his trip.
It is an information memo, and Mike has no objection to it being staffed routinely—so
long as the President gets to see it before his trip.” (Ibid.) Carter traveled to Venezuela,
Brazil, Nigeria, and Liberia March 28–April 3.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
markets will be tighter, and inflation will be higher. What’s worse,
there are enormous pressures, at every program point, to enlarge the
FY 1979 deficit beyond our January figure.
A few examples:
Urban program
$1–3 billion
Farm legislation
$1–3 billion
Elimination of some tax reforms
$2–4 billion (at minimum)
Tuition Tax credit
$1–2 billion
Total
$5–12 billion
Unless we exercise a very firm hand, the FY 1979 deficit will almost
certainly balloon—despite shortfalls and contingencies—to $63–65 bil-
lion, i.e. at least a $10 billion increase over FY 1978.
Against this inflationary background, financial markets will inev-
itably tighten, either spontaneously or through a more restrictive mon-
etary policy by the Federal Reserve.
Energy
The Energy Conferees have recessed for another 10 days, with no
action in sight on COET. For this bill, the end is always in sight, but
never in hand.
There are gathering signs that OPEC will not long hold back from
price-raising action. King Khalid’s letter to you is one straw in the
wind.2 The Kuwaiti-led drive for a 5% price rise is an equally serious
portent.
Dollar
Given this environment, the foreign exchange markets remain
nervous. The pressure has momentarily subsided on the German mark
and Swiss franc but demand for the Japanese yen is especially strong.
The dollar has depreciated against the yen by 4.4% so far this month,
despite intervention by Japanese authorities totaling $4.1 billion. We
are seeing signs that central banks as well as private firms are shifting
financial reserves into yen; our information is incomplete and sensitive
but the amounts appear to be quite substantial.
Private bankers are telling me that capital is continuing to flow out
of the U.S., following an estimated fourth quarter 1977 net outflow of
almost $10 billion.
I am very concerned about the impact on the market of next week’s
release of the CPI and leading indicators for February. The leading in-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
dicators may be down due to a decline in money supply and to weather
and coal strike3 effects, following on the heels of a decline in January of
1.9%. It is unlikely that this and the inflation figures for February will
be well received, especially after we just this week revised upward our
These trends seem to me to dictate three conclusions:
1. Immediately after your trip, we should inform the Congress
that, absent prompt passage of COET, circumstances will require impo-
sition of an oil import fee. This would not be intended as a threat but as
a step necessary to our economic and political security.
2. The anti-inflation program you announce after your trip must be
tough and credible. I have asked the EPG to review the plan submitted
this week with this in mind: we may propose additional options to you.
3. In light of the economic and political risks of accelerating infla-
tion and continuing weakening of the dollar, we should review our
economic goals and the fiscal policies designed to achieve them.
We still have time to master these related threats to our prosperity,
but not much time. If we shy from taking difficult actions now, we may
face almost impossible difficulties in the future.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
124.
Letter From President Carter to West German Chancellor
Schmidt1
Washington, March 27, 1978
Dear Helmut:
I recently said good-bye to Jim Callaghan, who came to discuss
with me ideas for concerted action to deal with our common economic
problems. I wanted to write you right away about our conversation and
about my views on these problems, which I have been considering for
some time.
I found Jim concerned, as I am, by the global economic situation—
particularly by the fact that many industrial countries are still caught in
the grip of high unemployment and continuing inflation. While U.S.
economic performance improved markedly in 1977, the slower growth
of our main trading partners, together with heavy U.S. oil imports, con-
tributed substantially to the U.S. current account deficit. That deficit,
together with concerns about rising U.S. inflation, has brought about a
decline in the value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets that
troubles me, as I know it does you. Combined with doubts about gov-
ernments’ ability to take corrective actions, these factors have created
widespread concerns in some countries.
Jim and I both felt, and I hope you will agree, that in order to im-
prove this situation the major industrial countries need to show that
they are in command of the situation and are taking actions that will
lead to a better future. I believe this means their developing a broad
program of concerted action to deal with five problems: economic
growth, long-term capital outflows, energy, trade, and greater mone-
tary stability. Some of these problems can be met by collective action;
others by individual national measures.
To have the maximum psychological impact, however, these na-
tional measures should be seen as part of a wider cooperative effort. If
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 6, Germany, Federal Republic of: Chan-
ture under cover of a March 24 memorandum from Owen, who noted Fallows’ concur-
rence. Owen explained that the letter’s length arose from his concern that “a shorter letter
might not persuade the heads of government that you were consulting with them as fully
as you did with Callaghan about these matters, which are of critical importance to them.”
(Ibid.) Similar letters were sent to Fukuda and Giscard on March 27; substantive differ-
ences are indicated in footnotes below. These letters are in the Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 13,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
our peoples understand that this is the case, we shall have done much
to restore confidence.
Here is what my advisers and I told Jim about our thinking on the
specific elements of such a cooperative effort:
1. As far as growth is concerned, I believe the OECD Economic
Policy Committee is on the right track in agreeing that the OECD coun-
tries should stimulate their economies in differing degrees, depending
on how far each can go without fueling inflation or encountering bal-
ance of payments problems. I hope that European Community and
OECD studies will help the Summit Preparatory Group to draw con-
clusions regarding the margin for growth2 that is open to each of our
countries.3 Based on this work, the Summit could discuss and an-
nounce appropriate future national policies. Even more important than
quantitative targets will be national resolve to fulfill these policies. If
national growth decisions taken between now and the Summit can be
related to this agreed approach, this will add to our peoples’ sense of
confidence that purposeful action is being taken to fulfill common
purposes.4
2. In regard to energy, U.S. action to limit oil imports is the heart of
the matter. I am determined to achieve progress as soon as possible. I
intend to relate any announcement of this progress to the overall inter-
national approach discussed in this letter. Although the U.S. has the
largest problem, the question of how to conserve and develop energy is
also a concern of other Summit countries. In preparing for the Bonn
Summit, I hope that our representatives can develop concrete ideas
about how to fulfill the general energy commitments we made in 1977
at London—e.g., by carrying forward joint research and development,
increasing investment to enhance energy production and conservation
in the industrial world, and expanding aid to developing countries for
the same purposes.
3. In the monetary field, it is essential to address the underlying
causes of the dollar’s decline: large U.S. oil imports and the disparity
between national growth rates, whose effect has been aggravated by
rising concerns5 about U.S. inflation. I expect soon to announce further
strong anti-inflationary U.S. measures, which can be related to our
2 In Carter’s letter to Fukuda, this phrase reads: “margin for action on growth.”
3 In Carter’s letter to Giscard, this sentence reads: “I hope that preparatory studies
will help us to draw conclusions regarding the margin for growth that is open to each of
our countries.”
4 In Carter’s letter to Fukuda, an additional sentence was added to the end of this
paragraph: “I look forward to discussing with you in early May the contribution that
both our countries can make to this growth strategy.” Fukuda paid an official visit to
Washington May 1–3.
5 In Carter’s letter to Fukuda, this phrase reads: “rising US concerns.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
agreed international goals. While progress is thus being made on
fundamentals, the U.S. will use resources generated by bilateral
U.S.-German swaps, IMF drawings, and larger sales of SDRs, as an-
nounced in our joint statement of March 13, to counter disorder in cur-
rency markets.6
4. In trade, I hope the Summit Preparatory Group can define the
areas that heads of government will need to address,7 in order to ensure
successful conclusion of the Multilateral Trade Negotiations and to
forestall any revival of protectionism.8 I was pleased by Jim Calla-
ghan’s forthcoming posture on these issues. I am much concerned
about growing government interventionism in matters of trade and
production, in response to weak economic conditions.9
5. As part of this package approach, we should consider how to in-
crease long-term capital flows to developing countries. I hope that you
will agree the surplus countries have special responsibilities in this con-
nection; I will be discussing possible increased Japanese aid with Prime
Minister Fukuda when he comes here in early May.10
If a five-point approach along these lines commends itself to you,
we might proceed as follows:
—In addition to launching preparations for the July Summit, the
Bonn Preparatory Group could prepare a short statement for heads of
6 In Carter’s letter to Fukuda, the final sentence of this paragraph was replaced by
these two sentences: “I understand the economic difficulties that you now confront; I am
hopeful that if progress can thus be made on fundamentals, currency disorders will sub-
side. As you know, we do not intend to intervene to defend any fixed dollar rate or target
range, but I believe our impending actions on energy and inflation will make a real con-
tribution to improvement in global prospects.”
7 In Carter’s letter to Fukuda, the phrase “at the Summit or before” was added at
this point in the sentence.
8 In Carter’s letter to Giscard, the paragraph ends here. In his March 24 covering
memorandum to Carter (see footnote 1 above), Owen noted that “the letter to Giscard has
less on trade than the others, given his views on this subject.”
9 In Carter’s letter to Fukuda, the final sentence of this paragraph was replaced by
these two sentences: “I look forward to discussing with you in early May the further
measures to be taken by both our countries in fulfilling the Ushiba–Strauss agreement, in-
cluding the additional MTN offers required to meet the objective specified in that agree-
ment. Given the size and continued growth of Japan’s current account surplus, I know
you will agree that it is important that every effort be made to achieve progress in the
areas listed in that agreement.” Regarding the Ushiba–Strauss agreement, see Documents
10 In Carter’s letter to Giscard, the final sentence of this paragraph was replaced by
this sentence: “I know of your own long-standing interest in aid to these countries.” In
Carter’s letter to Fukuda, this paragraph reads: “As part of this package approach, we
should consider how to increase long-term capital flows, particularly from the surplus
countries, to developing countries. Expanded private investment and untied bilateral
and multilateral aid to these countries would facilitate world economic recovery, particu-
larly during this period of low growth in the industrial countries. I was pleased to hear
that you have recently taken steps to this end. I hope that we can talk about further steps
by both our countries in May.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
government to issue in early April, committing themselves to hold a
Bonn Summit in mid-July and indicating the main substantive pur-
poses that they will be seeking to achieve—both at the Summit and
beforehand.
—Relevant decisions that any of our governments take between
then and the Summit (for example, U.S. action on energy and inflation)
could be related to this broad statement of agreed purposes. Our gov-
ernments would try to consult with one another beforehand about
these national actions.
—The July Summit could then review actions that had been taken
and decide what further steps were needed to achieve these common
purposes.11
How does this all strike you? I have asked Henry Owen to seek
your views when he sees you next week. I look forward to hearing your
thoughts, given your wide knowledge and experience in this field. The
position and partnership that you and I shape in reviewing these issues
will be critical to the outcome. There is no way to achieve lasting
progress without the closest cooperation between our countries. That
cooperation can only be achieved if you and I stay in very close and
continuing touch.12
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
11 In Carter’s letter to Giscard, an additional sentence was added to the end of this
paragraph: “This would be consistent with your view that Summits should only be held
if they can do something useful—which must depend, in the end, on the heads of gov-
ernment themselves.”
12 In both Carter’s letter to Giscard and his letter to Fukuda, this paragraph is dif-
ferent. In the letter to Giscard, the final paragraph reads: “How does this all strike you? I
look forward to hearing your thoughts, given your wide knowledge and experience in
this field. In closing, Valery, I would like to express my personal admiration for your
leadership as President of the Republic during recent months. Now that your elections
are past—with such a remarkable turn-out of voters in support of the democratic
process—I look forward to continuing our close and personal relations. I felt in January
that you and I had helped to begin a new era in Franco-American friendship, and I shall
do all that I can to strengthen that friendship in the days ahead.” In the letter to Fukuda,
the final paragraph reads: “I look forward to learning your views on these issues when
you and I meet, little more than a month hence. I greatly value your judgment, given your
wide knowledge and experience in this field. There is no way to achieve lasting progress
without the closest cooperation between our countries. That cooperation can only be
achieved if you and I stay in close and continuing communication.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
125.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, April 8, 1978
SUBJECT
Chancellor Schmidt’s Messages to You About the Summit
1. When I saw him last week,2 the Chancellor told me that he ac-
cepts the notion of a package approach suggested in your recent letter
to him.3 This report summarizes his comments on the package’s three
main elements—US action on inflation and energy, German and Japa-
nese growth, and UK and French acceptance of more liberal trade pol-
icies—and submits for your approval a draft letter to Schmidt.
2. US Action
a. Inflation. The Chancellor stressed the need for effective US
anti-inflationary action to strengthen the dollar; he said that he realized
from his own experience both how painful such measures were bound
to be politically in the US, and how necessary it was to stick with them,
year in and year out, if inflation was to be brought under control.
b. Energy. The Chancellor asked about energy prospects. He made
clear that nothing would do so much to enhance European confidence
in US leadership as effective action to limit oil imports, and asked when
you would act, if the Congress did not.
The Chancellor said that we were on the right track in thus ad-
dressing the causes, rather than the symptoms, of the dollar’s decline.
Neither he nor any of his subordinates showed any desire to see us in-
tervene more actively in exchange markets.
3. German and Japanese Action
a. Japan. I told the Chancellor that my Japanese Summit colleagues
in the Summit Preparatory Group felt that there was a good chance of
Fukuda submitting an expansionist budget to the Diet in September,
6%. Schmidt was skeptical the Japanese would reach such a high figure.
b. Germany. He said the German government would introduce a
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 6, Germany, Federal Republic of: Chan-
memorandum, which Owen sent to him under cover of an April 10 note. (Ibid.)
2 No record of Owen’s meeting with Schmidt was found.
3 See Document 124.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
target. He warned that he would not say so publicly, until and unless
the time came to act. He was unclear about timing; at one point he indi-
cated that he would only make his decision in August, i.e., after the
Summit. His subordinates, by contrast, favored announcing the pro-
posal for a tax cut before or at the Summit. I stressed to them the diffi-
cult situation in which you would find yourself attending a Summit, if
German growth was low and the German government gave no sign of
wanting to do something about it.
The Chancellor wanted you to know how hard he had worked to
achieve a tax cut last year when he realized that German growth was
falling below target; he asked me to tell you that he was confident that
he could get parliamentary approval this time if it proved necessary.
He implied that German stimulus measures would hinge on a favor-
able international environment—i.e., the US vigorously attacking its
inflation and energy problems.
4. UK and France. One German official said: “The politically tough
decisions in this package have to be made by the US and Germany;
there’s nothing we want from the UK and France except better trade
policies.” He is right. A successful MTN and avoidance of specific
forms of protectionism should be the UK’s and France’s contribution to
an economic package, since they are the worst offenders on trade
policy. The Chancellor asked about creeping US protectionism; I said
there was nothing wrong with US trade policy that a successful MTN
wouldn’t cure.
5. Conclusion. My hour and a half meeting with the Chancellor was
specific and business-like. He asked me to tell you that Germany would
loyally support US policy, and that he wanted to cooperate closely with
you. The discussion covered much the same ground that you did with
Callaghan and gave us most of what we wanted: German agreement to
a package approach, and a commitment to stimulus measures, if
needed. It did not settle the important problem of stimulus timing. I
suspect, as you indicated at the Callaghan lunch, that the Chancellor
will eventually agree to action at the Summit, since he wants a suc-
cessful Summit. But he will have to decide this before the Summit, since
several weeks of advance consultation with party leaders will be
required.
6. Action. I attach a letter to Schmidt, cleared with State, Treasury,
and Jim Fallows, thanking him for the messages he sent you, nailing
down his commitments, and nudging him politely on timing. (Tab A)4
4 Tab A, attached but not printed, is a copy of the signed April 11 letter from Carter
to Schmidt.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
126.
Briefing Memorandum From the Under Secretary of the
Treasury for Monetary Affairs (Solomon) to Secretary of the
Treasury Blumenthal1
Washington, April 12, 1978
SUBJECT
Supplemental Briefing for Fowler Committee Meeting April 13—Witteveen’s
Proposal for a “Substitution Account”
This proposal (described in Tabs D and F of your Fowler Com-
mittee briefing)2 may become a focus of both the Fowler Committee
and Interim Committee discussions. It has potentially wide implica-
tions, and we need to take a very careful approach.
In the C–20 reform negotiations,3 there were extended discussions
of proposals for substitution of SDRs for foreign official holdings of
dollars, in the framework of a resumed system of par values and con-
vertibility of currencies into “primary” reserve assets (SDR and gold).
The idea was to establish a new account in the IMF that would buy
dollars from official holders with newly created SDR, and hold the re-
sulting claims on the U.S. The par value reform approach was dropped,
and serious negotiations on terms of a substitution account never ma-
terialized. But it was widely assumed (hoped) by others that the U.S.
would bear exchange risk and pay market rates of interest on sub-
stituted dollars, and would undertake some form of amortization
obligation.
Witteveen’s proposal is supposedly much more modest, and is not
cast in terms of reform of the system. He has been trying to develop
support for an SDR allocation, but has run into strong German and other
European objections on grounds that additional international liquidity
is not needed. He has hit on this scheme as a way of getting his SDR al-
location and meeting European objections to increased liquidity: at the
same time there is an SDR allocation, countries would make irrevocable
2 The briefing was not found and no other record of the April 13 Fowler Committee
meeting was found.
3 In July 1972, the IMF Board of Governors established the Committee on Reform of
the International Monetary System, also known as the Committee of Twenty or C–20.
After 2 years of negotiations, the C–20 approved an Outline of Reform for the interna-
tional monetary system at a Ministerial meeting held in June 1974 in Washington. For
the text of the Outline, as well as the accompanying C–20 final report, see de Vries, The
International Monetary Fund, 1972–1978: Cooperation on Trial, vol. III: Documents, pp.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
deposits of foreign exchange (mainly or wholly dollars) in a special ac-
count at the IMF. Each country’s deposit would be equal to its alloca-
tion or to some agreed fraction of its allocation; the deposit would be il-
liquid and therefore no longer counted as reserves; and it would earn
interest at longer-term rates based on IMF investment of the deposits in
Treasury securities. (Although Witteveen’s paper doesn’t say so, he is
entertaining an idea proposed by some that the U.S. would be expected
to deposit gold.)
The advantages Witteveen claims for this scheme are a) modest
movement toward making the SDR the “principal reserve asset in the
system” and b) improvement in the “quality” of international liquidity.
There has been only very brief discussion of this proposal in the
Executive Board. To generalize:
—A number of the Europeans are reluctant to increase liquidity,
but if there has to be an SDR allocation anyway, this would be a way of
mitigating the liquidity impact.
—The LDCs want a straightforward SDR allocation, and they do
not want the study of a substitution account to delay an allocation.
They profess some interest in the Witteveen idea if it is additional to a
regular allocation—though they will probably oppose any permanent
deposit of dollars as required in Witteveen’s proposal.
—Nearly all are attracted in some degree by the implied reduction
in the dollar’s role in the system. This attraction is particularly strong so
long as we are not regarded as dealing adequately with our balance of
payments situation, and may overwhelm the views of some countries
on the narrower question of SDR allocation per se.
As Witteveen has framed it, the proposal avoids some of the objec-
tions of some earlier substitution account proposals. He proposes no
U.S. assumption of exchange risk or amortization obligations. The U.S.
would be regarded as making a “cooperative” gesture, in agreeing both
to an allocation and a modest movement of the system away from
dollars.
But I am very leery of this proposal.
—Its stabilizing effect would be nil to negligible at best, and pos-
sibly adverse depending on the psychological reaction. The reaction
could be bad. In any case, we could expect to get little credit for
agreeing to it.
—Both the earlier reform discussions and the initial Board discus-
sion of this proposal suggest a very tough negotiation on terms—in-
terest rate, exchange risk, amortization, liquidity of deposits, what the
U.S. puts in, etc.—and we, as issuers of dollars, have a fundamentally
different position on these questions from the 131 dollar holders we
would be negotiating with.
—There are serious legal questions about our authority to make
the irrevocable deposits that would be required, whether in gold or

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
dollars, and serious questions of Congressional attitudes regardless of
the legal position.
—Finally, there are political overtones and potential systemic im-
plications that we need to test carefully. (For example, some may point
to the fact the proposal is receiving serious consideration as evidence
that the U.S. has mismanaged its affairs—we may hear some of that in
the Fowler Committee.)
Even if we were to decide that Witteveen’s proposal were attractive to the
U.S., our best tactical negotiating position might be one of skepticism and re-
luctance. For the time being certainly, I think we should be skeptical, but
willing to look at the proposal and hear the views of others. We should
not be in the position of demandeur.
127.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of Telephone Conversation between the President and
Prime Minister Callaghan
The following is a paraphrase of the conversation:
The President: Jim, how are you?
Callaghan: Fine.
The President: It’s a great pleasure to talk with you.
Callaghan: I called just to exchange thoughts after the Neutron
bomb decision.2 How was Camp David?3
The President: Very good. It was the first time we’d done it. We
reassessed the first fifteen months of the Administration, and the
problems in an administrative sense. We also discussed several themal
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
that Carter spoke to Callaghan from the Oval Office, the President’s Daily Diary states
that the call took place in the Cabinet Room. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials)
2 On April 7, Carter announced his decision to defer production of the neutron
bomb; for the text of the statement, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States:
Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book I, p. 702.
3 Carter met with select Cabinet members and senior advisers at Camp David on
April 16 and 17. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
issues, we talked about the mood of the country, and went over opinion
polls. I think it cleared the air and helped to eliminate the kind of
sniping and backbiting that is liable to occur. I think we came away
with a renewed spirit, and a new sense of team. It was very, very good.
Callaghan: I think that’s necessary now and again.
The President: I agree. It was the first time we’d done it. But I think
we’ll do it every three months or so. Camp David has all sorts of
facilities.
Callaghan: It makes people feel they’re part of a team.
The President: It breaks down tensions and alleviates all sorts of
problems. There was some question about one junior staff member.
Callaghan: Jimmy, at this end the main issue on the cards is
whether Europe goes it alone more than it cooperates with you in the
United States. I detect more inclination in that direction here in Europe.
Not in defense, of course; there you must remind those who would go it
alone that European defense cannot be separated from the United
States. But in the economic and monetary field I do detect a tendency.
There is talk here, for instance, of enlarging the European “snake”. If
that were done, the only reason would be to insulate us a bit from what
happens to the dollar.
When I talked with you before Easter I told you I was not in favor
of enlarging the “snake”.4 That is still my view. I did go along with a
technical examination of the question. But, frankly, an enlargement of
the “snake” is not attractive to the United Kingdom or, I think, to the
world economy as a whole. That is a political judgment. I will make
sure that the question is not looked at from a political standpoint until
after the Bonn Summit. But there is this feeling in Europe, and I thought
you should know about it.
The President: I appreciate that. We had some reports from the pe-
riphery of the Copenhagen meeting.5 We have been concerned, but not
too seriously yet. Here there has been some reversal of previous con-
cerns—such as inflation, the failure to pass the energy bill and the
Panama Canal vote tomorrow. That concern has been alleviated here
recently, to some degree. But I understand the concern in Europe and
Japan over the appreciation of the yen and the Deutschmark.
Callaghan: That is wrapped up with other problems, especially
unemployment.
The President: Here we have had considerable success in reducing
unemployment over the last fifteen months.
4 See Document 121.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Callaghan: (interference on line) When that is linked to the fall of
the dollar, people begin to say: “The United States can stand on its own,
we must do what we can by ourselves.” That would be extremely
unfortunate.
The President: We must consult, at least at the level of Henry
Owen. We should have an open and frank discussion—we have
nothing to hide—of the advantages and disadvantages of our basic
interdependence.
Callaghan: Helmut Schmidt is the key to the European view. I’m
not sure you get his point of view clearly.
The President: I doubt it.
Callaghan: Germany is the strongest economy in Europe, and
what it does makes a great deal of difference. Helmut feels strongly that
Europe must organize itself to do better. You—not you personally, but
your people—need to know his point of view better. It’s hard to under-
stand. There is the coalition government, and Helmut and Genscher are
not always on the same wavelength. Then there is the Bundesbank that
has certain kinds of independence. But I’m not sure you get the depth
of his view.
The President: I’m not sure I do. When we talk, either personally or
on the phone, or when we exchange messages telegraphically, we have
a good meeting of the minds. I will make a comment and he will re-
spond that it is a good answer, that he agrees. But then I hear that he
has expressed concerns about our actions and policies. That is some-
thing I have not been able to solve.
Callaghan: It’s very difficult if he won’t tell you what he thinks.
My understanding of his view is that the United States cannot continue
to expand, the dollar is in trouble and therefore the Europeans should
do what they can to insulate themselves. I don’t know if you have
heard it that way. But it is a stronger and stronger view in Europe. I
don’t know how to obviate it.
I think it very likely that Giscard will re-enter the European
“snake” before the Bonn Summit. I’m 99 per cent certain that I won’t.
But the alternatives are complex. Helmut is the key.
The President: He is coming to Washington before the NATO
Summit.6 In view of what you’ve said, I’ll prepare myself very care-
fully—of course I’ll use words that don’t reveal where I heard of his
view. When he comes, I’ll be more briefed than usual. He can speak
Disarmament. He had a working dinner with Carter on May 26. (Carter Library, Presi-
dential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) The NATO Summit took place in Washington

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
frankly, bluntly. Why he is reticent with me, I can’t understand. I’ll try
to break that down.
Callaghan: If I might suggest, perhaps you could have Miller with
you, and he might bring Emminger or someone else from the
Bundesbank.
The President: That’s a good idea. We might perhaps have a lun-
cheon, with a tiny group.
Callaghan: I think I would do that. If it’s a tiny group, he’ll talk
frankly. He knows economic issues very well . . .
The President: Much better than I do.
Callaghan: . . . he was Finance Minister, he has had considerable
experience, and he cares a great deal. He thinks the United States posi-
tion is all wrong.
The President: I appreciate your advice, Jim, your admonition. It is
very valuable to me.
Callaghan: Let me leave it there. Whatever you hear, you can be
sure that I won’t allow action on the “snake” before Bonn. Perhaps by
then you’ll have the measure of it.
The President: I do have one source of confidence—the strength of
the U.S. economy. We did meet our goals for inflation and growth set at
the London Summit, while some other countries did not. Barring un-
foreseen circumstances, we will meet them again this year. The goal for
unemployment by the end of the year we’ve met already. There is no
potential problem with our economy.
Callaghan: That’s right. What is a matter of concern in Europe is
the external value of the dollar. That is a difficult technical problem. If
you could reduce your balance-of-payments deficit by some action on
energy, that would be very healthy.
The President: Jim, thank you. I appreciate you being a good
enough friend to speak frankly.
Callaghan: I would hope that in May at the NATO Summit we
could have a declaration that means something, that talks about the in-
terdependence of Europe and the United States.
The President: Right.
Callaghan: You know, as do I, that the Soviet Union believes it is
the largest power in Europe but without comparable, matching influ-
ence in Western Europe. It will try to strengthen its position. Unless Eu-
rope responds and the United States recognizes that it is inextricably
bound up with what happens in Europe, we’ll all go under at some
point. I saw Harold Brown for an hour today, and I have asked him and
Fred Mulley to begin working on such a statement. I knew you
wouldn’t mind. Then I could raise the idea with Helmut Schmidt, who

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
I’ll be seeing on Sunday.7 The declaration would show the Soviet Union
that there is no difference between us, and it would also demonstrate to
the people of Europe and the United States that they must remain
together.
The President: That is exactly our commitment and our purpose.
That is the reason I suggested escalating the level of the NATO
meeting. I think there is a new commitment to NATO in Europe, and a
renewed commitment here. There was doubt in the past, but now the
Alliance is strong. Our renewed, deepened commitment is reflected in
our budget decisions and in many others. I think a strong statement in
May would be very important.
Callaghan: That kind of statement could have repercussions on
economics as well.
The President: Yes.
Callaghan: I remind those in Europe who could go a separate way
about defense. We couldn’t have close defense relations while econom-
ically we were pursuing different directions.
The President: Yes, Jim, you’re a great man.
[Omitted here is discussion of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty
and Carter’s trip to Latin America and Africa.]
7 April 23.
128.
Paper Prepared by the National Security Council Staff1
Washington, undated
THE DOLLAR CRISIS AND NATIONAL SECURITY
The prolonged decline of the dollar could have an adverse effect
on the conduct of our foreign policy. Because of the importance of psy-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 68, PRC
memorandum from Renner, who wrote: “Following the failure of CIA and State to pro-
duce any useful indication of foreign reactions to the dollar crisis, I wrote the attached
paper on the basis of reason and instinct.” Renner noted that the paper incorporated the
suggestions of several NSC Staff members and commented: “It is ironical that the dollar
has strengthened in the last several days. Perhaps the traders heard that the NSC was
taking a serious view of the crisis!” (Ibid.) Renner sent a draft of the paper to Brzezinski
and Owen under cover of a March 15 memorandum. (Ibid.)

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
chological factors, it is difficult to measure the impact of the falling
dollar on the US position abroad. Nonetheless, a plausible case can be
made that the falling dollar and our perceived inability to take ade-
quate corrective measures is contributing to the development of an atti-
tude toward the United States that could undermine our credibility
abroad.
General
Our ability to influence events in the world in order to protect our
vital interests depends, in large measure, on military and economic
power and foreign perceptions of our capacity to bring this power to
bear in a controlled fashion on foreign situations. Thus, foreign atti-
tudes about our determination and skill are almost as important as our
strength.
Although the weakened dollar has undermined neither our mili-
tary power nor the basic health of our economy, foreigners may have
begun to question our willingness to use our strength in pursuit of our
interests and to doubt our ability to grant and withdraw benefits. Our
perceived inability or unwillingness to take corrective action may be
changing foreign attitudes about our persistence in pursuit of our aims.
If we are seen as not having the resolve and expertness to take the
steps necessary to strengthen the dollar, some foreigners may well be
asking themselves whether we have the resoluteness and mastery to
shape even more complex and hazardous situations. Some foreigners
may pose the question to themselves this way: Can a country that has
not been able to prevent its currency from tumbling be relied on to act
decisively and effectively to influence events far from its shores?
Foreign assessments of the strength and determination of the US
are based on many factors in addition to the fall of the dollar. Their ap-
praisal of how the US might act in any given situation depends on their
perception of the totality of these factors; and any one factor probably is
not decisive.
Also the impact on foreign attitudes of the decline of the dollar and
our reaction to it will be heightened if the crisis continues for an indefi-
nite period. On the other hand, if the dollar stabilizes within a short
time, it is probable that the damage to our perceived strength and re-
solve will not be permanent.
The Industrialized Democracies
Our friends and allies fear that we either are indifferent to the fall
of the dollar or are actively encouraging the depreciation of the dollar
to stimulate US exports. In the former case, they fault us for lack of con-
cern for their welfare. In the latter case, they accuse us of “malign ne-
glect”. In either case, they worry that their interests will suffer—that

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
their exports will fall, their income from investment and tourism drop,
and their economies falter.
If they see our position on money as either ineffective or selfish,
will this not begin to influence their attitude toward our reliability as a
NATO partner? No European country, not even France, thinks that
Western Europe can either defend itself against the Soviet Union or
stand up alone to the tremendous political pressure the USSR could
and would bring to bear on Western Europe if the US power and re-
solve came to be discounted. So much of the willingness of the Euro-
peans to contribute to their own defense and to follow policies contrary
to the wishes of the Soviet Union depends on their appraisal of the
strength, steadfastness, and reliability of the United States.
The Japanese, in addition to sharing the European worry that the
US is not able to act decisively and effectively to strengthen the dollar,
are concerned that they are being discriminated against. Historically
sensitive about being treated differently, the Japanese are not happy
that the US intervenes to maintain orderly conditions in the Dollar–DM
market and not in the Dollar–Yen market. They fear that the United
States is using monetary policy to force changes in Japanese economic
policies in a way and to an extent that the US would not with regard to
Germany.
The Soviet Union
The Soviets are constantly trying to judge the priorities we assign
to specific foreign policy objectives and the extent to which we are pre-
pared to use our political, economic, and military strength to attain
them. They probably see the dollar crisis and our perceived inability to
deal with it as a sign of weakness. This perception could be a factor in
persuading the Soviets that they can exploit opportunities in the world
with less risk of American opposition than otherwise might have been
the case, thus increasing the possibility of miscalculation that could re-
sult in dangerous confrontation.
OPEC Countries
The OPEC countries denominate their oil sales in dollars and keep
their monetary reserves largely in dollar instruments. They decided to
do so because they considered the dollar to be a stable currency. With
the recent fall in the dollar, some OPEC countries have begun to ques-
tion the wisdom of depending so heavily on the dollar. They have
asked for OPEC consideration of denominating oil sales in other cur-
rencies and diversifying reserves. The Saudis have resisted these pres-
sures. Whether they will maintain their faith in the long-term stability
of the dollar will depend in large measure on their assessment of the
ability of the US to deal with the fundamental causes of the deprecia-
tion of the dollar. If the Saudis and the Iranians decide that they should

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
switch away from the dollar, it is probable that their foreign policy out-
look will be affected also. If they conclude that the US has neither the
determination nor the ability to handle its currency properly, it is un-
likely that this appraisal would not also influence to some extent their
attitude toward broader cooperation with the United States. Such a
change of perception might spill over onto the delicate Middle Eastern
situation in ways and degrees that cannot be predicted.
The Small and Weak Countries
Most countries throughout the world do not have the resources to
defend themselves adequately against foreign invasion. Their sover-
eignty and welfare are not entirely in their own hands. Many are de-
pendent on the implicit acceptance of their frontiers by stronger na-
tions. These small, weak countries feel obliged to live by their wits and,
above all, their ability to align themselves directly or indirectly with
powerful countries who might protect them or at least not harm them.
Thus, the weak watch the strong and try to determine the extent to
which the strong are likely to use or threaten to use their strength to
harm or protect them.
This is an inexact science; the indications of the willingness of the
strong to use their strength to affect foreign events are often fuzzy and
contradictory. It is probable that the perception of the weak countries of
how the US manages its economy and its money will condition their
appraisal of how the US might respond to an armed struggle far from
American shores. Thus, the decline of the dollar and the nature of our
response may affect to some extent the way the small, weak countries
judge the ability of the US to influence political and military events of
importance to them.2
2 In an April 25 memorandum to Brzezinski, Renner wrote: “In view of your com-
ments about my little paper on the dollar and national security, I am seeking your guid-
ance regarding the next steps.” He offered three options: that Brzezinski formally ask the
CIA to prepare a report on “what foreign leaders and opinion makers have been saying
about the decline of the dollar and our policy responses;” that Brzezinski discuss with
him “what additional work you would like to have done and how best to get it done;” or
no further action at that time. Renner counseled taking no further action. Given the
stronger dollar, Renner argued, “if the energy bill is passed with COET, the chances are
reasonably good that the previous precipitous decline will not be resumed;” moreover,
accurately assessing and understanding foreign views was a very difficult task. Brze-
zinski indicated his approval of taking no further action. (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
129.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, April 28, 1978
SUBJECT
Visit of Prime Minister Fukuda
The appreciation of the Japanese yen vis-a-vis the U.S. dollar over
the past six months has caused Prime Minister Fukuda both economic
and political difficulties. About six weeks ago, he instructed his cabinet
to seek out every possible opportunity to make high-level repre-
sentations to the U.S. about the need for U.S. action to stabilize the
dollar.2
Japanese irritation was exacerbated by the fact that the U.S. was in-
tervening by selling Deutschemarks but not by selling yen. It is neither
politically feasible nor economically appropriate for us to intervene to
support the yen-dollar rate, especially while Japan is running large
trade and current account surpluses.
For the time being, Japanese concern over the yen-dollar rate has
eased because the dollar has been slightly firmer for the past month.
Recognizing that the U.S. is not prepared to commit itself to support the
dollar against the yen through intervention, Fukuda has now estab-
lished a public posture which will enable him to treat our announced
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit
dential. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “ok. J.” The memorandum was sent to Carter
under cover of a May 1 memorandum from Owen, who noted that “the daily consulta-
tion referred to in this memo would be between the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
as the US Treasury’s agent, and its opposite number, the Bank of Japan. Communication
between our Treasury Department and the Japanese Finance Ministry would also be
more frequent. It may not amount to much substantively, but it will give Fukuda some-
thing to take home and therefore it could be important politically.” (Ibid.)
Fukuda asserted that Japan’s ability to reduce its current account surplus depended upon
the major industrialized nations strengthening “their concerted action for stabilizing the
world economy, especially the international monetary situation. I sincerely hope that the
United States, which is the key currency country, gives due considerations to it.” (Letter
from Fukuda to Carter, March 31; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 11, Japan: Prime
during an April 14 meeting with Schultze, Fukuda “spoke candidly about his expectation
that U.S. as world’s largest country whose currency is key currency would show greater
concern about decline of dollar lest further declines lead to oil price increase, reversal of
progress of last five years and resultant political confusion and chaos.” (National Ar-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
intention to promote the stability of the dollar through action on the
fundamentals (energy and inflation) as responsive to his request.
Nevertheless, the appearance of discrimination in our treatment of
the yen and the Deutschemark rankles Fukuda personally and hurts
him politically. As a means of easing this problem, we have offered to
upgrade the consultations3 between our monetary authorities to the
level of our consultations with the Germans.
This will mean daily4 telephone contact between officials directly
responsible for exchange market developments.
We understand that Fukuda is highly pleased with this suggestion
and wants to convey the Japanese response to you personally. In his
comments to the press he will probably wish to treat the arrangement
as an achievement of his visit.
If we are asked about it subsequently we would be prepared to
state as follows: “In view of the importance of exchange rates to our
broader economic relationship, we have agreed to strengthen the con-
sultative procedures between U.S. and Japanese monetary authorities.
For some time we have had consultations with German authorities
daily. Similar procedures will now apply to Japan.”5
W. Michael Blumenthal6
3 An unknown hand underlined the phrase “upgrade the consultations.”
4 An unknown hand circled the word “daily” and wrote a question mark above it.
5 The final four paragraphs of this memorandum are highlighted. In his May 1
cover memorandum to Carter, Owen noted that he had “sidelined” those portions of Blu-
menthal’s memorandum dealing with the new procedure for U.S.-Japanese monetary
consultations.
6 Blumenthal signed “Mike” above this typed signature.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
130.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting with Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
President Jimmy Carter
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Secretary of the Treasury Mike Blumenthal
Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Ambassador Robert Strauss, Special Representative for Trade Negotiations
Mike Mansfield, U.S. Ambassador to Japan
Ambassador Henry Owen, President’s Special Representative for Summit
Preparations
William Gleysteen, Acting Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and Pacific
Affairs
Mike Oksenberg, NSC Staff Member (Notetaker)
Mutsuyoshi Nishimura (Interpreter)
Japan
Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda
Sunao Sonoda, Foreign Minister
Nubihiko Ushiba, Minister for External Economic Affairs
Fumihiko Togo, Japanese Ambassador to the U.S.
Yoshiro Mori, Deputy Chief Cabinet Secretary
Masuo Takashima, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs
Toshijiro Nakajima, Director-General, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Hisashi Owada, Assistant to the Prime Minister (Notetaker)
Ryuichiro Yamazaki (Interpreter)
President Carter: Mike, why don’t you get the discussion started
with the analysis of the economic situation.
Secretary Blumenthal: Fine, Mr. President. We have gone through
a difficult economic period. In our view in recent weeks the situation
has begun to improve. We are engaged in communication with your
colleagues on a number of mutual problems and are working up to the
Bonn Summit in July.
I have been fully aware of the difficulties caused Japan by the rapid
movement in exchange rates. We have tried to adopt both fundamental
and short-run measures to ameliorate the situation. The basic insta-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
House Dining Room. Fukuda made an official visit to Washington May 1–3. Memoranda
of conversation of two meetings between Carter and Fukuda, as well as U.S. and Japa-
nese officials, during the morning of May 3 are ibid.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
bility in exchange markets has been caused by the energy crisis, re-
sulting in different rates of growth and rates of inflation, causing trade
surplus in Japan, Germany, and Switzerland, and inflation in the
United States.
The long-term solution to inflation in the United States was out-
growth rate. We intend to reduce the rate of inflation, and we will soon
secure final enactment of an Energy Bill. This, plus the success of the
Multilateral Trade Negotiations and our determined resistance to pro-
tectionist sentiment will make a success of our efforts.
Our monetary policy remains committed to following a flexible ex-
change rate. We will not peg the dollar to a particular level of value, or
even to a zone or range of value.
Here are our measures for correcting short-term disorder in ex-
change rates:
—International Collaboration. The United States and Germany have
developed and expanded a swap agreement which helps stabilize the
dollar-yen relationship.
—Our gold sales are intended to provide further stability.
—Consultations with Japan. The Bank of New York and the Bank of
Japan, as well as our Treasury and the Ministry of Finance, will ex-
change information daily to help deal with short-term problems.
As to the long-term solution, Japan clearly has an important role to
play. Reduction of Japan’s trade surplus is a key requirement. And key
to this is for Japan to achieve a 7 percent growth rate.
Co-financing of the World Bank with a Japanese contribution
would also improve the stability of the dollar-yen exchange rate.
A final element of our own policy is to work closely with you and
to collaborate in the international organizations. We are engaged in ef-
forts to secure maximum contributions to the World Bank and to such
regional banks as the ADB, with aid on an untied basis. Collaboration
in the International Monetary Fund is equally important. The Wit-
teveen facility will contribute to this. We discussed the IMF surveil-
lance mechanism in Mexico a few days ago and we should all collabo-
rate closely on the results of that meeting.3
I am not going to comment on trade. Ambassador Strauss may
want to do that.
ment 119.
3 The IMF Interim Committee met at the Ministerial level in Mexico City April

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Prime Minister Fukuda: I thank Secretary Blumenthal for his re-
marks. I agree with his assessment. I basically agree with him as to how
we should proceed.
Last year at the London Summit, various countries set targets as to
the growth rate they intended to attain: West Germany pledged 4 per-
All the other countries did not meet their targets of growth.
In current account balances, your country had a deficit of $10 bil-
lion while the Japanese surplus was $14 billion. The situation is even
more difficult this year.
The dollar is the key currency in the world. It is essential for the
dollar to be stable. Japan and West Germany are trying to rectify their
trade surplusses. These endeavors are not just to benefit the United
States but benefit the whole world economy. We recognize our respon-
sibility to rectify our trade surplus.
The depreciation of the dollar and the appreciation of the yen,
however, meant that we were unable to reach our growth rate target.
Had the dollar-yen exchange rate remained stable, we would have
reached our goal of 6.7 percent last year. But because prices in the
United States went up, the dollar value of our exports also went up. We
expect another large surplus this year.
This year our goal is a 7 percent growth rate and a reduction in the
surplus of our current accounts. Attainment of these goals is our re-
sponsibility to the world economy.
My major concern presently is how to cut the surplus. Let me give
you my analysis of this.
On the export side, the yen value appreciated 30 percent in the past
year, but this appreciation has not yet had its effect. Three exports ac-
count for 43 percent of the total value of Japanese exports to the United
States:
—Steel. Due to the trigger price mechanism, we anticipate that
steel exports to the United States will decrease 10 to 15 percent in
volume.
—Automobiles. Though there is a long list of orders for automo-
biles, our goal is to keep the volume of sales the same as last year or
less, if possible. We are pursuing administrative measures to this effect.
—Color TVs. We talked about this last year. We expect a 30 percent
decrease in exports below the level of 1976, the year during which sales
surged in the American market.
How these efforts to reduce exports in three key commodities will
affect the dollar value of our exports is uncertain. If inflation continues
in your country, then the value of these exports will still rise.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
We appreciate the measures you intend to take to curb inflation.
Anyway, the value of our exports to the United States will be affected
not just by our own restraint but by your capacity to control inflation.
As to imports, our goal of a 7 percent growth in GNP should help.
Some Japanese economists are pessimistic and doubt that we can attain
a 7 percent growth rate. But based on my observations in the last four
months, I am quite optimistic. I believe we are on the path to a 7 percent
growth rate which is necessary in any case for domestic reasons. If the
steps we have already taken are not sufficient, I will then take the nec-
essary measures. This growth rate will increase imports, but there will
be a time lag.
I have therefore concluded that urgent measures are necessary for
the following:
—We seek to increase our import of enriched uranium and make
advance payment for it. I request the President to consider favorably
this proposal.
—We have sent the Ikeda purchasing mission to the United States.4
—We intend to stockpile non-ferrous medals.
—We intend to stockpile petroleum.
—We will purchase such civilian airplanes as the DC–980.
But I would repeat my concern that if inflation continues and the
dollar continues to be devalued, then we are in a vicious cycle. Specif-
ically, I have two concerns. First, the depreciation of the dollar will
have a worldwide negative impact on trade. And second, as to Arab oil
prices, although there is no immediate sign of problems given the
supply of oil, as the dollar continues to be depreciated, then the Arabs
may increase the price of oil, and this would become a worldwide
problem. The background is the oil problem. United States consumers
use 2½ times as much oil as the Japanese. I know of the Energy Bill.
When I visited Congressmen yesterday I asked the Senate for an early
conclusion for the Energy Bill for the rest of the world.
As to the international monetary situation, the results of the
Mexico Conference were satisfactory. As to your suggestion that we co-
operate with the World Bank, we will study this on a case-by-case basis.
I have proposed that we float World Bank bonds in Japan.
As to special economic assistance, we had earlier pledged to
double ODEA assistance in five years, but we have changed this target
to three years.
4 In keeping with the January agreement reached between Strauss and Japanese of-
ficials (see Documents 97 and 99), Yoshizo Ikeda, President of Mitsui & Company, led a
mission in March to promote Japanese imports of U.S. goods. (Peter Kihss, “Japanese
Offer a Ship to Display U.S. Export Goods in Their Ports,” The New York Times, March 16,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
As to various research and development projects in the energy
field, and joint research, I believe a joint energy resources fund would
contribute greatly. I request the President to consider this. Japan is
willing
to
cooperate,
and
cooperation
would
make
a
global
contribution.
I repeat my view that a strong United States is important to world
peace and prosperity.
I welcome the daily consultations on matters of currency exchange
rates. As to the IMF, we will keep close contact with its officials and
with you.
Also related to the energy situation, I talked to you last year about
nuclear energy. It is necessary to cooperate in this field. We believe that
nuclear energy is necessary. Japan is strongly in favor of nuclear
non-proliferation. We are also in favor of pursuing the peaceful use of
nuclear energy. We do not believe these two goals are incompatible.
Last year, I made a request about Japan’s strong interests in the
peaceful use of nuclear energy. I request the President carefully to con-
sider this request.
President Carter: We are scheduled to adjourn at this point. I hope
I can impose on you to stay a few more minutes.
We are making every effort to solve our economic problems and to
hold down inflation. The Congress and the American people are
willing to join me.
Congress is considering a major bill, as you know. We have partic-
ular problems because we are both one of the leading producers of pe-
troleum as well as leading consumer. It might be easier to settle the
problem if we were simply a consumer. But I believe we are making
progress.
As to nuclear energy, I believe the existence of Nuclear Fuel Cycle
Evaluation will lead first to further peaceful uses of nuclear energy re-
search and second to improved safeguards. I am committed to nuclear
power with comprehensive safeguards that will prevent nuclear
[proliferation?].
I would like to inform you briefly that we are making progress
with the Soviets in our strategic arms limitation talks and with the So-
viet Union and Great Britain in our efforts to reach a comprehensive
Test Ban Treaty. We have good relations with the Arab oil producing
nations.
We know we have a responsibility for maintaining world mone-
tary stability. Japan shares with us the view that steady moderate
growth and a minimum inflation are extremely important for the world
economy. The moderate Arabs share that view with us.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
I was gratified a few months ago with the Ushiba–Strauss Agree-
ment5 that was reached with your help. I might ask Bob Strauss to com-
ment so that the two of us would be informed if we should discuss any-
thing between us.
Ambassador Robert Strauss: I will be brief. Under the leadership of
President Carter, this Administration is committed to free trade at a
time when protectionist sentiment is as strong as I have ever seen it.
Last week the issue was fasteners. The clock is running out on this.
Rather than adversaries across the bargaining table, we should
consider ourselves members of the same team working together. Japan
simply must upgrade the quality of its offer. We must have help there
so that together we can beat back the protectionist sentiment. Optical
measures are frequently helpful. But they must also be substantive.
You should find room for a bit more beef and citrus. This will have an
impact on the Congress to give us and you time to move forward.
When you send a mission, be specific with plane purchases and timber.
Look for specific things. Even if the dollar value is not large, it will have
an impact.
Prime Minister Fukuda: The Bonn Summit must be a success.
Some say it will be a place to agree to disagree, but we must agree there.
We must reaffirm our commitment to free trade.
The Multilateral Trade Negotiations will have reached a conclu-
sion by then. Last year at the London Summit I said that strong coun-
tries must pursue as high a growth rate as possible. We will cooperate
in order to stabilize international monetary currencies.
On another subject, the purchase of Alaskan oil, I understand that
one-third of this oil now goes to the West Coast and two-thirds to the
East Coast. Would it be possible for Japan to either buy some of this oil
or swap for it? I know you have some problems with this, but we have
thought about it for a long time.
President Carter: I know. I know you discussed this with Vice
President Mondale just a few hours after I had become President and
we had talked about it last year. We will certainly keep this suggestion
in mind.
I apologize for keeping you overtime. Our discussions have been
important and fruitful. There have been no toasts because this has been
an informal luncheon. But I wish to express my gratitude to you. We
have shared the past, we share the present, and we will share the future
together.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Prime Minister Fukuda: Thank you very much. Thank you for
your kind words and for your hospitality. You are the President not
only of the United States but of the whole world.
(As the meeting broke up Prime Minister Fukuda told the Presi-
dent that he hoped to see him in Japan.)
131.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council of
Economic Advisers (Schultze) and the Special Representative
for Economic Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, May 26, 1978
SUBJECT
Economic Issues at Your Tuesday Breakfast with Chancellor Schmidt2
This is a joint memorandum, since we are both interested in the
Summit—Owen as your representative on the International Summit
Preparatory Committee, and Schultze as chairman of a group of eco-
nomic experts that met last weekend to prepare a report on macro-
economic policy for that Committee. This memo also reflects the views
of your advisers in State and Treasury. A report on the Schultze group’s
meeting is attached at Tab A.3 The Summit Preparatory Group will
meet this coming weekend; if anything develops during this meeting
that you should know, Owen will send you a supplementary note be-
fore you see Schmidt.4
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
information.
2 Carter and Schmidt held a breakfast meeting in the Oval Office on Tuesday, May
No memorandum of conversation was found.
3 Tab A, attached but not printed, is a May 25 memorandum from Schultze to Carter
entitled “Economic Policy and the Summit.”
4 In a May 28 memorandum to Carter, Owen reported that “nothing emerged” from
the May 27–28 meeting of the Summit Preparatory Group that would “change the
briefing memo that Charlie Schultze and I sent you” on the breakfast meeting with
Schmidt. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File,
ratory Group meeting is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
1. Introduction. Whether Schmidt decides to take the decisions that
we believe are needed for a successful Summit will depend partly on
the impressions that he forms in his meeting with you Tuesday.
Schmidt’s German colleagues have told us that he was puzzled in
past bilateral meetings as to whether you agreed with him or not; in
some cases, they say, he mistook your courtesy for assent, and was
upset afterwards if he concluded that this had not been the case. They
urge that you make clear any disagreements with him; he respects
people who do.
You may want to start by thanking Schmidt for the statements that
he has made, in answer to your telephone request, about the energy
bill.5 He spoke about this in his interview with the Washington Post,6 in
his BBC interview with Callaghan, and in a speech at Hamburg (which
was misinterpreted in the US media as an attack on your policy).7 The
German Ambassador has been told how grateful we were, and that we
hope Schmidt will speak further about this question while he is in
Washington—to the press and to any members of Congress whom he
may meet.
2. Schmidt’s Views. Schmidt wants to preside over a successful
Summit. He wants the US to contribute to that success by curtailing in-
flation and limiting oil imports;8 he wants the UK and France to con-
tribute by adopting sensible trade policies; and he indicated to Prime
Minister Callaghan that he is prepared to contribute by taking addi-
5 During an April 13 telephone call, Carter said to Schmidt: “Any time you have the
chance to speak out on the importance of our action on energy, please do so. Your words
are closely monitored in this country.” Schmidt replied: “I use the words ‘assistance to
the President’s energy conception.’” (Memorandum of conversation, April 13; Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 36, Memcons: Pres-
6 On April 20, The Washington Post published a report by Michael Getler on his
“lengthy and wide-ranging interview” with Schmidt on April 19. (“Bonn Anxious on
7 A New York Times report on Schmidt’s April 28 speech in Hamburg bears the head-
line “Schmidt Attacks U.S. Attitudes on Oil and Economics,” while a Washington Post re-
port is entitled “Schmidt Assails U.S. On Economic Policy.” (The New York Times, April
8 Earlier in May, Blumenthal and Owen urged Carter to press Congress to pass the
energy bill; should Congress fail to act, they suggested that he take executive action to
curb oil imports before the Bonn G–7 Summit. Eizenstat and Schirmer opposed this rec-
ommendation, while Schultze and McIntyre offered alternative ways of strengthening
the U.S. Summit position. (Memorandum from Blumenthal to Carter, May 8; memo-
randum from Owen to Carter, May 11; memorandum from Eizenstat and Schirmer to
Carter, May 11; memorandum from Schultze to Carter, May 11; and memorandum from
McIntyre to Carter, May 11; all in the Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Sec-
149.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
tional economic stimulus action if German growth appears to be falling
Although most German estimates suggest that 3.5% growth will
not be achieved without further stimulus, there is little political pres-
sure in Germany for expansionary action. Moreover, there are substan-
tial differences of opinion in Germany as to the form that any action
should take. Thus it will be easier for Schmidt to act if he can present his
actions in the context of international cooperation, including action by
the US.
Schmidt may elaborate to you on his difficulties, indicate that he
doubts more than a small stimulus—if any—will be needed, suggest
that he would like to make up his mind only after the Summit, and add,
as in his last letter to you, that the Summit should focus on underlying
structural issues (i.e., inflation, energy, and trade, where the action
would come from others), rather than on short-term issues (i.e., growth,
where the action would have to come from him).10
He may also make clear that if he does take stimulus action he will
insist on reciprocal action by others, including US action on inflation
and energy. As in his conversation with Owen,11 he may say that it
makes no sense for Germany to accelerate its growth unless the dollar
is strengthened by such US action, ask when you will take administra-
tive action on energy if the Congress does not act, and urge on you the
merits of raising the US crude oil price to the world level.
4. Our Position. We want the Summit to develop an economic
package along the lines that you and Callaghan discussed: US action on
9 In a May 10 memorandum to Carter, Owen relayed a U.K. report on a
Schmidt-Callaghan meeting, in which Schmidt appeared “prepared to participate con-
structively in a concerted plan of action for the Summit, and he told the Prime Minister ex-
plicitly that if President Carter would act on inflation and energy, then he would act (notwith-
standing his lack of intellectual conviction) on stimulating the FRG economy. We do not think
that he intends to take any such action until July, and the size of what he will do will no
doubt be influenced by how he judges the rest of the package. Nevertheless the readiness
seems to be there, though he hoped we would not press him too much publicly between
now and July.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
10 In a May 17 message to Carter, Schmidt suggested that it was “extremely impor-
tant that at the July summit we should devote special attention to the long term structural
aspects of economic development.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Carter, Trudeau also stressed the importance of addressing the Summit agenda “in a way
that brings clearly to our minds the longer-term, structural nature of the forces with
which our policies must contend.” Owen noted in a May 18 memorandum to Carter
Johnstone’s belief that Schmidt’s message and Trudeau’s letter “were both the result of a
phone conversation between Trudeau and Schmidt.” (Both in Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders
11 See Document 125.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
energy and inflation, British and French agreement (along with the
other Summit countries) on sensible trade policies, and German and
Japanese efforts to improve their growth, to the extent feasible without
adding to inflation. Each of these elements of the package depends on
the others being present. More specifically, significant action by Ger-
many to promote growth is an indispensable part of any coordinated
set of measures, since it will largely determine what other European
countries are able to do to increase growth in their economies, and
whether they would be willing to reduce their barriers to wider trade.
The scale of German action will be important; Schmidt is probably
thinking in terms of expansionary measures that would add ½% or less
to GNP. The US view is that a stimulus on the order of 1% of GNP (i.e.,
DM 12 billion) would be a more appropriate policy. When Schultze
suggested such a stimulus, the German member of his group did not
object, although he may not have reflected Schmidt’s thinking. In any
event, we wish to cast the Summit discussion in terms not of numerical
growth targets but of the need for a significant improvement from cur-
rent prospects, which are well below the earlier forecasts for both Ger-
5. Talking Points. You might organize your discussion of economic
issues with the Chancellor around the main components of a Summit
package:
a. US Action on Inflation and Energy: It is important to stress the pri-
ority that the US is giving to dealing with inflation and, even more im-
portantly, to persuade Schmidt of your willingness to commit yourself
at the Summit to get US domestic oil prices up to world market levels
over a very short period. This is crucial from his standpoint.
b. Trade: You might stress your support for international efforts to
keep an open trading system and to prevent the spread of subsidies
and other measures to prop up unviable industries, and indicate that
we will work at the Summit and otherwise to bring the French and
British into agreement along these lines.
c. Growth: You might point out that it will be easier for you to take
the politically difficult actions that Schmidt wants, particularly on en-
ergy, if they are balanced with actions by others that will also con-
tribute to world economy recovery. You might mention Fukuda’s re-
cent expression of willingness to announce further Japanese stimulus at
the Summit, if this proves needed to achieve Japan’s own growth objec-
tive, and mention your hope that Germany will be able to do the same.
You might indicate your understanding of the delicate political
problem that Schmidt faces; your recognition of his desire to avoid
“stop-and-go” policies, and your agreement on the need to promote
long-term sustainable growth. You might suggest that a substantial
German expansionary move at this time could pave the way for steady

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
and continuing improvement in both the world and German economy,
carrying well beyond 1978 and 1979.
(In all of this, it will be well to avoid the term “stimulus”, since
Schmidt equates this with short-term “quickie” measures; you might
speak, rather, of action to achieve sustained economic growth.)
6. Conclusion. If Schmidt leaves Washington with a clear under-
standing of the importance that you attach to German action on growth
and US action on energy, the chances of his taking the lead in devel-
oping a successful Summit are reasonably good.12 The critical point to
convey is that a successful Summit will require that all countries shape
their policies in ways that contribute to world recovery. We agree with
the Chancellor that the Summit should not be the occasion for pro-
grammatic decisions (a point on which the Chancellor feels strongly);
but it should be the occasion for defining policy directions. A meeting
that resulted only in an exchange of views would be widely criticized.
12 In a June 9 memorandum to Carter, Owen discussed two pieces of “evidence that
your breakfast with Schmidt was useful,” concluding that it had begun “to look as
though our package strategy may pay off.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
132.
Decision Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury
Blumenthal and Acting Secretary of Commerce Harman to
President Carter1
Washington, May 30, 1978
SUBJECT
Export Tax Incentive
We have been fighting for repeal of the Domestic International
Sales Corporation (DISC) on the grounds that it is not cost-effective.
orandum from Blumenthal, who wrote: “We decided at EPG last Thursday [May 25] to
have the attached decision memorandum on DISC forwarded immediately, as the Ways
and Means Committee is presently marking up the tax bill. It is in keeping with the Ex-
port Task Force package to be presented to you on June 15 and has the endorsement of
the Task Force’s membership.” (Ibid.) Minutes of the May 25 EPG meeting were not
found.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
The existing DISC rewards companies for export profits, not for export
sales. The rewards go primarily to big multinationals that export
anyway. At best, the additional exports created in 1978 by DISC are
These arguments are still valid. Yet there appears to be virtually
no chance that Congress will terminate the DISC program this year.
Twenty-eight of the 37 members of the Ways and Means Committee
have indicated their opposition to any cutback in DISC benefits. It ap-
pears, however, that some of those members are willing to talk compro-
mise. The Export Policy Task Force has developed an export tax incentive pro-
posal that contains the elements of a compromise which reconciles the needs of
trade policy with the needs of tax policy, and holds the possibility of turning
this issue into a victory for the Administration.
Operational Constraints
The policy considerations stem primarily from our growing bal-
ance of payments problems:
—The U.S. badly needs to recoup export market shares. Adjusted
for inflation, U.S. exports have not grown since 1974; the volume of U.S.
manufactured goods has actually declined. The rest of the industrial
world, by contrast, has seen a 12 percent growth in export volume since
1974;
—Incentives will have to be provided to medium and small-sized
firms if we are to augment the export accomplishments of large
multinationals;
—In the eyes of the business community, a credible and effective
export policy must include an appropriate incentive for exports;
—The Congress views a tax incentive as the simplest, fastest and
most nearly self-executing method of export stimulation. Rightly or
wrongly, it is in no mood to jettison DISC in the absence of an
alternative.
Proposed Alternative
The Export Policy Task Force’s basic proposal would: (1) reduce the
benefits of the present DISC program; (2) restructure the benefits to em-
phasize export sales rather than export profits; and (3) use part of the
revenue saving to create, within the DISC framework, a direct export
incentive targeted on small and medium-sized companies. The spe-
cifics of this proposal are summarized at Tab A.2 The revenue cost totals
$750 million, a $350 million reduction from the present DISC program.
This proposal is designed to make the DISC significantly more
cost-effective while keeping the number of legislative changes to a min-
imum. The Congress has no appetite for a complicated revision of
2 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated memorandum entitled “Specifics of
Export Policy Task Force Proposal.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
DISC. Moreover, the more complex the Administration proposal, the
less certain we can be of the final outcome.
MTN Considerations
DISC itself, and any new variant, is contrary to the thrust of our in-
ternational negotiations to limit export subsidies. Further, the adoption
of a new incentive for small and medium-sized firms will be seen as in-
consistent with our vigorous enforcement of the U.S. countervailing
duty statute against the export subsidies used by the EC, Canada,
Brazil, Colombia, and other nations. Ambassador Strauss, however, be-
lieves that while the recommendation might be awkward to our inter-
national posture, it would not be fatal to the negotiations. A smaller
DISC is clearly more acceptable to our trading partners than a larger DISC.
Recommendation: That you authorize Treasury, in consultation with
Commerce and others, to negotiate a revised DISC with the Congress
along the lines suggested.3
W. Michael Blumenthal4
Sidney Harman5
3 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation; how-
ever, see Document 135.
4 Blumenthal signed “Mike” above this typed signature.
5 Harman signed “Sidney” above this typed signature.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
133.
Memorandum From the Head of the Delegation to the
Multilateral Trade Negotiations (McDonald) to the Special
Representative for Trade Negotiations (Strauss)1
Geneva, June 2, 1978
SUBJECT
Assuring U.S. Trade Success and Tokyo Round Approval
In looking ahead to the task of obtaining approval for the Tokyo
Round results, we should begin thinking how these fit into an overall
U.S. trade program that could significantly expand our political and
public base of support. In my view, this means complementing the
Tokyo Round results, which are predominantly “offensive” toward
trade liberalization, with a comprehensive and aggressive “defensive
package” aimed at assuring increasingly fair trade now and for the
future.
Such a program would call for a major reorientation and reinforce-
ment of U.S. trade practices which should have wide appeal even to
many interest groups opposing the liberalization moves. Thus, with
such an enlarged effort we could shift focus appropriately from the
more distasteful liberalizing moves to encompass a broader constitu-
ency who must favor a reinforcing and upgrading of the system and
the U.S. role in assuring fair trade.
For example, this approach might well elicit the support of Sen-
ators like Heinz and Danforth, who consider U.S. present practices as
too weak and ineffective, as well as those key industries who need a
long-term, aggressive U.S. posture to preserve and build their positions
in international trade (e.g., chemicals,2 electrical machinery, capital
goods producers).
The remainder of this memorandum lays out some initial ideas for
the defensive elements in such a program, leaving aside for the mo-
ment the offensive aspects of trade policy (e.g., tariff reductions, freer
flow of agricultural products, lowering of trade barriers, opening or ex-
panding accesses to markets). Obviously, these ideas need a lot of elab-
oration and refinement but we must begin that process shortly if we are
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Assistant to the President and
sonal and Confidential. A copy was sent to Wolff.
2 McDonald discussed recent consultations with chemical industry representatives
in a June 2 memorandum to Strauss entitled “Reconciliation of STR Chemical Industry
Positions.” He noted that he “spent considerable time trying to think through with them
some solutions to their problems so that we could obtain their full support by the time we
get the Tokyo Round results to Congress.” (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
to have a solid and clearly winning series of trade proposals ready for
Congress in January that will help ensure approval of the Tokyo Round
results.
“DEFENSIVE” ELEMENTS OF TOKYO ROUND RESULTS
1. Major Moves for “Fairer Trade”
Much of our focus in the Tokyo Round centers on improving the
international system leading to “fairer trade.” These include the fol-
lowing aspects that we must negotiate in Geneva and emphasize in our
public presentations.
A. Codes: Central themes through all of the codes call for
—increased discipline in the system
—greater transparency of domestic and international procedures
with an increased opportunity to air individual cases and complaints
—greater opportunities for consultations over problems before
they reach the crisis stage
—objective reviews of differences
—expanded international understandings with more common
ground rules, leaving less latitude for arbitrary manipulation of trade
measures and administration
B. Dispute Settlement Mechanism: Our aims here are for
—reinforced procedures
—easier notification and consultative arrangements
—accelerated, objective reviews of trade complaints and violations
of understandings
—greater tendency to build over time a series of case precedents
that themselves permit the evolution of the GATT to deal with
changing circumstances.
2. More Realistic Safeguards
Also as a defensive measure, our aims here are to widen the range
of options for safeguard actions and avoid a major confrontation and
diplomatic incident whenever safeguards are involved. While in-
creasing the actual level of discipline within the system by encompas-
sing many sub-rosa activities, we need to be able to protect the legiti-
mate interests of American industry when trade is diverted by informal
arrangements and secret procedures.
Moreover, we should have the international right to invoke con-
sultations on a government-to-government basis without threatening a
trade war or taking Article XIX3 actions when we face or anticipate
problems from import disruptions. These consultations should provide
opportunities for reviewing a whole range of trade problems, including
3 Article XIX of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade deals with “Emer-
gency Action on Imports of Particular Products.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
new concerns such as excessive capacity build-ups through gov-
ernment policy and financial intervention.
3. An Upgraded and Modernized GATT
Within the GATT framework itself, we are seeking
A. Improved understandings and guidelines for
—balance of payments actions
—preferential arrangements between LDC’s, and
B. The introduction of the concepts of
—graduation for advanced LDC’s, and
—embryonic guarantees of supply access (e.g., limitations on ex-
port restraints)
REORIENTATION OF U.S. TRADE POLICY
WITH “DEFENSIVE” APPEAL
In addition to the elements of a defensive package that are being
negotiated in the Tokyo Round, these must be supplemented by some
wide ranging reorientations of overall U.S. trade policy. Key elements
should probably include the following:
1. Improved Domestic Programs and Processes
A. Adjustment Assistance: Here we need a workable, substantive ef-
fort with the support of organized labor to help pragmatically the ad-
justment of workers displaced in industry, particularly in those sectors
with rising imports. Both Murray Finley and Sol Chaikin, during their
Geneva visits,4 said they felt this is a must. Certainly Congressman
Vanik has been disappointed that no new program has come forward
yet from the Administration in this area.
B. Programs for Youth Training and Retraining of the Unemployed: A
Government-sponsored series of incentives to private industry for
(a) building skills in our otherwise unemployed youth and for (b) re-
training workers dislocated through industrial restructuration is badly
needed. This would have wide appeal. One would expect for relatively
small sums of money, with the active support of private industry, this
could represent a major move toward ensuring higher levels of em-
ployment long-term for the less qualified elements of our society.
C. Simplification of Processes on Injury Determination: One of in-
dustry’s major complaints is that the U.S. Government itself is the big-
gest obstacle to gaining recognition of its problems and obtaining ap-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
propriate relief within a reasonable timeframe. The procedures for
bringing complaints about unfair trade practices and finding injury in
subsidy/countervail, anti-dumping, and safeguard actions need to be
simplified.
A fast-track opportunity also needs to be included as an option for
those industries who feel totally stymied by the normal time delays and
who feel their businesses are being threatened irretrievably by current
administrative delays. There may also be circumstances identified re-
quiring mandatory reference by the U.S. to the GATT.
Improvements here could go far to underline our interest in com-
bating unfair trade practices on every front, domestically and interna-
tionally. They could also make an injury test in a subsidies code a more
compatible concession because of the side benefits gained for business
in improving injury processes for anti-dumping and safeguard actions.
D. “Buy America” Adaptations: For countries that do not sign the
code or who later do not live up to our international understandings,
we should continue “Buy America” preferences. This would have wide
appeal. Senator Heinz also indicated interest during his recent visit to
Geneva5 that his activities and our aims in the Government procure-
ment code could converge around this theme if the code appears to be
a realistic first step toward opening major foreign markets for U.S.
exporters.
E. Advise U.S. Industry on How Best to Deal with Trade-Related
Problems: STR should provide positive guidance to industry on where
to go and how to proceed within the U.S. Government on trade
questions.
2. An Aggressive Bilateral/Multilateral Program for Maintaining Fair
Trade Relationships
Too many people feel currently that our trade relationships are
flabby, inconsistent, and have not been aggressively pursued on a reg-
ular basis. Certainly we will need the following kinds of efforts:
A. Japan: This will be a continuing negotiation since only by a
process of aggressive erosion can the United States hope to move
toward the realization of a parity of opportunity of the kind essential
for both of our countries. Our steps toward this aim in the Tokyo
Round will need to be constantly policed and reinforced.
B. Advanced LDC’s: These groups are establishing precedent-
setting patterns on a day-to-day basis as they move toward develop-
ment. Many of their industries are increasingly among the more effi-
on his visit was found.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
cient and progressive. Thus, our trade relationships with such coun-
tries as Brazil, Korea and others will take constant vigilance and a
regular series of bilaterals to enforce adherence to reasonable rules of
the game in fair trade.
An aggressive policy with the advanced LDC’s may also permit us
to segregate the LLDC’s for some special privileges which we want to
confer for humanitarian reasons. This would cost us very little in trade
problems. Of course, such a two-pronged effort would in itself rein-
force the concept of graduation by making it a reality in U.S. practice.
C. EC: With the largest trading entity we will also want to maintain
essentially a continuing dialogue cum negotiation to make sure we are
playing by the same rules. Then, together we must insist on the adher-
ence of others who have access to our markets. Our long-term interests
are converging and we collectively can provide enormous discipline
for the system if the EC will join us in this effort.
D. Multilateral Efforts: Here we must make the GATT work. We
should do the following:
—devote the time and effort needed to upgrade and reinforce its
mechanisms and secretariat
—get the codes off to a good start with constructive, positive
precedents
—provide mandatory referrals of legitimate complaints by U.S. in-
dustry to the GATT
—maintain strong U.S. positions to provide a continuing role of
leadership
—keep a broad-based, commercially oriented discussion going to
reduce political build-ups of pressure in the UN, UNCTAD and other
political fora.
3. STR Responsibility for Building and Defending U.S. Export Interests
As the President’s Special Trade Representative, the office of STR
should be charged with the responsibility to build and defend U.S. ex-
port interests on a consistent and effective basis. These efforts, in coop-
eration with many of the executive department entities, should include:
—initiate and provide leadership for key U.S. programs to expand
exports and support the needs of exporters
—audit across the board of U.S. programs to comment on their im-
pact on our international competitive position
—serve as a persistent, continuing watchdog over U.S. export re-
sults and trends and our balance of trade.
4. Active Management of the Trade Interface with Non-Market Economies
We have no good solutions yet to our relationships between the
Western economies and the Communist/Socialist countries whose
markets are essentially closed to us. We must make sure that our
market is not glutted by their merchandise when they have followed no

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
reasonable rules of economics in developing industries or pricing
products.
For example, in textiles we should move to negotiate a textile
quota arrangement with the People’s Republic of China.6 With the
Eastern Bloc countries, we will also need to determine rules of the game
for a series of industries, and particularly in chemicals where their ex-
pected capacity in the next few years will equal that of the United
States.
5. Continuation of a Trade Advisory System
Our Government should establish an Office of Trade Relations as a
part of STR. This entity should provide for a continuing dialogue on a
constructive, substantive plane between those officials responsible for
developing and administering trade policy and those executives most
knowledgeable about the trends and competitive elements affecting
our industries.
This effort over time, similar to the interchanges between the
ISAC’s and the U.S. Delegation in Geneva over the last six weeks, could
become the nucleus of a constructive interface on trade issues between
the Government and the private sector, reaffirming for both their re-
spective rights and obligations for our common well-being in the inter-
national trade field. This also assumes the continuation, on a perma-
nent basis, of a private sector advisory system similar to the one
established for the Multilateral Trade Negotiations.
Other elements undoubtedly should also be considered, but the
above could provide the core for a solid defensive package. Then
linked to our MTN results, I believe this would enormously enhance
the appeal to Congress and the public support for the results of the
Tokyo Round.
6 McDonald discussed ways of addressing problems associated with trade in tex-
tiles in a June 1 memorandum to Strauss. (Carter Library, Records of the Office of the As-
Representative 6/78)

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
134.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, June 5, 1978
SUBJECT
DISC
1. Introduction. Mike Blumenthal and Juanita Kreps have recom-
mended to you that we propose to the Congress a smaller and more
cost-effective DISC, and a new direct export incentive within the DISC
for small and medium-sized firms.2
2. The Pro Argument. A cost-effective DISC and a direct export in-
centive would help to sustain US exports and thus to stabilize the
dollar. By the same token, the National Export Policy now being devel-
oped3 will lack credibility in the business community if we are still op-
posing DISC when it is announced.4
3. The Con Argument. State argues that these proposed export in-
centives would step up the pace of export subsidy competition and
thus go counter to the type of international subsidies code we are trying
to negotiate in MTN. (See State memo at Tab A.)5
I doubt that negotiating a reformed DISC with Congress will sig-
nificantly reduce our chances of securing an international subsidies
agreement. Indeed, in seeking a reformed DISC, we could inform both
the Congress and foreign governments that we will propose its repeal if
a satisfactory international agreement is negotiated. This would show
the Congress that we are tough negotiators, and give foreign gov-
ernments a tangible reason to seek an international agreement.
In any event, the chances of negotiating a subsidies code are uncer-
tain, at best. In the absence of a code, common sense argues for having a
cheap and effective DISC, instead of the present expensive and ineffec-
tive one—which the Congress will otherwise insist on our retaining.
4. Conclusion. Substantively, the arguments favor DISC reform.
Procedurally, I see little merit in deferring your decision pending further
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
for information. Brzezinski initialed at the top of the page.
2 See Document 132.
3 See Document 119.
4 In his tax reform plan announced on January 20, Carter included a measure calling
for the phased elimination of DISC. See footnote 13, Document 119.
5 Tab A, attached but not printed, is a June 3 memorandum from Christopher (as
the Acting Secretary of State) to Carter entitled “Export Tax Subsidy.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
interagency consideration, as State suggests, since we already know the
views of the principal agencies involved and since delay would pre-
vent us from influencing the current Congressional review of pending
tax reform issues. I therefore recommend that you approve the
Treasury-Commerce proposal. Bob Strauss does not oppose this pro-
posal, although he can hardly support it explicitly, given his STR
responsibilities.
135.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic
Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) and the Director of the Office
of Management and Budget (McIntyre) to President Carter1
Washington, June 6, 1978
SUBJECT
Treasury/Commerce Memo re Export Tax Incentive
Treasury and Commerce propose that you authorize them to try to
negotiate with Congress a revision of the Administration’s DISC pro-
posal which would (1) restrict the applicability and reduce the revenue
loss of the present DISC and (2) introduce a new tax credit for “export
promotional expenses”.2
While the first part of their recommendation is sound and would
be a significant reform of DISC, the second part of this proposal repre-
sents unsound tax and budget policy and is as likely to result in a polit-
ical embarrassment for the Administration as the “victory” suggested
by Treasury and Commerce.
The present Administration position is to try to eliminate DISC in
its entirety and if we cannot succeed with that proposal to try to elimi-
nate as much of DISC as we can (e.g., by limiting its applicability to
small businesses). The rationale for that position is that DISC is bad tax
and budget policy, expending a great deal of revenue for little net
benefit.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
sification marking. Included as Tab B of a June 26 memorandum from Bergsten to Blu-
menthal. (Ibid.)
2 See Document 132.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
Under the Treasury/Commerce proposal, the Administration
would, in effect, be reversing its position on DISC and saying that (1) a
restructured DISC is appropriate tax policy and (2) in addition, there
should be a new tax credit (the Credit) for export promotional expenses.
The Credit would be equal to 50 percent of “export promotional ex-
penses” (subject to a $50,000 limit per firm per year) for firms with less
than $5 million in export sales.
We oppose the new Credit for the following reasons. First,
Treasury/Commerce present no cost-benefit analysis whatever for the Credit.
Each dollar of “export promotional expenses” would be eligible not
only for the 50¢ credit but also for deduction as a business expense
(thereby saving the average DISC roughly 30¢ in taxes). Accordingly,
the Federal government (or the taxpayers generally) would be paying
80¢ of every dollar of export promotion expenses and the exporter 20¢.
This formula might promote ill-conceived foreign sales efforts fi-
nanced by the taxpayers and is inconsistent with the tax reform ap-
proach of the Administration. Its potential benefits are not analyzed.
(CEA’s memo3 indicates they are likely to be very small.) For many ex-
port operations the major effect of the Treasury/Commerce proposal
will merely be to shift the accounting entry for the same export expenses
from the parent company to the DISC in order to get the 50% credit.
Second, such a proposal is inconsistent with the thrust of our tax
reform. There is no reason for a tax reform minded Administration to
propose a new tax incentive which, if ever passed, may become the
target of tax reform efforts by future Presidents.
Third, as Treasury/Commerce recognize, the new credit would be
inconsistent with our international trade posture of opposing export
subsidies by our trading partners. While this may not be “fatal” to the
international negotiations, it certainly might undermine them.
The same basic forces (G.E. and the multinationals) that are lob-
bying so effectively against the elimination of DISC would also oppose
the Treasury/Commerce compromise since it does not do anything for
them.
We are concerned that if the Administration defuses its opposition
to DISC and indicates that as a matter of principle it actually supports
tax credits for export activities, Congress will wind up keeping DISC and
coming up with some new, wasteful export tax credit of its own. Given the
present mood in Congress, there is a substantial downside risk in-
volved here.
3 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Conclusion
Accordingly, we recommend that you (a) approve of Treasury at-
tempting to modify DISC (as a fall back to eliminating it), along the
lines proposed—limiting income allocated to the DISC to 4% of export
sales, (b) disapprove the new tax credit, and (c) so that you are not
forced to publicly reject a published proposal by the Export Policy Task
Force,4 ask that the recommendation for a new tax credit not be in-
cluded in the report.5
Decision
Approve Treasury/Commerce proposal (Recommended by Treasury
and Commerce)
Disapprove Treasury/Commerce proposal (Recommended by OMB,
DPS and CEA) and Congressional Liaison.6
4 See Document 119.
5 In the margin adjacent to this paragraph, Bergsten wrote: “Note here their support
for DISC alteration.”
6 Carter indicated his approval of this option and initialed “J.”
136.
Discussion Paper Prepared for the Economic Policy Group1
Washington, undated
MTN AND THE BONN SUMMIT
I. Overview
We, the EC and Japan are committed to reaching political agree-
ment on a comprehensive MTN package by July 15. We are also
working to have Canada join such a consensus. Our aim is to enable the
participants at the Bonn Summit on July 16–17 to endorse such a
package as part of an overall program for economic cooperation.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Under Secretary for Economic Af-
fairs, 1978–1980 Files Pertaining to International Monetary Affairs, OECD, Documents,
to Hessler under cover of a June 7 memorandum from Feketekuty, which indicated that
the paper was for a June 8 EPG meeting on the MTN and the Bonn G–7 Summit. (Ibid.)
No record of the EPG meeting was found.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
The negotiations in Geneva have been making progress on most
negotiating issues over the past few months, and the outlines of pos-
sible agreements in the various areas of the negotiations have begun to
emerge. Nevertheless, a considerable amount of work remains to be
completed, and the possibility remains that a political impasse may de-
velop on one of the key issues in the negotiations, such as market access
for U.S. agricultural products, the development of satisfactory disci-
plines for agricultural and industrial subsidies, or the achievement of a
substantial cut in tariffs.
The possibility also remains that one of the summit participants
may link agreement on a key issue in the MTN to other topics on the
Summit agenda. While we have no evidence at this point that such
linkages will be established, France in the past has made a major issue
of a link between trade liberalization and reform of the international
monetary system.
II. Using the Summit context for maximizing the MTN package
Inclusion of the MTN on the Summit Agenda makes it possible to
place MTN issues into the broader context of economic and political re-
lations among the major countries. It may be useful to pursue the fol-
lowing themes:
1. The rapid growth of trade has been a major engine of growth
during the past 30 years. We should achieve a credible result in the lib-
eralization of trade in the MTN in order to ensure that expanded trade
will continue to be a dynamic element of our economies over the next
decade or two. On the other hand, even a tariff cut in the range of 35–40
percent would be unlikely to create difficulties of economic adjustment,
since the existing levels of most tariffs are already low, key cuts are ex-
pected to be spread out over 8 years, and the possibility will remain for
postponing a portion of the cut should economic circumstances
worsen.
2. The tendency of governments to intervene in our economies to
achieve a variety of social and economic goals has grown considerably
in recent years. While this trend has made possible an improved social
environment, it has also introduced some rigidities and inefficiencies in
our economies that retard growth. The guidelines we are seeking to de-
velop in areas such as subsidies, standards, and agriculture should help
us in achieving a balance in our economies between the achievement of
social goals and avoidance of the more excessive forms of intervention
in our economies that can prove costly for economic growth.
Government policy measures involving subsidies, standards and
the stabilization of agricultural income can also have a major impact on
the trade interests of other countries, and thus tend to create political
friction among countries. A stable economic and political relationship

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
is, therefore, not possible without the means for minimizing the distor-
tion to trade that can result from such policies and without the means
for resolving any disputes that arise before they assume major political
proportions.
III. Scope of a likely MTN package
Negotiators in Geneva have been working on an MTN package en-
compassing the following elements:
1. Offers to cut industrial and agricultural tariffs.
2. Offers to remove or to reduce specific non-tariff barriers af-
fecting both industrial and agricultural items.
3. Agreements (or Codes) covering subsidies, safeguards, gov-
ernment procurement, standards, customs valuation, licensing, export
restrictions, dispute settlement, use of trade measures for balance of
payments purposes, and right/obligation of developing countries in
the GATT.
We expect that by July 15 the countries participating in the Summit
will have been able to achieve agreement on a technical level on all but
a few key issues and that Ministers will have found appropriate polit-
ical solutions for those issues. Further technical discussions will be nec-
essary after July 15 in order to translate such political solutions into
concrete technical language.
IV. Relationship to other countries participating in the MTN
While our negotiators in Geneva have concentrated on achieving
agreement on individual negotiating issues among the key countries,
efforts have continued to expand the number of countries who would
be able to endorse such agreements.
By July 15, we would hope that most of the other developed coun-
tries participating in the MTN will be able to support the major ele-
ments of the agreements reached. It is likely that substantive negotia-
tions with the developing countries will need to continue after July 15
in order to accommodate their interests.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
Appendix
Paper2
Washington, undated
Key Objectives on Critical Issues
The following is a discussion of key issues in the MTN, including
those points which may require political-level resolution early in July.
Agriculture.—Agricultural issues are the most difficult in the MTN.
We are committed to Congress and the U.S. agricultural community to
conclude agreement of substantial benefit for U.S. agricultural trade.
The primary interest of our agricultural community is to achieve
improved market access for specific U.S. commodities. It has become
apparent, however, that even modest results in this area will require a
major negotiating effort.
Another objective of the United States is to achieve a better basis
for international cooperation on issues involving agricultural trade.
Since the GATT has been totally ineffective in this area, and since
disputes over agricultural policy usually involve powerful political
interests, we see progress in this area as vital for a harmonious re-
lationship between the U.S. and Europe in the future. However, our ag-
ricultural community does not see progress in this area as an adequate
substitute for improved market access.
The basic interest of the European Community in agriculture is to
achieve, in addition to market access for EC exports, greater price sta-
bility in world markets in order to reduce the pressure exerted by the
world markets on the common agricultural policy. In the EC, some
share our desire to establish a better basis for cooperation on agricul-
tural issues, most notably Finn Gundelach, EC Commission Vice Presi-
dent in charge of agriculture. However, as in the United States, this is
not a popular issue politically.
The following are major agricultural policy issues which remain to
be resolved. They are listed in order of priority and negotiating
difficulty.
(1) Response by the EC, Japan and Canada for improved access for
U.S. exports of key commodities.
(2) Nature of discipline to be developed on the use of agricultural
export subsidies.
2 No classification marking. An unknown person made several marginal notations
throughout this paper.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
(3) U.S. response to EC requests for improved access to the U.S.
dairy market.
(4) With respect to commodity arrangements being negotiated:
1. Role and nature of the notional floor and ceiling prices in
the agreement.
2. Level of stocks which would be held.
3. Nature of subsidy disciplines in the agreement.
(b) Coarse grains—extent of economic provisions, if any, to be in-
cluded in the coarse grains agreement.
1. Degree of U.S. participation in a commodity arrangement
on dairy products, particularly degree of U.S. commitment to ad-
here to minimum export prices.
2. Nature of subsidy discipline in the agreement.
Subsidies/Countervailing Duties.—The issue of subsidies is one of
the most sensitive issues in the MTN. Other countries consider U.S. ac-
ceptance of an injury test prior to the imposition of countervailing
duties as one of their major objectives. The United States, in turn, is in-
terested in achieving greater international discipline in the use of
subsidies.
Although progress has been made on this issue in recent weeks, in-
cluding the development of a joint U.S.–EC negotiating paper,3 a
number of critical issues remain outstanding. They include:
(1) Agreement on guidelines for use of domestic industrial
subsidies;
(2) The extent to which countries can take unilateral actions against
illegal subsidy measures (nullification and impairment under Article
XXIII of the GATT);4
(3) We also need appropriate disciplines for agricultural export
subsidies, as indicated earlier.
Tariffs.—1. Level of Tariff Cuts.—The United States has actively
supported a substantial tariff reduction under the assumption that
(a) lower tariffs would reduce the degree of discrimination inherent in
regional preferential arrangements such as those currently existing in
Europe and (b) that a substantial overall cut would provide the means
for bringing down the higher tariffs of Japan and Canada to the level of
subsidies and countervailing duties. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D780226–0718)
4 Article XXIII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade deals with “Nullifica-
tion or Impairment.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
U.S. tariffs. Even though the current economic situation will make
reaching agreement on a substantial tariff cut difficult, economic ad-
justments required will not be great since existing tariffs are already
low, any cuts will be spread over 8 years, and part of the cut could be
delayed if warranted by economic circumstances.
The U.S. tariff offer, as tabled in January would result in 42.2 percent
average reduction in our tariff rates.
The EC has offered a 37.8 percent reduction in items of interest to the
United States. If the EC were to implement a list of withdrawals that it
has tentatively distributed, the depth of cut offered would drop to 31.1
percent. Since that time, the EC Council of Ministers has approved an
additional list of withdrawals that would lower their depth of cut
further.
The Japanese offer amounts to a 20 percent reduction of applied
rates and a 47.4 percent reduction of legal rates. We have received indi-
cations that they are willing to increase that offer to a 28 percent reduc-
tion from applied rates.
The Canadian offer amounts to a 40.9 percent cut on GATT rates,
and a 26.7 percent cut on applied rates.
2. Composition of Tariff Reductions.—In order to achieve a satis-
factory tariff package, we must achieve adequate tariff reductions in
key U.S. export industries. The offers now on the table from our major
trading partners fall short in key U.S. industries such as paper, elec-
tronic products, chemicals, construction equipment and photographic
film.
Government Procurement.—There is currently a strong presumption
against foreign procurement by publicly-owned entities, much of it
high technology items in which the U.S. is strongly competitive. Given
this fact, plus the current trend of greater public ownership in many
foreign countries, we feel that negotiation of a government procure-
ment code is particularly important.
The two main issues in the government procurement area are:
(1) The degree to which governments will provide the information
necessary to judge whether new rules for greater access by foreign sup-
pliers are being followed.
(2) The public entities, commodities, and type of contracts which
are to be subject to the rules (coverage) of a new code.
Standards.—The standards code which is under negotiation will
contain international guidelines for the development of product stand-
ards to assure that they do not unnecessarily distort trade. Major issues
in the standards area which remain are:
(1) The extent to which a standards code would apply to state,
local, and private standards setting bodies;

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
(2) Access by outsiders to regional certification and standards-
making systems.
Safeguards.—A safeguards code would provide updated rules for
the temporary imposition of trade restraints when a surge of imports
threatens to disrupt domestic markets.
The major question to be resolved in this area is the degree to
which it should be permissible to apply safeguard measures selectively
against individual countries, rather than on an MFN basis against all
countries. International legitimization of selective application of safe-
guards is a key objective of the European Community. While we have
agreed that a safeguard code may need to permit limited use of selec-
tive safeguards, it should be reserved for only the most extraordinary
circumstances and should be circumscribed by strict rules and interna-
tional surveillance.
Customs Valuation.—It would appear at this point that there will
not be issues on customs valuation which will require political-level at-
tention between now and mid-July. In exchange for acceptance of a
new system of valuation, however, the United States has continued to
insist upon adequate reciprocity and compensation in other areas of the
negotiations.
Role of Developing Countries.—
(1) Provisions for a legal basis for special treatment for developing
countries in the form of an “enabling clause” to be added to the General
Agreement. The critical issue on this topic is whether GSP should be
covered by this clause.
(2) Reciprocity/Graduation—This topic deals with obligations in
the trading system the developing countries would assume as they
reach more advanced stages of economic development.
Use of trade measures for balance of payments purposes.—The U.S. sup-
ports a general commitment by developed countries to avoid the use of
such measures. The EC Commission is sympathetic to our approach,
but faces opposition from the UK, France, and Italy.
Dispute Management.—We are seeking to negotiate improved and,
to the extent possible, uniform rules whereby disputes that arise be-
tween contracting parties are settled.
Export Restrictions.—The United States is seeking improved guide-
lines for the use of export restrictions by governments, in order to rec-
ognize their disruptive impact on trade. The EC and Japan generally
support our approach, but Canada, Australia and most developing
countries have consistently opposed our efforts to develop an agree-
ment in this area.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
137.
Editorial Note
gotiations, Robert Strauss, and other U.S. officials met with repre-
sentatives from the European Communities (EC), Japan, and Canada in
Washington for a discussion of the status of the multilateral trade nego-
tiations (MTN). No memoranda of conversation of these discussions
were found. A summary of the talks, included in a weekly status report
by the Office of Economic Policy, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Af-
fairs, noted that they “were designed to clarify MTN issues before the
final three weeks of bargaining. Each side explained its position and
listed the top priorities it felt it needed for a settlement.” The partici-
pants also “confirmed that July 15 is the deadline for the MTN and
agreed on a stringent timetable for drafting and decision-making to
meet that date.” (Telegram 163753 to all East Asian and Pacific diplo-
matic posts, June 27; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D780267–0486) Speaking to the press, Strauss said: “We now have
in hard and final form what the bottom line is for each of the constit-
uencies we represent.” (Clyde H. Farnsworth, “Key Nations Sup-
On June 23, the Special Representative for Economic Summits,
Henry Owen, recommended, at Strauss’ request, that President Jimmy
Carter send letters to Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau and
Japanese Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda asking them to address out-
standing trade issues. (Memorandum from Owen to Carter, June 23;
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Presi-
dent’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 11, Japan: Prime
asserted the necessity of redressing the “imbalance between our tariff
offers on both industrial and agricultural items,” noting that the United
States “badly needs an improvement in the Canadian offer if our offer
is to stand.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Ma-
terial, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 3,
letter to Fukuda, Carter stressed the need “to improve access for agri-
cultural products, reduce industrial tariffs, and reach agreement on
such issues as government procurement and a meaningful code on sub-
sidies” and called for “Japanese leadership in liberalizing trade.” In
particular, Carter asserted to Fukuda that “improvements in your ne-
gotiators’ offer in Geneva and other efforts to liberalize access to
Japan’s import market are essential, if agreement is to be reached be-
fore the Bonn meeting on the main unresolved issues in the Multilateral
Trade Negotiations.” Noting Japan’s interest in a U.S. pledge to limit oil
imports, Carter noted that his ability to offer that pledge at Bonn “de-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
pends, in good part, on what actions other countries are prepared to
take on growth, trade, and aid.” (Carter Library, National Security Af-
fairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign
In his June 23 memorandum, Owen also noted Strauss’ recommen-
dation that Carter discuss the trade negotiations with British Prime
Minister James Callaghan, who made a private visit to the United
States on June 26. Earlier that month, on June 5, Carter had sent Calla-
ghan a handwritten note that reads: “Without your active help, pros-
pects for substantive achievement in Multilateral Trade Negotiations
are not good. Can you join us in a more concerted effort?” (Carter Li-
brary, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 2, Great
Carter under cover of another June 23 memorandum, noted that he was
“well aware of the importance of” the trade talks and asserted that “ob-
viously there must be a good deal of give and take, not just from Eu-
rope on matters of concern to the United States, but from the United
States on issues to which we attach importance.” In his cover memo-
randum, Owen reported that British Ambassador to the United States
Peter Jay believed that Callaghan’s reply suggested “that the P.M. is
prepared for a deal: He will give on trade if the US gives ‘on issues to
which we attach importance.’” Owen suggested that Carter tell Calla-
ghan that the United States could “make a meaningful pledge on lim-
iting oil imports if other Summit countries can make equally mean-
ingful pledges on growth and trade.”
Owen’s June 23 memorandum also relayed Strauss’ talking points
for Carter’s conversation with Callaghan: “We are missing the essential
elements of a deal. The US is being responsive to your concerns, but
needs help with respect to its needs. We hope that the UK will be able to
support efforts by the Commission to work out acceptable solutions in
each of these areas on a reciprocal basis: meaningful rules on subsidies;
market access for a number of US agricultural products; tariff and
non-tariff barrier reductions for US industrial exports; and allowing ex-
porters to compete for foreign government procurement.” (Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office
Carter and Callaghan held a breakfast meeting on the patio outside
brary, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No record of the
meeting was found.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
138.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, June 23, 1978
SUBJECT
Our Summit Goals
1. The main purpose of US participation in the Summit is to strike a
three-way deal, which will involve:
a. the US pledging action to limit oil imports2 and control inflation;
b. the Germans and Japanese pledging additional measures to
stimulate domestic demand;3
c. all Summiteers agreeing to freer trade policies4—which will be
especially difficult for the British and the French.
Thus each head of government would pledge actions that are in his
country’s interest, but that would be politically difficult unless done as
part of a package that included concessions from other countries. I
won’t elaborate further on this concept, since you are familiar with the
steps that we are taking to try to give shape to it.
2. In addition to this package of immediate measures, our object at
the Summit is to tackle two longer-term structural problems: energy pro-
duction and conservation (other than US imports), and North-South
relations.5
3. On energy, I hope the Summit can agree on actions—coordinated
research and development, increased investment, etc.—to reduce en-
ergy consumption and increase energy production in the industrial
world. An international sub-group (on which DOE is represented) is
spelling out details, which we will submit to you shortly.6
4. On North-South relations, the two key issues are aid and trade. It
is through these means that the vast majority of resources move from
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
tial. Sent for information. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page. Brzezinski wrote on
the memorandum: “Concur—this summarizes the strategy on which we are basing our
preparations. ZB.”
2 Carter underlined the phrase “to limit oil imports.”
3 Carter underlined the phrase “stimulate domestic demand.”
4 Carter underlined the phrase “freer trade policies.”
5 Carter underlined the phrases “energy production and conservation” and
“North-South relations.”
6 A July 7 memorandum from Vance, Blumenthal, Schultze, Brzezinski, and Owen
to Carter entitled “Energy and the Summit” is printed in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
the industrial world to LDCs, and it is by improving these means the
industrial countries can act most effectively to enlarge that flow. On aid,
we propose that the Summit call for differing measures to meet the
needs of middle-income and poorer developing countries:
—The middle-income countries need more private investment, hard
loans, and technological collaboration (such as our intended new Foun-
dation for International Technological Cooperation).7
—The poor countries need growing concessional aid, including gen-
erous replenishment of IDA—the World Bank’s soft-loan window.
We also propose that the Summit call for more assistance to help
non-OPEC developing countries produce or conserve energy, with the
World Bank being asked to play a financial, advisory, and coordinating
role. The Canadians are suggesting that the Summit countries establish
a special fund to receive voluntary contributions for grant aid for en-
ergy exploration in LDCs.
On trade, the heads of government should direct their MTN negoti-
ators to ensure that LDCs share fully in post-Summit MTN negotia-
tions, and that LDC concerns are fully taken into account in these nego-
tiations. Lowering trade barriers would be the most effective means of
increasing LDC export earnings.
The Summit should also encourage commodity agreements, which
will help to stabilize these earnings.
These Summit actions on aid and trade will be directly responsive
to LDC concerns. If we are able to arrange effective follow-up, which
will not be easy in the present mood of the Congress, they can make a
large contribution to the welfare of the roughly billion human beings
who live in desperate poverty in the Third World.
The Common Fund8 poses more difficult problems. The gap be-
tween LDC and industrial country attitudes will be difficult to bridge,
except over a prolonged period of negotiation. This issue is of more
symbolic than economic importance to LDCs, but must be addressed.
5. Conclusion. If the Summit can agree on the package described in
paragraph 1 and address the longer-term problems set forth in para-
graphs 3 and 4, it will be seen to have contributed significantly to a
healthier world economy.
7 See Document 311.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
139.
Memorandum From John Renner of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, June 30, 1978
SUBJECT
US Current Account Deficit
In response to your tasking memo of February 15 (at Tab A),2 an in-
teragency group under the chairmanship of Tony Solomon has been
working steadily to arrive at a reliable estimate of the probable magni-
tude of future current account deficits and the probable impact on the
dollar.
The report of the Solomon Group is virtually finished. The prin-
cipal conclusions are that, in the absence of major policy changes, the
US current account position will not improve and may deteriorate over
the next five years and that as a consequence the dollar will depreciate
further.
Blumenthal and Solomon are worried this report will leak to the
press and cause a run on the dollar. Consequently they are considering
not sending the President the report but to brief him orally.
It does not make much difference whether the President is told
orally or in writing about the findings of the Solomon Group. But as the
future of the US current account position and the repercussions for the
dollar are among the most important international economic issues that
the President needs to focus on, it is essential that Blumenthal and Sol-
omon brief the President promptly and certainly before the Summit. If
you agree, I will take this line with Solomon.3
What should the next steps be?
Faced with the prospect for large current account deficits over the
next five years and additional pressure on the dollar, the question is
whether anything can be done about it.
I think there are additional steps that can and, given the adverse
consequences of a continually falling dollar, definitely should be taken.
There is much that could be done, given sufficient resolve, to reduce
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
tion. Sent through Owen. Brzezinski initialed at the top of the page.
2 Printed as Document 106.
3 Brzezinski underlined the last part of this paragraph beginning with “essential
that Blumenthal,” and he indicated his approval of this recommendation.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
our imports of oil, to expand our exports, and otherwise increase the in-
flow of foreign exchange. But these actions would require a reordering
of our national priorities.
To prepare to take such measures, I propose to start talking to
people around town about a draft tasking memo (Tab B).4 There prob-
ably will be opposition. Nonetheless, I think it essential that the Ad-
ministration move in this direction. But before doing battle, I want to
make sure I have your support.5
4 Tab B, attached but not printed, is an unsigned draft memorandum from Brzez-
inski to the Secretaries of State, the Treasury, the Interior, Commerce, Transportation,
and Energy, the OMB Director, the CEA Chairman, and the President’s Assistant for Do-
mestic Affairs and Policy on the “US Current Account Deficit and National Security Re-
percussions.” The memorandum, citing the need to “take prompt steps to reduce sub-
stantially the deficit,” called for the intensification of the development of a national
export policy; establishment of an interagency task force on ways to reduce oil imports;
and IMG recommendations on additional measures “to increase the inflow of foreign
exchange.”
5 Brzezinski indicated his approval of this recommendation, writing in the adjacent
margin: “if both you & HO think it a good way to generate the needed response. ZB.”
140.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, July 3, 1978
SUBJECT
Summit Strategy
1. The essential US goal at Bonn is to strengthen world economy.
More specifically we want:
a. German and Japanese economic expansion, which will help
other European countries and the US.
b. European and Japanese MTN concessions, which will benefit
the US and other industrial and developing countries.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
formation. Sent to Carter as Tab A of Owen’s July 3 cover memorandum forwarding
briefing materials for the Bonn G–7 Summit. (Ibid.) Owen sent additional Summit
briefing materials to Carter under cover of a July 11 memorandum. (Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 13, President, Germany,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
c. Increased aid to LDCs—particularly by those with large sur-
pluses, i.e., Japan and perhaps Germany.
d. Stepped up action on energy research, development, and pro-
duction by all the Summit countries.
2. To assess the likelihood of these goals being achieved, we need
to review the attitudes of other Summiteers. These are summarized
below, on the basis of impressions that I formed at Preparatory Group
meetings.
3. Schmidt wants a success, both because he is host and because of
his domestic political difficulties. He is prepared to pay for that success
with some German economic expansion (we don’t know exactly how
much), if he can get what he wants from other countries in return:
a. He wants the US to limit oil imports. He believes that continuing
heavy US oil imports will hurt Germany’s economy and would offset
any German expansion.
b. He wants reduced trade barriers. He knows this is particularly
difficult for the British and French.
He is also concerned about US inflation, but my impression is that
he isn’t looking for any new US action—only for you to describe the ex-
isting program, which he will applaud; he wants to be convinced that
you will stick to it, despite political costs.
He also wants a general US blessing for European monetary unifi-
cation and US assurances that nuclear fuel supply will not be inter-
rupted while INCFE is underway. This may provide us with some US
bargaining leverage on other issues.
Schmidt (and others) may wish to stress the role of private invest-
ment in stimulating growth; this is in the draft Declaration; it makes
sense and would be welcome to the business community.
4. Callaghan has a large stake in the Summit’s success, since he has
spoken a good deal in the US about his role in producing a package
Summit result. The main element in that package, as far as the US is
concerned, is German growth.
Callaghan says that he is prepared to pay for that growth with
trade concessions. It is not clear what or how significant these conces-
sions will be. He probably has in mind that the MTN negotiations
will fail to resolve key issues before Bonn, and that the Summit will
give a political directive to shape their resolution in post-Summit
negotiations.
Callaghan shares the general European concern about US energy
policy.
He would like some apparent Summit progress on North-South
issues; there is no evidence he is prepared to contribute more than for-
giveness of some past LDC debts to the UK to achieve it.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
5. Fukuda’s main goal is to do something about the problem that
worries him most: the weakening US dollar. He also wants to turn back
the protectionist tide in Europe. And he is anxious to get the industrial
countries off his back on the Japanese surplus issue. In short, he wants a
substantive success.
To achieve these goals, he may be prepared to pledge additional
expansion measures; this depends on whether his present optimism
about achieving 7% growth continues right up to the Summit and on
whether Fukuda decides for electoral reasons to convene a special Diet
session to which he might propose additional stimulus. Fukuda also
says that he will improve Japan’s MTN offer, and that he will pledge
additional aid to developing countries. This could be a fraud or a real
increase depending on whether the base for his projected doubling of
aid is 1976 (bad) or 1977 (good), and whether the comparison is in
dollars (bad) or yen (good). He will want the other Summit countries to
welcome these Japanese measures as an effective response to Japan’s
surplus problem.
Fukuda is anxious to secure European concessions in MTN, and
US assurances about energy and inflation.
Fukuda may invite the Summit to be held in Tokyo next year. This
prospect would have a healthy effect on Japanese economic policy be-
tween now and then. My guess is that post-INCFE nuclear energy
issues will also figure largely in the next Summit.
6. Giscard shares some of the other European countries’ concerns:
Like the UK, he wants German growth; like Germany and the UK, he
wants to know whether the US will limit oil imports; like Germany, he
wants a general US blessing for European monetary unificiation; and
like the UK and others, he would like some progress on North-South
issues.
Giscard is not the host, like Schmidt; he has not talked up what he
hopes to achieve, as Callaghan has; and he is not as hard pressed at
home as Fukuda is. But he has goals he wants to fulfill, and the
Germans believe he is prepared to make some trade concessions to this
end. His representatives say that this would be France’s contribution to
a successful Summit.
7.
Andreotti’s
representatives
seldom
speak
at
preparatory
meetings, and then only to echo other European views.
8. Trudeau has a special interest in North-South relations. He will
support aid to LDCs, particularly to help them produce more energy.
9. This run-down suggests that other leaders’ goals are, in varying
degree, congruent with our own: Schmidt and Fukuda want a good
MTN result; so do we. Callaghan and, to a lesser extent, Giscard want
German and Japanese growth; so do we. Most of the other heads of

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
government want to see more energy research, development, and pro-
duction in the industrial world, and more aid to developing countries;
so do we. They are likely to welcome your anti-inflation program and
expressions of strong intent to prosecute it, such as you have voiced in
recent US speeches.
Even on US energy policy what the other heads of government
want you to do is what you may well want to do: pass the bill at this ses-
sion or take administrative action in January. The question is how far
you can go in committing yourself at the Summit to such action
without eliciting a counter-productive domestic response. The other
heads of government face somewhat similar problems: Schmidt and
Fukuda on growth, and Callaghan and Giscard on trade. So all will
want to agree on commitments that foreshadow progress without
being so phrased as to reduce their margin for maneuver in over-
coming domestic obstacles to that progress. You may be able to lead
them toward greater specificity or generality in their pledges, de-
pending on how you want to handle energy; their tendency will prob-
ably be to settle on more general language, given the problems that
they face—particularly on trade, where large EC concessions are still
needed.
Reaching agreement will be eased by the fact that at least three
leaders—Schmidt, Callaghan, and Fukuda—want very much to
achieve an evident success. Your Friday meeting with Schmidt2 will
provide an opportunity to work out an understanding about the types
of agreement that would serve this purpose. Schmidt will breakfast
with Fukuda just before the Summit, and could then share any conclu-
sions that you and he had reached with the Prime Minister.
My guess is that what will emerge is a Declaration that contains
rather general pledges on growth by Germany and Japan and on en-
ergy and inflation by the US, plus confirmation of any MTN progress
and a directive to complete trade negotiations by a date certain (hope-
fully with some indication of likely movement in such key areas as sub-
sidies). The Preparatory Group will be sitting as the heads of gov-
ernment meet; it could revise and amplify the draft Declaration along
these lines, if that is the direction Summit discussion takes.
Such a Declaration would be less specific than some (including
me) had hoped for. Fortunately, most of the press here—and according
to our Embassy, in Germany—have been expecting even less. We will
Chancellor’s office in Bonn. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily
Diary)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
work to keep the expectations low. Nonetheless, there would probably
be some press reports pointing out the contrast between such a Decla-
ration and more specific outcome that Callaghan, Lambsdorff, and
others had forecast. (If so, our answer should be that the test will be
post Summit performance, not Declaration language.)
In addition to whatever is said about the more controversial items
of trade, growth, and energy, the others will probably be ready to agree
on the draft Declaration language stressing the need for expanded re-
search, development, and investment in energy in the industrial coun-
tries, and the desirability of more aid to developing countries, in-
cluding aid for energy production. These last two issues are important:
—We need increased energy investment in the industrial world;
the pre-Summit energy working group that we set up developed some
useful ideas on follow-up.
—Bob McNamara would welcome the draft Declaration’s strong
support for IDA replenishment and the invitation for the World Bank
to examine proposals for improving aid for energy production in de-
veloping countries. A strong Summit stand on foreign aid should help
us with the US aid bill, which will be voted on after the Summit.
You may want to press for making these parts of the Declaration as
strong as possible, and for effective follow-up.
10. Bob Strauss spoke to me of the need to avoid placing you in the
position of being made to seem responsible for any lack of progress. I
don’t see why this should happen, if we play our cards sensibly—since
political considerations will probably constrain the other heads of gov-
ernments’ pledges as much as yours, and since all of them will be more
interested in taking credit for what they will portray as a success than
in blaming others for a failure that would damage them all.
11. Nonetheless, you will be the leading figure, because of domi-
nant US power. As in NATO, others will look to you to speak to the
common interest, to the need for according it priority over more paro-
chial concerns, and to the US willingness to play its full part in mutu-
ally reinforcing actions to this end. The other heads of government
know of your problems with the Congress; they don’t expect the
Summit to make them go away. But they want to be reassured about
your own constancy in pursuing the larger goals that you and they
share; they want to know that you will not be diverted, even if you are
delayed, by obstacles along the way.
For this you don’t need briefing papers—only to speak your mind,
as I have heard you do in meetings in the Executive Branch and with
members of the Congress. If you do, the most important prerequisite to
a successful Summit will be fulfilled.
What will it all add up to?

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
Mike Blumenthal said in his speech to the Press Club that the
measure of a successful Summit is what happens in the year that
follows.3
The measure of the Bonn Summit will be:
—whether the Germans and Japanese propose additional expan-
sion to their parliaments this fall, and if so how much;
—whether the British and French make MTN trade concessions—
either before or after the Summit;4
—whether your energy program prospers—having been more
helped than hurt by what you did at the Summit;
—whether increased energy R&D and investment by Summit
countries follows;
—whether the pledges for increased aid to LDCs are fulfilled.
I’m more worried about whether these later actions will take place
than I am about the ability (which I suspect will be considerable) of the
heads of government at Bonn to portray what they have achieved as a
success. Limited and ineffective follow-up could lead to growing re-
crimination and divisions and, more importantly, to lost opportunities
after the Summit.
It is trite to say that we are at a turning point, but in this case it
seems to be true. The industrial world is poised between a relapse into
protectionism and an advance which will, if it is to take place at all,
have to extend to growth and energy, as well as trade. Bonn may not
decide the issue, but it could give things a substantial impulse one way
or another—not only by what is said in Declaration, but even more by
what you and the other heads of government agree about effective
follow-up.
At best, Bonn will be a modest success. But even a modest success
could make a considerable difference in determining what directions
things take in the year that follows.
3 Blumenthal spoke before the National Press Club on June 30; a report on his re-
marks was published in the July 1 edition of The Washington Post. (Hobart Rowen, “Blu-
4 Under cover of a July 4 memorandum, Owen forwarded three letters on the multi-
lateral trade negotiations to Carter for his signature: one to Giscard, one to Schmidt, and
one to Jenkins. Noting that Strauss had requested that Carter send the letters, Owen re-
minded him that “a large gap still separates the US from EC positions in these negotia-
tions and a powerful political impulse will be required to close it.” Carter signed the
letters, which are dated July 5. In the letter to Giscard, Carter expressed hope that the EC
and the United States could reach “agreement on key issues in the Geneva trade negotia-
tions prior to the Bonn Summit.” In the letter to Schmidt, Carter expressed hope that
Schmidt could “convince your colleagues that the Community must be sufficiently flex-
ible to negotiate a mutually satisfactory multilateral trade agreement.” In the letter to
Jenkins, Carter asserted the need for Jenkins’ leadership to secure U.S.–EC agreement on
a trade deal. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Country Chron File, Box 12, Europe: 1978)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
141.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1
Washington, July 6, 1978
On July 4 I met with Ambassador Togo and other representatives
of the Japanese Government.2 On being advised that they would not be
forthcoming on beef, citrus and certain other agricultural products, I
took an exceedingly firm line. I was very clear on what I thought of the
future of this market for Japanese imports with Congressional protec-
tionist attitudes hardening daily. They were also advised that neither
you nor I could hold off the Congress much longer. I also expressed my
extreme displeasure over their failure to do better in the industrial
sector.
On the same day, I received information with respect to the negoti-
ating mandate granted the EC negotiators by their Ministers.3 If they
give everything under their mandate, there would be insufficient agri-
culture access on tobacco, grain, citrus and so forth. We were also ad-
vised by the European Community that the Ministers would not meet
to even consider improved authority prior to September 30. They are
also too negative on export subsidies, among other things.4
Accordingly, yesterday after talking with Stu and Jody, I went
public with the fact that we would not have a complete trade package
in time for the Bonn Summit.5 In my judgment, the firmness of our ne-
gotiation position was well received by domestic agricultural and in-
from a copy that does not bear Strauss’ initials.
2 No other record of this meeting was found.
3 On June 27, the EC Council of Ministers approved the negotiating mandate for the
final stage of the multilateral trade negotiations. According to telegram 12679 from USEC
Brussels, June 28, the issues that proved to be “the major sticking points” among the EC
Ministers and officials were agriculture, subsidies and countervailing duties, and selec-
June 29, discussed the EC negotiating mandate. (National Archives, RG 59 Central For-
USEC Brussels, June 29, described unofficial French, British, and Italian reservations to
4 It is not clear how Strauss received this information. On Strauss’ instructions, Mc-
Donald met with Gundelach on July 4 in Brussels to talk about the trade negotiations;
among the items they discussed were agriculture and subsidies. (Telegram 10138 from
5 Both The Washington Post and The New York Times printed articles in their July 6
editions. See James L. Rowe, Jr., “Trade Accord Called Unlikely Before Summit,” The

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
dustrial interests. Additionally, you will leave for Bonn a week from
now with my having failed to deliver a trade package for the Summit—
not you having failed to return with one. I am leaving tomorrow for Ge-
neva and will furnish Henry Owen with last minute details so that he
may adequately brief you on the way over. I will go from Geneva and
be in Bonn on Friday.6
Mr. President, I discussed with Jim McIntyre again this morning a
“hiring freeze”. I hope you will consider imposing one, without notice,
and before it begins to be speculated in the press. In my judgment, it
will be exceedingly well received in this country and also gives you one
more additional anti-inflation move having been made when you ar-
rive at the Summit.
6 July 14.
142.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of the Treasury for
Monetary Affairs (Solomon) to the Special Representative for
Economic Summits (Owen)1
Washington, July 7, 1978
SUBJECT
Probable Foreign Exchange Market Reaction to the Bonn Summit
The market will be most sensitive to what the President says about
energy and inflation, Chancellor Schmidt says about German growth,
and the Europeans say or decide to do about European monetary ar-
rangements.2 Decisions or statements on North-South issues, the MTN,
and general energy policies are not likely to have a significant market
impact.
Some pre-summit dollar selling has already taken place, in the ex-
pectation of minimal success at the Summit, but this movement has
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
ered, among other issues, the establishment of a European Monetary System. Solomon
discussed how the EMS might affect the United States in a July 10 memorandum to
Owen. (Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles L.
Schultze Subject Files, Box 29, European Monetary Arrangement) See also Document 143.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
been limited, and the market may go either way depending on the re-
sults of the meeting. A summit “failure” has not been discounted.
Heavy dollar selling is possible if: (a) the President is unable to offer
reasonable assurance on limiting oil imports, either by Congress or ad-
ministrative action, (b) Schmidt does not announce his intent to stimu-
late the German economy, and (c) the Europeans announce a regional
arrangement for “monetary stability” which is perceived as a means of
insulating themselves from a falling dollar. Obviously, an appearance
of a breakdown in cooperation between the U.S. and Europe could
cause heavy dollar selling.
The market is probably not expecting the President to announce
further actions against inflation, and if significant new measures were
revealed, the market would tend to react positively.
The President’s position on European currency arrangements will
be closely observed. A blanket endorsement, without qualifications, is likely
to be taken as a sign of U.S. weakness and lead to an effort to shift out of
dollars. If a Presidential endorsement of the general effort to improve
EC cooperation were carefully qualified, however, to demonstrate U.S.
concern about the implications of possible detailed arrangements for
the global monetary system and the dollar, such a reaction could be
minimized.
143.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council of
Economic Advisers (Schultze) to President Carter1
Washington, July 11, 1978
SUBJECT
Assessment of Proposals for a New European Monetary System
You asked if I would prepare an assessment of the new European
Monetary System. We labor under the disadvantage that the outline
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
cover of a July 11 memorandum, Owen forwarded to Carter a July 7 message from
Schmidt that described the decisions on EMS taken by the EC Heads of Government at
the July 6–7 meeting in Bremen. Owen noted that Treasury, State, and CEA would pre-
pare “a memorandum analyzing the scheme.” Carter wrote at the top of Owen’s memo-
randum: “ZB—I have a good memo from CEA—will study before Bonn.” (Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
proposed at Bremen was very broad and general. Given that limitation,
this memorandum (i) discusses the background for the proposal;
(ii) outlines it; (iii) evaluates the likely impact of alternative formula-
tions of the proposal on the United States’ and world economy; and
(iv) states my view on what our reaction should be. Before the Summit,
you will receive an interagency memorandum with further discussion
and agreed-upon talking points.
I. Background for the New Proposal
The new European Monetary System (EMS) proposals must be
seen in light of both a long history of the functioning and subsequent
breakdown of the Bretton Woods system, and the current frustrations
with economic policy in Europe today. A short history of postwar inter-
national monetary arrangements is given in an Appendix.2
Why are the European governments proposing EMS now? First, most
high officials in Europe do not like floating exchange rates. Second, Eu-
ropeans believe that U.S. “benign neglect” of exchange rates (our view
that market-determined, floating rates are appropriate) reflects an en-
during lack of concern about exchange market instability. They believe,
therefore, that measures to achieve greater exchange rate stability must
be taken without active U.S. participation.
Most important, I suspect that this is a brilliant ploy for deflecting
criticism from the failure of European economic policy. The central
need in Europe and most of the world today, outside the U.S., is to re-
store economic recovery. By taking the initiative on a dramatic and
bold new action and focusing everyone’s attention on EMS, Schmidt
may well remove the sting of German failure to promote adequate eco-
nomic growth. It should be emphasized, however, that exchange rate
instability cannot be reasonably counted as the central cause of eco-
nomic weakness in Europe. The cause is basically failure to take appro-
priate monetary and fiscal policies.
Schmidt does genuinely believe that exchange rate instability has
been a significant drag on economic growth, especially in Germany. In
fact, there is little evidence to date that exchange rate appreciation has
markedly dampened German exports (and therefore growth). Ex-
change rate instability is a symptom of fundamental disparities in eco-
nomic conditions among countries. Moreover, attempts to impose ex-
warded to Carter a July 15 memorandum from Blumenthal that provided more informa-
tion on the EMS. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
2 Attached but not printed is an undated paper entitled “A Short History of Postwar
International Monetary Arrangements.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
change rate stability on countries with widely different inflation and
external positions could well do more harm than good.
What are current views on fixed vs. floating rates?
• There is very little support in the United States for moving back
to a fixed rate regime. Such a move would put a straitjacket on do-
mestic economic policies. As in the late 1960s, we would have to weigh
the balance-of-payments consequences of every major government
transaction. (As Director of the Bureau of the Budget in the mid-1960s, I
literally had two sets of books: one for dollars spent in the U.S., and an-
other for dollars spent abroad.) Ultimately, we might be forced into
raising unemployment to cure a trade deficit.
• The view from Europe is different. Countries that are smaller
and more open than the United States, and have close economic ties
with one another, have sound reasons for pursuing economic integra-
tion, including monetary unification. About one-fourth of the E.C. GNP
moves in world trade, as compared with 7 percent of U.S. GNP. More-
over, half of E.C. trade is within the E.C. Unnecessary exchange rate
fluctuations are disruptive of trade and investment. By joining to-
gether, these countries hope to reduce unnecessary fluctuations. (But
inevitably this must involve harmonizing domestic policies as well as
providing for monetary union.)
II. Proposals for a European Monetary System (EMS)
The heads of government in Bremen decided that competent E.C.
groups would study the German-French “scheme” with an eye to
adopting an EMS in December. It should be emphasized that no agree-
ment was reached in Bremen on the substantive scheme. The main fea-
tures of the German-French scheme are:
—Setting limits on movements of E.C. currencies relative to each
other;
—The establishment of a pool of reserves, consisting of dollars,
E.C. currencies, and gold to support these rates;
—There would be “conditionality” on borrowing of pooled re-
serves, i.e., countries in deficit would have to institute policies to elimi-
nate their deficits. (Note: The Bremen scheme states that responsibil-
ities apply to “deficit and surplus countries alike.” I am very skeptical
whether surplus countries will be subject to effective pressures for
adjustment.)
—The adoption of a European Currency Unit (ECU) whose value
would be based on a basket of EC currencies as “the center of the
system;”
—The ultimate establishment of a European Monetary Fund to
hold the pooled reserves and oversee the system.
These arrangements would be phased in over two or more years
beginning in early 1979. At least during the transitional period they
would be superimposed on the existing Snake arrangements. Cur-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
rencies not now in the Snake might initially have leeway for greater rate
fluctuations than now exist among the Snake currencies, but it is envi-
sioned that when fully implemented the new system would be at least
as restrictive as the Snake.
As you know, the U.K. and Italy have serious reservations about
such a plan, and did not endorse it at Bremen. Moreover, the features
are all subject to change and negotiation.
III. Analysis of the Proposals
As the exact details will be unclear for weeks or months, we can
only pose a series of potential problems that the EMS may hold for the
U.S. and world economy.
1. Will EMS restrict the ability of the dollar to reflect underlying market
forces? If the EMS only attempts to reduce fluctuations among Euro-
pean currencies, extreme fluctuations of the dollar against individual
European currencies may be reduced. (For example, the dollar might
depreciate less against the German mark and more against the French
franc than it would have otherwise.) On average, the depreciation
against European currencies might well be unaffected. There are some
hints in the Bremen statement and from other reports, however, that
the new system might be used to manage the value of the dollar against
European currencies. If these operations went beyond efforts to counter
disorderly markets, they could deprive us of needed exchange rate
flexibility.
Comment. We must be assured unequivocably that the dollar will
be free to adjust when fundamental economic conditions warrant. It
must not be pegged.
2. Will the proposals destabilize the dollar? The discussion and devel-
opment of these new proposals is itself likely to create nervousness and
uncertainties in exchange markets—indeed, some has already oc-
curred. This probably will be temporary and modest. Moreover, ini-
tially speculators will test the new set of intra-European exchange rates
rather than focus on European/U.S. rates.
If the new system uses dollars to intervene when it is buying or
selling currencies of its members, and if the transactions are not bal-
anced between buying and selling, then the value of the dollar would
be affected.
A more fundamental question arises as to whether the develop-
ment of more stable rate relationships within Europe, and perhaps ulti-
mately the emergence of a European currency, will make European
currencies relatively more attractive compared to the dollar as interna-
tional money. This may occur, but it is unlikely to occur overnight.
Moreover, the dollar as the key currency is likely to face growing com-
petition from the DM and the yen in any case.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Comment. Although technical provisions need to be worked out, it
is clear that the dollar may be subject to unnecessary pressures if the
details are not carefully drafted. For example, the intra-European inter-
vention arrangements should be generally neutral with respect to the
dollar. Our technical people must be kept abreast of the details as they
develop.
3. What effect will the new system have on growth in Europe? There will
be a number of offsetting forces at work within the new system, that
will affect economic growth. (i) Because countries in payments deficits
will not be able to depreciate their currencies, they may have to adopt
more restrictive internal policies to deal with their deficits. (ii) The pro-
vision of additional resources for loan to deficit countries will, on the
other hand, help ease the pressure on them to take such restrictive pol-
icies. (iii) But, finally, the fact that the loans will be conditional on
adopting “stabilization policies,” and the lack of any equivalent le-
verage on surplus countries, may create a contractionary bias in the
system. This is the source of much of the Italian and British reluctance
to participate.
Implementing the system at a time when large and stubborn dif-
ferences in inflation rates exist among participating countries increases
the likelihood that even with fairly large financing resources some
countries will be forced to take sharply restrictive action or abandon
the system.
Any overall contractionary bias in the system could be reduced
(i) by allowing periodic adjustments in intra-European exchange rates;
or (ii) imposing and enforcing symmetrical responsibilities on both
surplus and deficit countries to adjust internal policies. Little has been
said so far concerning the responsibilities of countries in surplus.
4. Will a New European Monetary System be viable? I have some
doubts about whether EMS will succeed. A new system of fixed rates
will be subjected to severe strains almost immediately:
—Significant current account imbalances exist within Europe.
—Large differentials in inflation rates will lead inexorably to the
overvaluation of currencies where inflation is high and undervaluation
of currencies where inflation is low.
—More fundamentally, a fixed exchange rate regime in Europe re-
quires institutions to assure that Europe has a concerted fiscal and
monetary policy; and that harmonization of inflation rates will occur.
The EMS proposal puts the cart of exchange rate stability before the
horse of economic harmonization.
Past experience with maintaining fixed rates under such condi-
tions suggests that a system of fixed rates is not likely to last. Britain,
France, and Italy have been in the Snake already, and have dropped

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
out—France twice. As the respected German Handelsblatt wrote yes-
terday, “An old worn out dress has been ironed again.”3
IV. Recommended U.S. Reactions
1. At this stage, the Bremen agreement is very general; its implica-
tions for the U.S. and the world economy cannot be assessed until its
further details are worked out.
2. Although there are some political disadvantages for the United
States, we should not take a negative attitude on general principle, and
indeed should support the broad objectives of European economic inte-
grations, including monetary cooperation.
3. When this subject arises in meetings with your Summit counter-
parts, especially Schmidt, Giscard, and Callaghan, you should indicate:
(i) we have historically supported moves toward European integration;
(ii) we cannot render a final judgment on EMS until the specific features
have been worked out; and (iii) we do have a major interest in seeing
that certain broad principles are incorporated and certain dangers
avoided.
A. We have an obvious interest in what the system implies for the
relationship of the dollar to the basket of European currencies in the
system. The system should not be designed or operated in ways that re-
duce the flexibility of the dollar.
B. Given the current depressed state of the European economy, we
think that over the next several years it will be especially important that
the system not exert a contractionary force.
C. The specific technical choices made in the design of the system
will inevitably have important repercussions for the dollar and for U.S.
economic interests. For that reason, you should urge that the United
States be kept closely informed at all stages of the technical discussions,
so that we can make our views known before arrangements are frozen.
4. Finally, it is critical that discussion of the Monetary System not
distract us from recognizing the central requirement in Europe today: a
concerted policy to expand the European economy especially in the
strong countries like Germany, Switzerland, and Benelux. It would be a
tragedy if EMS removed attention from the necessary expansionary
measures which must be taken.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
144.
Editorial Note
As the July 15, 1978, multilateral trade negotiations deadline ap-
proached, representatives of countries participating in the Geneva talks
intensified their negotiations. Robert Strauss, Special Representative
for Trade Negotiations, frequently briefed the press on the progress of
Owen, Special Representative for Economic Summits, reported to Pres-
ident Jimmy Carter in a July 12 memorandum that there had been
“good progress” at the Geneva talks and that Strauss would “bring a
respectable US–EC trade package to Bonn. This agreement will not in-
clude the Japanese. US-Japanese negotiations at Geneva have come to a
virtual halt, due to Japanese recalcitrance.” (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with
Foreign Leaders File, Box 11, Japan: Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda,
On July 13 in Geneva, representatives of the United States, the Eu-
ropean Communities, Japan, Canada, the Nordic countries, Switzer-
land, New Zealand, and Austria agreed on a “Framework of Under-
standing
on
the
Tokyo
Round.”
According
to
the
statement
announcing the agreement, the framework included “the necessary ele-
ments, as may be elaborated in further negotiation between these and
other participants, to ensure a successful conclusion of the negotiations
in accordance with the objectives of the Tokyo Declaration of Sep-
In a July 15 memorandum to Secretary of State Cyrus Vance,
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs Richard Cooper com-
mented: “The trade talks in Geneva, as you undoubtedly know, went
quite well. We are still far from having agreement, but enough progress
was made there for the Summit to note with satisfaction, and then give
another rhetorical push.” Cooper noted “two difficulties in the current
negotiations: The European Community has withdrawn some of its
tariff offers to the Canadians, and the Japanese tariff offer remains
much too small. [Japanese Prime Minister Takeo] Fukuda would like to
offer more, but has not yet been able to persuade his Cabinet. Japan
should be criticized at the Summit for its trade offer, to strengthen Fu-
kuda’s hand back home.” Cooper also reported France’s assertion “that
the EC trade representatives exceeded their mandate at Geneva, but all
other countries supported the negotiator on this” and the United
Kingdom’s continued reluctance on selective safeguards. Cooper noted

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
that on safeguards, the United States, West Germany, and Japan stood
“strongly with the developing countries, and we and the Germans
hope to get recognition in the communique on the importance of not
going too far in the use of selective safeguards, but the British (sup-
ported by the French) will probably resist.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the Under Secretary of State
3, Memorandums from RNC to Secretary, Deputy Secretary, 78)
On July 15, Strauss and Owen each met separately with Fukuda in
Bonn to discuss the U.S.-Japanese impasse. As a result of these
meetings, Fukuda instructed his trade negotiator, Nobohiko Ushiba, to
meet Strauss on the following day to try to reach agreements on indus-
trial tariffs and export restraints on particular Japanese goods, such as
cars. Fukuda also promised to send a representative to Washington to
discuss “access for agricultural commodities of special concern to the
US (including those of interest to California, the Midwest, Texas, and
Florida).” (Memorandum from Owen to Carter, July 15; Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 13, Presi-
of conversation of Strauss’ meeting with Ushiba was found.
145.
Minutes of the Bonn Economic Summit Meeting1
BONN SUMMIT
Session 1
Schmidt: Cordial welcome to Bonn. Room was for 30 years Cabinet
Room of FRG.
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of Cyrus
Secret. Drafted on August 8. Attached but not printed are two cover pages that indicate
that Hormats drafted the minutes and identify the Summit participants: Trudeau, Jam-
ieson, and Chretien; Giscard, Monory, de Guiringaud, and Deniau; Schmidt, Lambsdorff,
Genscher, and Matthoefer; Andreotti, Forlani, and Pandolfi; Fukuda, Murayama, and So-
noda; Callaghan, Owen, Healey, and Dell; Carter, Vance, Blumenthal, and Strauss; and
Jenkins. This first session of the Summit, which took place in the Palais Schaumberg,
dent’s Daily Diary) Carter’s handwritten notes on the Summit are in the Carter Library,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Coverage of conference kicked up a lot of dust. Should not give im-
pression of just bilateral drifting. Should not raise hopes which deflate
in day-to-day business of our inter-relations.
We are at foot of a mountain but we are determined to reach the
summit. Governments working together is a good sign.
On the other side of Rhein there are seven hills. Each of us climb
one individually. But we would all find it hard to climb this Summit
alone. We should all tie our hopes in a rope party of reason and work
together.
Satisfaction will depend on the public: they watch while we climb.
Success will affect everyone.
Press reaction after the Downing Street Summit not very friendly.
Some said no concrete results. I feel value of Summit lies in opportunity
for a direct exchange of views—all acted in the spirit of the Downing
Street talks 14 months ago.
We introduced additional measures in the FRG equaling 1% of
GNP in the form of tax relief. We have not, however, resolved all our
international economic problems because of changes in the world eco-
nomic structure and we must, therefore proceed step by step, from
Summit to Summit. But we have avoided a deterioration in our rela-
tions. Many countries, especially in Europe, have improved their cur-
rent account balances. Inflation has been reduced, for example, the
OECD foresees 7% inflation versus 8% last year. The US has been suc-
cessful in reducing unemployment. The MTN is making headway.
Public hopes for the Summit are very high. We must see discus-
sions against the backdrop of popular hopes. Failure will have a psy-
chological impact on the world economy.
We need a package deal which shows that the developed countries
are capable of managing the world economy. Long term growth re-
quires that we continue to fight protectionism and make progress on
energy, fighting inflation and stable currency.
We should all be gratified to our personal representatives who
have provided us with a draft declaration.
I suggest that the discussion proceed as follows. First, a general
discussion about relationships among subjects we will discuss. Second,
monetary and energy issues, which would be this afternoon. On
Monday2 morning we will discuss trade policy including the MTN,
protectionism and adjustment. This would be followed by North/
South relations. Before noon on Monday, and shortly after noon we
would discuss the declaration. The draft declaration should be con-
2 July 17.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
stantly reviewed by delegations based on the information of our
notetakers.
We have also agreed that there should be only three people from
each country at the table, although substitutes are possible for indi-
viduals if the delegations so wish. In addition, of course, there would
be Roy Jenkins and a notetaker from each country.
Before the meeting I received a delegation from the International
Conference of Free Trade Unions. I believe Jim Callaghan received the
same group last year. All of our countries were represented in the dele-
gation. The Group gave me a paper, which I have distributed to you.3
The only point I want to make is that the trade unions do not have a
recipe for us either.
Giscard: We should discuss the text of the declaration as we pro-
ceed. The Ministers present can then agree during the next two days on
the parts discussed and then present them to us.
Schmidt: It is a good idea to update the draft as we go along, but
nothing should be published before the end. Who now wants the floor?
Jim Callaghan?
Callaghan: The countries represented here have over 50% of the
world trade. The results of this meeting will be extremely important to
investors confidence, trade unions and money markets. It is important
that we recognize our responsibilities in this situation of many ten-
sions, such as protectionist pressures. Protectionism has been growing,
but we have managed to keep it at bay as a result of the Downing Street
Summit and earlier meetings. Protectionism arises from pessimism,
which is hurting our ability to achieve growth. What we can produce
will be seen to be of great significance.
At Downing Street we joined to make general commitments. We
will not make them this time, but should be more specific. There are
blank spaces in the communique. If each of us can make contributions
to fill those blank spaces, it will have a great impact. The Sherpas4 dem-
onstrated that what we all need is a package approach. Each of us will
be called on to make conclusions that are not popular but will be of
value to the world as a whole. The package approach can reach certain
collective conclusions that we might not reach individually.
The fact of this meeting is important and the results will influence
people. All of us should make individual contributions. The thought of
individual decisions will be greater than the sum of its parts.
3 Not found.
4 The “Sherpas” refer to the representatives of the G–7 heads of government who
were responsible for the planning and preparation for each G–7 Summit; Henry Owen
was the U.S. sherpa during the Carter administration. The term derives from the term
used for guides employed in Himalayan climbing expeditions.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Carter: Coming together is a great help. I shook hands with
Helmut Schmidt on Friday5 and the stock market went up 15 points.
We should understand the importance of individual commitments. We
have tried to carry out our Downing Street commitments. US growth
was 5.7% last year, but will drop some this year. We have also made a
great deal of progress in reducing unemployment. Energy imports are
up only 1% in 1977. During the first five months of this year, oil imports
are down by about 1 million barrels a day.
I have introduced a five-part program on energy. Three are in little
dispute. A conference committee has agreed on the fourth part, on nat-
ural gas. A few oil pricing elements are also agreed. As far as oil is con-
cerned, the sum total of these agreed efforts will reduce oil consump-
price of US oil to world market prices by 1980. I will check back home
on these things so I am not doing what is politically unfeasible.
With respect to the budget, our 1978 deficit will be in the 50 bil-
lions. This coming year it will be in the 40’s and the next in the 30’s of
billions. This represents a small part of the GNP. We are also limiting
government spending.
We know our balance of trade is important to all of you. We are
able to buy your goods better than you are to buy ours. Exchange rate
changes should deal with some of these problems. Also, the dollar is
down; while we regret this, it should help to correct the imbalance.
This meeting can provide a tone of general progress and specific
commitments. We will do our share.
Schmidt: I believe Summits have been constructive on the whole. I
know more about other countries problems than I would have other-
wise. I am pleased that US Congressional leaders have demonstrated
more of a personal interest in foreign affairs. We were pleased with
Senator Byrd’s visit to Europe.6 We are also pleased that there is in-
terest in the US in the success of Summits.
In a number of ways this Summit has already achieved some
success by encouraging positive programs in certain countries. The
proof of our efforts is what we do here and what the declaration says.
For instance, progress in the MTN is essential. We should emphasize
the progress that has been made, show appreciation for our negoti-
ators, give them support, and encourage them to continue with this
progress. There are also protectionist measures. To the extent that we
German officials in Bonn; the next day, he visited Frankfurt and Berlin. (Carter Library,
Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)
6 Byrd visited Spain, Belgium, the Federal Republic of Germany, and the United
Kingdom July 1–9.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
can demonstrate success in the MTN we can put obstacles in the path of
protectionist pressures.
Giscard: We should be frank in our analysis here. I know countries
do not like to be offensive, but the analysis will remain among our-
selves and will not be seen to be offensive in the outside world.
The French problem is unemployment. It is both a social and a po-
litical problem. Compared to the East the fact that the West has unem-
ployment, particularly unemployment among the young, is a handicap
we must do something about. Also, the LDCs are directly tied to our
difficulties. We should not just pay lip service to them but include a dis-
cussion of LDC problems among our own. We are interdependent with
them.
Let me assess the causes of our problems. During the 1960’s and
the early part of the 1970’s there was a considerable amount of growth.
There was then a gradual slowdown, and an increase in oil prices. This
resulted in a new disequilibrium in the world. Things were improved a
bit because of the oil price freeze. But there now may be a period of oil
price increases, in part for international monetary reasons. There will
be catastrophic economic difficulties if there is once again a steep oil
price increase. This would cause an impossible situation, causing coun-
tries to tighten their belts and try to increase their exports. It will lead to
huge increases in unemployment. The period between now and 1982
will be dangerous. We here have an economic responsibility. There is a
long lead time before economic measures are felt. To influence events
beyond 1979 we must take steps now. We should start to do things this
summer or early autumn to be effective in future years.
Fukuda: This is an age of uncertainty. There is an opaque future for
all of us. People are insecure. Many economic and social problems con-
tribute to a lack of confidence. There is uncertainty in East/West and
North/South relations. Within ten years there could be an oil crisis. We
need a clearer vision for the future. We should adjust ourselves to the
post-petroleum era, and should work toward a clearer vision of that
era. In addition, we should cooperate to help the peoples of the world
regain confidence. We should pool our wisdom and by the next
Summit should take up the long-range future energy problems of the
world.
Andreotti: The fact of this meeting has a useful purpose. It enables
our people and public opinion in our countries to become accustomed
to interdependence in the solutions of economic and social problems
both among the industrialized countries and between them and the rest
of the world. The issue of the LDCs is not a matter of aid but an element
in the overall progress of humanity and attention to these problems in
LDCs can reduce demand for improvement in our countries, which
have already developed.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Giscard: Let us remind ourselves of the importance of solving the
unemployment problem. In London we shared a joint commitment to
solve that problem. Some have achieved a great deal of progress, par-
ticularly the US. Others have done little. The Bonn message should be
understandable—particularly to young people. Today and tomorrow
we should pinpoint some actions which our public opinion can per-
ceive as conveying a commitment to solidarity and interdependence.
These actions should both help our countries and show we have a
broader vision of humanity as well.
Trudeau: We must establish goals and seek to establish a feeling of
confidence. Our deliberations will affect the world and determine the
degree of optimism and pessimism in world public opinion. Our com-
munique must take account of this and show we can tackle problems. I
also agree with Fukuda that we should extend our thinking to the long
term, although we will probably have to take some steps only from
Summit to Summit. There is a contradiction between our attempt to
achieve progress here and what some of us believe in our hearts—that
these problems cannot be resolved in the short-term. We must think
more in the long term and have studies which show public opinion that
we are seeking long term solutions. For instance, are we at the bottom
of a curve that will go up again, are we at the end of the second indus-
trial revolution, or is all we need is a little fine tuning. We should deter-
mine whether there should be studies, in groups such as the OECD, so
that we can resolve in our own minds these issues and identify the
structural difficulties we face.
Among the new difficulties are entrance of third world exporters
to our markets, adjustment to higher energy costs and difficulties with
slower rates of growth. There is some contradiction. Can we reduce en-
ergy imports and grow at the same time? We should examine whether
or not we are at the end of a cycle of development based on the elec-
trical revolution and are now in the faltering stages before a new period
of expansion. We should study this so that our population can be in-
formed that we are looking at the long term structural problems rather
than attempting only to solve short-term economic problems. As long
as we are on the analogy of the Summit, we should determine whether
there is an “abominable snowman” out there to get us.
Schmidt: I don’t know if there is a long-term kondratieff cycle7 or if
this concept is useful to us at this time. The problem is that world-wide
pessimism is in part caused by the increase in oil prices and by the col-
lapse in the balance of payments structure leading to exchange rate dis-
array. We must overcome inflation and also achieve international mon-
7 Reference is to the theory, named for Russian economist Nikolai Kondratieff, that
economic activity is characterized by decades-long waves, or cycles, of boom and bust.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
etary stability. We must achieve balance of payments equilibrium and
exchange rate stability. I was interested in Carter’s statement regarding
the US objectives of bringing oil prices in the US to world levels by
1980, to reduce US oil consumption and to ensure that the US current
account deficit is reduced. I am sure that I and others will point out
what we can contribute to the party, i.e. spell out these square brackets.
If oil prices increase in the coming year, there will be problems.
Our Saudi friends have helped a great deal. But if oil prices go up, it
will mean disarray in exchange rates. If the Middle East situation once
again places oil exporters under pressure from the other Arabs, there
will be a significant deterioration. This will be very serious for coun-
tries without oil, although less so for the US than for countries without
energy. For economic and strategic reasons it is vitally necessary to
limit oil import dependence. The EC at Bremen decided to reduce en-
ergy imports by 50%. This will be difficult for France, Germany and
Italy. We spend .5% of GNP to subsidize coal. We already import vast
amounts of energy. Our resolve is firm and unswerving to increase nu-
clear production. This is the only way we can increase domestic energy.
We should look to the long term energy policy. I agree with Fukuda on
this. But I would take it still further—to make individual countries
much less dependent on imported oil. I stress this for strategic reasons,
because of the depletion of fossil fuels, because of oil’s impact on pay-
ments balances and exchange rate stability and because it will affect
protectionist pressures.
Let me add something on the latter point. There are protectionist
pressures in many areas such as steel, textiles and shipbuilding. If any
of us gives in, all may follow suit. This will lead to an increase in unem-
ployment. In the communique we should re-emphasize the crucial im-
portance of combating protectionist pressures. We should also agree to
open our markets more to one another and to the LDCs, too. There has
been progress by Strauss, Haverkamp and others. We should also
discuss investment tomorrow, when we discuss trade, and how to
make the system more open than in the past.
Regarding the question of growth, we have not done as well as we
would like although our inflation has been only 2.5%. Our growth has
been less than 4%. We can pay for our oil by exporting, and we do not
have to finance oil imports from anywhere. We have a small current ac-
count surplus, but we would be happy to do away with the surplus be-
cause it constitutes a transfer of real resources abroad. We let the DM
go up to offset this. It has increased three times more than GNP, and
more than our exports. As a result, a certain amount of unemployment
has developed. The DM was undervalued for two decades. This di-
rectly affected incentives for exports. These exports are now slowly de-
creasing. We need 5–7 years to correct the export-oriented focus of our

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
industry by investments oriented toward the home market. We no
longer for instance export ships or cameras.
Giscard: The Leica is a fine camera.
Schmidt: But it is too expensive. I can’t do much for shipbuilders
by monetary action. Interest rates are up significantly in the FRG. A 1.5
billion DM loan had to be taken off the market because of a steep in-
crease in interest rates.
We have serious constitutional difficulties as well—the opposite of
Proposition 13.8 The Federal budget opposes giving more credit than
there are budget receipts. If I say the FRG will contribute to the
package, on the assumption that others will do so as well, this will pose
constitutional difficulties. Thus, in our declaration we should choose
our words carefully to give us the flexibility needed to deal with consti-
tutional difficulties. But we are prepared to contribute to the package if
others are willing to do so.
Jenkins: Unemployment is a major problem. It also leads to protec-
tionist pressures which would lead to more unemployment. There has
been significant progress in the MTN in the last few days. I agree with
Giscard that energy price increases hurt our economies—but we
should remember that there were underlying difficulties before. Our
economies may also be running out of steam. Perhaps, the great
stimulus of the past has begun to exhaust itself. Inflation is an inhib-
iting factor in our economies.
Regarding energy, there could be a blow like 1973 in the not too
distant future—in the 1980’s. We should reduce our dependence on oil
in this period and have new methods for producing energy. Also, we
must think of the LDCs and give attention to encouraging them not to
produce goods already in surplus but to focus on such goods as energy
and food.
On growth, one can grow more effectively and safely if this is done
on a concerted basis rather than individually.
Trudeau: Schmidt said FRG and Japan would suffer more if there
were an increase in the price of oil. But a German economist has re-
cently written that if a product’s price is set by a cartel, other prices are
reduced. Thus, if Japan imports 10% of its imports in oil and the price of
oil goes up, the price of 90% of its imports go down and thus Japan ben-
efits. In the US the price of energy goes up but the price of other goods
it exports goes down.
creased the current level of property taxes and limited both future property tax rates and
annual increases in property value assessments.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
Schmidt: The reason for this is that if you have to spend five times
more on energy, industry is not fully employed and thus it does not
need as much raw material, so raw material prices go down.
Trudeau: There is a real transfer of resources to OPEC, but the bal-
ance of adjustments shifts to those who import lots of oil and against
those who export other goods and commodities.
Giscard: This is a tax decided by OPEC. It goes with the transfer of
real resources.
Fukuda: Let me identify measures taken by Japan. The oil shock
dealt us a serious blow. We are heavily dependent on imported oil.
economy is moving full steam ahead to this end. Our balance of pay-
ments had done too well. We have an $11 billion current account
surplus. This is my biggest headache, and we are most seriously con-
cerned about it. For JFY ’78 we have taken an obligation to reduce our
trade surplus by expanding imports, reflating by expanding domestic
demand to achieve 7% growth. This is the crucial test. Many thought it
would be difficult to achieve 7% growth, but for the first quarter we
have had 10% annual growth. We can’t maintain that momentum, but I
am confident that we can achieve 7% for the year. If 7% seems doubtful,
I am ready to take additional measures which may be needed. During
August and September we will be able to see if additional measures are
needed and determine the type of measures which will be necessary.
By the end of September we will table a bill in the Diet.
The effects of our actions already taken will take time. That is why
in the first half of this fiscal year we have a fairly large balance of pay-
ments surplus. To deal with this problem I have embarked on an emer-
gency import scheme, including purchases of enriched uranium and oil
stockpiling. There should be an improvement with respect to our bal-
ance of payments. But expanding imports alone is not sufficient. That is
why I am contemplating adjustments of exports. The volume of exports
in FY ’78 should be the same as in FY ’77. I will see to it that the volume
of exports in ’78 does not exceed that of 1977. If this goal is achieved
and the price of Japanese exports is the same as 1977, the surplus will be
liquidated soon. But the prices keep rising and thus increase the value
of Japanese exports. The single most important factor here is that we at-
tain price stability in Japan and in the international market. For the
same volume of exports, prices are now 20% higher in monetary terms
than in the previous year. That is why even if we hold down the
volume of exports (undesirable as that may be) we still need to hold
down global inflation. For the first time in history I am overriding op-
position in Japan by regulating exports. But our efforts will be defeated
if there is inflation in markets abroad, because if there is, the value of
those exports will go up even if the volume does not. Thus, I am asking

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
you to give attention to inflation. This is of cardinal importance. I
would like to have all of you share your concerns about inflation.
Still we recognize we have a very large current account surplus. I
will also make efforts on the capital account by floating foreign bonds
in the Japanese market. Also, we will double aid in three years—a deci-
sion which took much courage.
I can assure you that I am doing my utmost. I am doing all within
my power. Whether our efforts will be productive will depend on infla-
tion. Other countries must make efforts to counter inflation if this effort
is to work. I am doing my utmost, and I would like to see my efforts
matched by yours.
Carter: I listened with care to Fukuda and Schmidt’s commitment
to do the utmost within their countries. These were very forthcoming
and instructive. Schmidt will eliminate his current account surplus and
achieve greater growth in the FRG. Fukuda will reduce his surplus and
double aid in three years. We will do our part on our goals to reduce the
consumption of energy and improve energy production in order to
hold down imports; and we will increase coal production.
On trade we are launching a new program to improve our exports.
They account for 7% of our GNP. We will increase our agricultural pro-
duction, and it should be higher this year than last. We have reduced
our unemployment even at a lower rate of growth. We now believe we
can grow with a very slight increase in oil consumption. We are force-
fully holding down our budget—more than any Democratic president
has done in the past, with the cooperation of the Congress. Our balance
of payments deficit is too high—1.5% of GNP. For the first five months
our energy trade deficit declined by $3–4 billion, but the balance of
trade in manufactured goods became worse.
I have a political problem concerning oil. Previous Congresses
were heavily influenced by oil producers. Now there is an equal in-
terest and influence by oil consumers. The big problem is to change
thinking domestically.
We enjoy a very wonderful relationship with the Saudis. They
have gone the second mile in holding down oil prices in recent months.
You have gotten a bargain price for oil because it is tied to the dollar.
We expect, however, that prices will increase, but hope this can be kept
within the inflation rate. We hope we can incorporate OPEC into efforts
to shape the world economic situation. We would also like to bring the
Soviet Union into compatibility with us in dealing with economic
matters. Surplus and deficit countries have a responsibility here. The
commitments of Fukuda and Schmidt will help to make this conference
successful and we will try to do our part as well.
Schmidt: With respect to the declaration, if we get similar gestures
from other participants, I will go to our constitutional committees and

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
legislatures. As a possible FRG commitment, I could put in the declara-
tion that “as a contribution to reduce world-wide disequilibrium the
German delegation stated that it could put additional measures to in-
crease demand and rates of growth to the legislature in the coming
autumn.”
Carter and Giscard: Do you have a number to add?
Schmidt: I can see additional measures designed to strengthen de-
mand and to strengthen economic growth. I am not talking of tenths of
percent of GNP.
Giscard: I appreciated Japan’s figures and deadlines—measures by
the end of September. Have you (Schmidt) thought of saying which
measures would be in your text?
Schmidt: The Government would, if others make commitments,
transmit to its legislature broader additional measures in the month of
September with a view to bringing about increased demand and higher
rates of growth. We will have to meet in our Cabinet, and with others,
in order to determine what types of measures our legislature will ac-
cept. Also, recognize that the opposition has a majority in the
Bundesrat. The opposition has other measures in mind. In principle, I
will get agreement to measures to stimulate demand and lead to higher
rates of growth. Others must also commit themselves in the same direc-
tion. I must also say that there is some skepticism as to whether these
measures can obtain growth.
Fukuda: I will give some phraseology for Japan early in the
afternoon.
Jenkins: At Bremen the communique took a commitment on
growth of a relatively general nature. What Schmidt has said will give
more sharpness to the declaration. The communique as a whole cannot
give quantitative indications for the EC because it cannot go beyond
Bremen.
Callaghan: We have made much progress externally to improve
our debt profile and we have improved our level of reserves. Our level
of inflation has been cut by two-thirds. We will ask for another year of
wage restraint. Our rate of inflation is now about the OECD average.
We will continue with counter inflation measures. Unemployment is
also down. Imports are high, and we have a high import propensity.
North Sea oil helps to finance our high imports and has given a healthy
boost to UK growth. We, of course, in this respect welcome high oil
prices, but will do our best to keep oil prices down, and we will use our
influence to achieve this because it is good for all countries.
We cannot make a contribution at this time to world growth. But if
there is an improvement in the world climate we will consider going
forward. Let’s discuss this over lunch and see how far we can get.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Schmidt: I suggest that the EC language which Jenkins read be in-
cluded in the declaration before we come to the FRG, because we are
acting under the EC declaration. Then we can have the German com-
mitment. Then we can quote Callaghan’s contribution saying he will
carry on the fight against inflation. It will help me in the FRG.
Callaghan: It will help me, if we commit ourselves here, to resist
inflation back home.
Giscard: Much work has been done in the OECD group under
Charles Schultze. We said we agree to the goals set for us in that group.
We are the leaders of Europe in growth. We agreed with Schultze that
we should have a stimulus of .5% of GDP. Our contribution will go
hand-in-hand with the fight against inflation—a decrease in our budget
deficit of 10 billion francs. We are prepared to put this in the final
communique.
Carter: Our part of the statement concentrates on reducing infla-
tion, our trade deficit and our energy imports. I have a feeling that
Schmidt’s verbal statement was more forthcoming and specific than his
written statement. The US portion of this is too lengthy and we look to
your advice as to how we can extract the pertinent sentences. If the FRG
and Japan are reluctant to indicate specific expressions of their goals it
will make it more difficult for me to project more specific goals on en-
ergy. I would like to agree on specific goals if others are willing to do
so. Percentage increases indicated in the declaration are more con-
vincing to the general public. We can give specific figures on the dates
and goals to be achieved. If others do the same, it will help me. We
should clarify this today. We know what we can do if others do the
equivalent amount. Criticize us if you believe our statement is not suffi-
ciently forthcoming. Let our aides negotiate specific language.
Andreotti: We can say we are moving in the right direction. In 1977
$3.5 billion surplus. But we still have a very large budget deficit. I will
introduce very large cuts in public expenditure in new legislation. The
task is difficult because inflation is still very high. And because of un-
employment, an austerity program is not regarded with much enthu-
siasm. Our weak side is the employment problem.
Schmidt: Could you indicate something about Italy’s fight against
inflation as the Italian contribution? We can leave it to the experts to de-
termine the wording.
Trudeau: I agree that it is desirable for the participants to put
something in the communique. We will put a phrase in it. Our situation
is not very good or very bad. We have the fastest growing labor force in
the OECD. We are creating jobs at a rate exceeded only by the US. But
unemployment will remain high. We could refer to our rate of growth
and to measures we are taking to fight inflation. We are now entering a

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
decontrol period. We can mention our commitment to ensure that
during this period there is no renewed spurt of inflation.
146.
Minutes of the Bonn Economic Summit Meeting1
Bonn, July 16, 1978
BONN SUMMIT
Session 2
of all participants?
Carter: I think this is a good idea, but you should leave specific
items until tomorrow when they can be presented in a package, not
piecemeal.
Giscard: Agree with Carter. You can bring atmosphere and the
idea of progress but not reveal texts.
[Omitted here is discussion of a joint statement on hijacking and
energy policy.]
Schmidt: Let us now turn to a discussion of monetary issues.
Giscard: I guess I should start the ball rolling. There are a number
of somewhat vague paragraphs in the Declaration, but they do impart a
positive impression. They say we should seek stability in our monetary
relations. This point will strike public opinion favorably. It is useful to
reiterate it here, especially for the Americans and Japanese.
Let me take a few minutes to explain why we seek stability in the
European Community. We have noted that there are three monetary
zones represented at this table—North America, the yen zone, and the
EC. Of the three only the EC has experienced a high degree of internal
instability with currency variations as high as 60% between two ex-
tremes. This explains, in a small way, slow EC growth. Japan has had
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of Cyrus
Secret. Drafted on August 8. For more information on the drafting of this memorandum
and a list of Summit participants, see footnote 1, Document 145. This second session of
the Summit, which took place in the Palais Schaumberg, began at 3 p.m. and ended at
6:43 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) The portion of
the discussion relating to energy policy is printed in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
growth is less than one-half of these. I can’t develop a direct numerical
relationship between instability of exchange rates and rates of growth,
but I believe there is some. The structure of EC trade is that one-half of
our trade is within the Community. If stable exchange rates eliminate
one-half of the instability, that will improve prospects for one-half of
our trade.
Much thought has been given as to how such stability would be
achieved. We have agreed to adopt within the EC the type of mecha-
nism which operated worldwide in the 60’s, i.e. to achieve stability of
exchange rates tied to intervention and a credit facility operating in a
short-term and medium-term. There will be other mechanisms to cor-
rect the problems of differential rates of growth. In the new scheme
there would be an estimated 20% of currency reserves available, which
would equal roughly $20 billion of reserves. The same amount would
be paid in the national currencies of European countries and would
thus be a total of $40 billion in reserves. This is a very large sum, but
compared to the Eurodollar market it is not unduly large. We will be is-
sued under conditions similar to that of SDR’s, i.e. against the opening
of credits resulting from currency deposits. I should say, of course, that
Mr. Callaghan’s government has expressed a certain measure of reser-
vation. The results would be stable exchange rates offering the possi-
bility of adjustment by permitting changes in parities, with agreement
by participants. This would be done infrequently, as a result of substan-
tial changes in commercial and trade relations.
We would coordinate with the U.S., Japan and other countries so
that among the dollar, the yen and other currencies there would be
coordinated intervention on exchange markets. All European cur-
rencies would move in parallel vis-a-vis the dollar, the yen and other
currencies. Coordinated intervention by central banks would be used
for this.
Within the EC we would then have relatively stable exchange rates
which would stabilize one-half of our foreign trade and a grouped float
vis-a-vis other currencies. One-half of the trade would therefore be
with countries participating in this grouped float. As a result, the rate of
exchange of the ECU would be lower than the deutschemark and
higher than that of weaker currencies of the system. This then would be
an indirect way of acting on the economic policies of some countries.
The FRG would stimulate more strongly because its currency would be
weighted down by others. Other countries with exchange rates which
are higher than at present would be more stable.
I informed President Carter of our thinking of this as did Chan-
cellor Schmidt. I indicated that as a result of instability in the EC we de-
cided to do this. We still have not reached a clear judgment as to what

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
the plan will look like. The Ministers of Finance will meet and develop
a plan for the next EC Council meeting in December.2
I repeat though that in no way can we separate the problems of
coordinated monetary policy from that of economic growth. A high
level of monetary uncertainty in Europe depresses our economies. A
zone of greater monetary stability will create a stronger market and a
stable monetary situation vis-a-vis all areas of the world. Progress will
contribute to reduced unemployment and encourage higher levels of
growth.
Fukuda: I highly value the significance of the Bremen Summit.
Since the London Summit the Japanese economic growth target could
not be achieved. Others also could not do so because international cur-
rency instability played havoc with our projections, and that is why our
projections were not realized. In the case of Japan, failure to achieve
growth was caused in large measure by appreciation of the yen and de-
preciation of the dollar. If they had not taken place, 6.7% growth could
have been easily achieved. But we have not exceeded 5.4% because the
yen fell abruptly.
In Europe a similar situation prevailed. Monetary instability af-
fected all of the growth projections. As a result, the situation today
differs from that of Downing Street. Monetary instability looms larger
than last May. I believe monetary instability is a very crucial issue
which must be tackled with priority. First, we must deal with funda-
mentals such as inflation and growth. The surplus countries must re-
duce their surplus. These are the fundamentals. At the same time we
need to pay heed to abrupt fluctuations in exchange rates. We must
make an effort to overcome and avoid sharp exchange rate fluctuations.
It takes time to achieve fundamental improvements. While we deal
with fundamentals, we must have a parallel effort to prevent sharp
fluctuations in parities. We must make a major effort on these two
fronts.
In this context the dollar is important, because it is a key currency.
As long as it is unstable the whole world economy can never be secure.
I urge the U.S. to prevent excessive fluctuation in the dollar. The situa-
tion of the dollar looms more important than ever. Every other country
should offer the maximum cooperation to achieve dollar stability. If
further dollar depreciation occurs, we cannot hope for stability in the
world economy. I urge President Carter to make maximum effort to en-
sure a stable dollar. And I ask others to do all within their power to sta-
bilize the dollar.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Carter: I have only a limited knowledge of the details of European
monetary policy. I recognize that there is no unanimity among leaders
involved. Our policy is to encourage the EC and its cohesiveness in po-
litical and economic matters. It is better for the U.S. if there is a strong
and united Western Europe.
There is some concern about this problem, possibly it is based on
lack of adequate detail. We are pleased by the revised articles of the
IMF. We hope that the European plan is compatible with its principles.
We assume no adverse intention regarding the dollar, and I doubt that
there is any toward the dollar. We would like to be kept abreast of plans
so we can voice an opinion if we feel affected.
We favor maintenance of dollar stability and protection against
temporary aberrations. But we do not favor interfering with trends.
The way to deal with trends is to attack the fundamental causes of
them. We would like to understand how the new fund might be used.
We are interested in growth in Europe and want to see strong and
growing economies. We will be concerned if the new system causes
contraction by putting more pressure on deficit rather than on surplus
countries. We also have some concerns related to growth. We favor a
strong economic and monetary system in Europe. It is not completely
accurate to say failure to meet London Summit growth targets was
caused exclusively by a drop in the dollar. Perhaps some will be corre-
lated to exchange rates, but some countries have not attained much
more than one-half of their growth targets. This was perhaps the cause
of the drop in the dollar rather than the other way around. Japan’s
surplus has increased. It is not accurate to attribute failure to meet goals
to the drop in the dollar when in fact this failure has contributed to the
drop in the dollar. We do not want to interfere, though we want to let
our concerns be known.
Jenkins: I support the analysis of President Giscard. If we look
back to the period when circumstances were such that Bretton Woods
operated well, it was a productive period. External exchanges are obvi-
ously needed because of inflation and energy. The critical point, how-
ever, is the economic effect of any instability. It is not a question of
blaming the dollar, but instability does more damage to growth in Eu-
rope than in the rest of the world. It would be like monetary fluctua-
tions between New York and San Francisco, or Tokyo and Osaka. It is
highly desirable to get stability without too much rigidity. Under this
scheme our currencies would be more closely linked together than has
hitherto been the case. This will lead to more growth within the EC.
This will not, of course, solve the whole problem of exchange rate
fluctuations, but can reduce excessive fluctuations. It should not be
thought of as a scheme hostile to the dollar. If we in Europe use our
own economic power responsibly, it would make it more difficult to

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
speculate against the dollar by going into European currencies. I also
see the scheme as having a major advantage in ensuring positive
growth in Europe.
Schmidt: Let me respond to President Carter. The real reasons be-
hind our action is our understanding of recent history. There was a pe-
riod of despair regarding fixed exchange rates. Because of differences
in rates of growth and inflation, these could not be sustained. Fol-
lowing this, there was great enthusiasm for exchange rate fluctuations.
But in recent years there has been criticism of instability. We are now in
a period of adjustments relating to changes regarding raw materials,
energy and new LDC production and competition. The rigid monetary
system of the 60’s was not flexible enough to support adjustment and if
it existed now, there would be a crisis. Now we need a more flexible in-
ternational monetary system, but Europe still can have one with more
stability. Europe has certain characteristics in common. Except for the
UK, we do not have energy, we all have heavy industry, and we are in
competition with new countries. We do not have an historical system of
flexible currency changes. We don’t need a system which involved
parallel adjustment. When we hear it said that currencies are going up
and down, it creates uncertainty which affects half of our foreign trade.
If we remove elements of uncertainty in the EC, we can also move
toward structural change in the future. We can better adapt to new con-
ditions when the EC decides on monetary cooperation. I see no reason
why we cannot openly exchange information with the U.S. and Japan
on this.
My second comment relates to the dollar. My currency has in-
not appreciated against any major currency as much as against the
dollar. Imports have grown more than exports. Other countries are also
pegged to the dollar. Our imports have grown three times as fast as our
exports in the last three years—a 25% increase of imports in real terms.
Our GNP is up only about 1/5 of that. We have exported jobs as a result
of changes in our currencies. This has hurt us, but we recognize that it is
our contribution to world growth. We are shortly coming to a situation
when we have to think of monetary stability in the interest of the
market.
We recognize, however, that there is no way in which we in Eu-
rope can influence the long-term development of the dollar’s exchange
rate. The long-term movement of the dollar depends on fundamentals
such as U.S. inflation and incentives to limit the imports of oil. And,
U.S. companies have a certain disadvantage because of their lack of ag-
gressiveness in exporting. There is a huge U.S. domestic market and
thus for many there is little reason to seek out exports. We in Europe
cannot influence these factors, but we can influence the volatility, speed

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
and sensitivity of currency markets’ reactions to them. I agree with Roy
Jenkins. That is why we need a large basket of currencies. But we
cannot reduce underlying trends.
Also, I was surprised that after the Washington discussions3 our
purpose is not better understood. Our efforts in Europe to create more
stability in Europe are conducive to a better overall situation. None of
us have yet gone fully into the technical considerations. But if we create
stability in the EC, it will be conducive to high rates of growth for all
countries. Some countries have more constrictive, and some have more
outgoing, money supplies. We can achieve some harmony here. We
should not put these comments into a final communique, although I am
grateful to Giscard and Jenkins for what they said. Perhaps we can indi-
cate that we have notified you of this, but we do not need to relate this
discussion. We believe it essential to create confidence in business
circles and we might indicate why monetary issues affect that
confidence.
Giscard: We might say we informed our main partners of our in-
tentions and procedures on how we can create a zone of monetary sta-
bility in Europe.
Schmidt: The dollar is the asset of central banks of the major indus-
trialized countries outside of the U.S. The holdings have increased by
30 to 35 billion dollars in an effort to help stabilize the exchange rate. I
do not believe that this level of intervention will continue in the future
because to intervene means creating national currencies. I do not be-
lieve that the central banks of the developed countries will in the future
intervene on the order of magnitude of $30–35 billion. There is a danger
that the central banks will decide that they do not need more dollars. If
this is the case, additional deterioration of the dollar exchange rate is
bound to happen.
Carter: My impression from this discussion—from the points
made by you, Giscard and Jenkins—is that your objective is not to re-
duce the volatility in Europe, but to reduce instability between the
dollar and the European exchange rates. (SCHMIDT: No, no, that is not
the point. GISCARD: No.) CARTER: I don’t know that the dollar is now
overvalued or undervalued. I can’t say. Your currencies have been un-
dervalued in the past. Many things determine the rate of exchange. To a
relative degree, the U.S. is obviously not as concerned about changing
rates of currency as you are. But we have not detected the export
problem that you describe. Our own exports have suffered more than
yours. We had a decline in our trade deficit in oil by about 3–4 billion
dollars in the first few months of this year, but we have had a large in-
3 Not further identified.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
crease in the U.S. deficit on manufactured goods. We have not tried to
impose restrictions on your goods. In fact, U.S. proposals in the MTN
moved farther, earlier than your offers. On some of our agricultural
items foreign markets are closed to us. I don’t say this to criticize, but to
be clear. There is little criticism of the U.S. for excessive imports of
manufactured goods, but there is criticism of our excessive use of oil
imports.
We would like to be kept informed and ask you to assess our views
during discussions among yourselves. We favor more stable European
currency and avoidance of temporary aberrations in the value of the
dollar.
Callaghan: This has been a useful discussion. Fukuda made some
interesting points. We agree that traders dislike currency fluctuations.
Although this helps the City because lots of money is made writing
U.K. would like a scheme to lessen fluctuations. But we have had a
bitter experience in trying to beat the market. It helps if you have a lot
of reserves. Some fluctuations occurred in the past because we did not
have adequate reserves.
Jenkins and Giscard put forward strong points of view. And
Helmut believes this will contribute to higher rates of growth.
However, I do not believe the analogy with the U.S. is quite per-
fect. It is true in the U.S. that San Francisco is not concerned about fluc-
tuations. But there has been a drift of industry in the U.S. from the
Northeast to the South. The U.S. imports 9 percent of its GDP. In the
U.K. the figure is over 30 percent. The U.K.’s share of trade is 39 percent
in the EC and 62 percent outside of the EC. Thus, the EC scheme will
not affect 62 percent of our total trade. We will try to work out these
factors. Lots of work needs to be done if we are to find a satisfactory
scheme. Such a scheme should not operate against the dollar.
I would like to reemphasize Fukuda’s point. These techniques may
be useful, but they will not deal with the fundamentals. We need
success in equalizing inflation and reducing disparities in the balance
of payments. This will mean more stable exchange rates in the long
term.
All of us in the EC want to keep the U.S. fully aware of events here.
It is right to emphasize that all developments have to be done with the
full knowledge of the U.S. and in consultations with them. I hope for a
satisfactory and constructive conclusion.
Carter: We wish you well.
Schmidt: I would like to respond to the American President. It is a
good course for the USG to bring about more export mindedness
amongst its people. In agricultural trade all of us are sinners—both the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
U.S. and the EC. Our scheme that we have been discussing is to bring
about monetary stability in the EC. We cannot influence basic trends of
currency outside of the EC. We cannot and we will not. We hope to re-
duce very volatile movements in the short term, but in the long run cur-
rencies cannot be stabilized by monetary devices. Stability in exchange
rates requires discipline. If not, exchange rates will go up or down. Let-
ting the DM go up reduces inflation. But this has caused too much
trouble with our neighbors.
We will inform our friends in North America and Japan and keep
you fully informed of developments.
Trudeau: One point of information. We don’t have a Common
Market in North America. We try to have stability and would like to
Thus we do not really have stable exchange rates.
Schmidt: We will meet again at 10:30 tomorrow.
147.
Minutes of the Bonn Economic Summit Meeting1
Bonn, July 17, 1978
BONN SUMMIT
Session 3
Schmidt: This morning we have agreed to discuss trade and rela-
tions with developing countries. First we might spend a minute or two
on the hijacking statement.
[Omitted here is discussion of a joint statement on hijacking.]
TRADE
Jenkins: The document worked out in Geneva last week2 was an at-
tempt to resolve the question as to whether there was a reasonable
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of Cyrus
Secret. Drafted on August 8. For more information on the drafting of these minutes and a
list of Summit participants, see footnote 1, Document 145. This third session of the
Summit, which took place in the Palais Schaumberg, began at 10:30 a.m. and ended at
1:01 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)
2 Reference is to the Framework of Understanding on the Tokyo Round, agreed to
by the U.S., EC, Japanese, Canadian, Nordic, Swiss, New Zealand, and Austrian MTN
delegations in Geneva on July 13. See Document 144.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
prospect of concluding the MTN by the end of this year. The conclusion
was that it is possible. This was a major and positive step toward the
success of the biggest trade negotiation yet undertaken.
The USG has decided that it will build an injury test into its legisla-
tion in return for increased discipline on subsidies. There was also
agreement that there would be selective safeguards but differences on
modalities. Some elements of a tariff package were agreed with a sub-
stantial amount of liberalization. There was a move to agreement on ag-
ricultural commodities and substantial progress on an international
framework for the conduct of world trade. If we can now build on the
elements which were agreed, there will be a major liberalization of
trade, improved GATT rules, greater fairness and discipline in the in-
ternational trading system and additional benefits for the developing
countries including special and differential treatment. But a lot of work
needs to be done before the end of the year.
Strauss: Let me add a few words to what Jenkins just said. Not
only does the document set out what has been done but it also covers
what has not been done. It is a most significant agreement because it is
also approved by 18–20 other countries not in this room who have en-
dorsed and support it. It lives up to the mandate given us by the
London Summit, and it sets out a schedule for us to conclude our work.
This document is a framework of understanding made public in Ge-
neva and approved by the EC, Japan, Canada and the U.S.
Deniau: With respect to the communique, we have a reservation
on the first point which states that “we welcome and endorse the Ge-
neva paper.” In Geneva we made definite progress on some subjects,
on others there was vague progress and others there was little progress.
With respect to the report given us on the negotiations, we feel it diffi-
cult to give final approval to this interim report. We can welcome
progress on some points but we cannot welcome and endorse the re-
port. We would agree to language which says we were informed of cur-
rent progress and express the hope that the negotiations would be
promptly concluded and provide balanced and real results for all par-
ticipants. Yesterday the text I proposed was “we have been informed of
the present state of progress of the MTN. We have expressed the wish
that they be concluded before the end of the year.”
Strauss: We strongly oppose weakening the language. We could,
however, agree instead of using the word “endorse” to a change which
would read “welcome and strongly support the progress”. To say we
were only informed moves back to the Downing Street Summit. Since
then, great progress has taken place and we should have language
which indicates it. I should also point out that there is full condition-
ality with respect to each issue. Also, this has been discussed with the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Nordics and others support it as well. Weakening would be a major set-
back on trade at the Summit.
Carter: Does this modification meet French concerns?
Giscard: Before we seek to find words let us look at the problem.
Negotiations are still underway. They have made substantial progress
thanks to Strauss, who, I am told, is energetic and persuasive, and even
difficult from time to time. We are not negotiating directly with the
United States but through the European Commission. The Commission
consults countries in the EC through an internal EC procedure under
Article 113 of the Treaty of Rome.3
The Geneva framework of understanding was accepted by a repre-
sentative of the Commission. Subsequently, France expressed reserva-
tions about the document.4 While we agree that negotiations should
move along these lines and will re-emphasize the point that progress
has been made, we do not want to give formal approval of a document
on which France has reserved. We support the view that progress has
been made which reflects our converging opinions, but we can’t ap-
prove a document which we have reserved on.
Lambsdorff: I recognize the legal reservation here. But last evening
we expressed our political support for progress at Geneva.5 That is why
we could agree to what Bob Strauss had suggested. We can say we ap-
preciate and strongly support the progress as set forth in the frame-
work of understanding. We could welcome the results and say we ap-
preciate the results. But by saying we appreciate what is set forth in the
document we also recognize that it is true that many points remain un-
settled. But the first line spells out that not all problems have been or
can be resolved.
A further point in Mr. Deniau’s text is point 2. I believe the last sec-
tion of the text echoes what Deniau suggested. This stage of the Geneva
negotiations was timed so that we could give new impetus at the
Summit. For political reasons it is desirable to recognize the achieve-
ment at Geneva and lend support to it.
Schmidt: On the last bracket, it is not clear whether there is a differ-
ence in substance between the end of the year and December 15
conclusion.
3 The Treaty of Rome, signed by Belgium, the Federal Republic of Germany, France,
Italy, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands in 1957, established the European Economic
Community.
French reaction to the Geneva Framework of Understanding. (National Archives,
respectively)
5 Presumably a reference to remarks at the dinner for the Heads of State and Chiefs
of Government on the evening of July 16.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
Deniau: This is a detail. The negotiators are trying to protect their
Christmases. We can accept the 15th of December.
Carter: I should like to ask the President of France a question. Is
our formulation on the first paragraph acceptable to you? Can we say
we support the progress made?
Giscard: There is some ambiguity in this matter. Jenkins’ report is
exactly on the point. There are questions not yet resolved and there are
vague sentences which can be interpreted in one way or another. I have
followed since 1973 the U.S. position in favor of a considerable tariff re-
duction. Europe also wants a tariff reduction as well as other aspects of
trade to be dealt with. In the text of the framework the provision on
tariffs is clearer than that relating to the obstacles to trade. Thus, there
may be a certain commitment in our agreeing to the declaration. But by
using these words we don’t want to hide our differences. Also, I am not
yet clear about what Japan will do.
I prefer a formula which makes it clear that in the declaration there
are points of real agreement but that ambiguities still exist.
Trudeau: One might say we support progress as set forth in the
framework. Thus, we would not endorse the framework but we could
say we appreciate and clearly support the progress as set forth in the
framework, although there are still some differences and important
issues to be resolved.
Giscard: That is a useful contribution from our bilingual friend and
is a possible solution. Each word must be weighed carefully. “We ap-
preciate and support the progress as set forth in the framework of un-
derstanding on the Tokyo Round of the Multilateral Trade Negotia-
tions made public in Geneva on July 13, 1978, even though within the
framework of understanding some difficult and important issues re-
main unresolved.”
Deniau: With respect to the last paragraph on page 1, in a certain
number of countries there are reservations to the GATT based on the
right to keep previous legislation. The U.S. has the right not to apply all
GATT rules. One purpose of the MTN is to have equal application of
the GATT rules. We want agreement on uniform application of GATT
rules. The U.S. wants to move as promptly as possible. I would suggest
that we have the language “there must be agreement on uniform appli-
cation of GATT rules”.
Giscard: That seems fair.
Strauss: We can’t accept that. It would impair our ability to get
support at home. We can’t accept the word “must”. We can say that we
intend to move in this direction and have so stated. There should be
agreement to move. The use of the word “must” would impair dramat-
ically our ability to deliver what you want, i.e. to bring our laws into
harmony with GATT rules. We can say we “seek”.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Carter: We should not use the “must” in the communique. I can as-
sure you that we will move toward this goal. If we use “must,” it will
hurt in the Congress. I cannot accept “must” when Congress has to join
with me in making the decision.
Giscard: Our Parliament feels strongly about this issue as well.
There can be no French support for tariff cuts unless the negotiations
seem to be a joint effort. They must seem to be joint and mutually bal-
anced. In the Kennedy Round there was a U.S. commitment to seek to
apply GATT rules. We do not want to repeat the Kennedy Round in
which U.S. seeks to apply these rules, but Congress puts political ob-
stacles in its path. We will act only when the U.S. authorities have acted
in order to assess the application of GATT rules.
Lambsdorff: France has conveyed what it would like to see.
“Must” is probably not appropriate in this situation. We must recog-
nize the circumstances. Many countries had their own regulations prior
to the GATT. We cannot get rid of all of these before December 15. We
cannot have unrealistic commitments. While we recognize the French
desire for this wording, it is not politically realistic. We should bring
this as close as possible to a commitment, recognizing that a commit-
ment is not possible. We should not overreach ourselves here.
Carter: I don’t disagree with the paper. But if I go back with a text
saying “must,” it would make Congress more obdurate than they al-
ready are. I am in a difficult situation to use the word must. We should
not use such language in dealing with sovereign nations. I will seek as
strong language as possible. I cannot say “must” when it is not my
decision.
Schmidt: We have two subjects here. It is clear that on the first one,
the U.S. President is actively seeking unified application of GATT rules.
There is no doubt about this. But he is afraid of counterproductive lan-
guage. The French President says we have heard such statements of in-
tention for years. I am skeptical about the will of the Congress. There-
fore, I warn you that we have difficulties as well and we might not
apply reductions of tariffs.
No one wants to harm or jeopardize the ability of the two gov-
ernments to get their Parliaments to agree to what we jointly seek.
Thus, we have to find language which doesn’t hurt the two countries
which have spoken. Why can’t we say for instance that we will seek
agreement on uniform application of the GATT rules as soon as
possible.
Dell: I agree with this. We in Europe will not implement the agree-
ment unless it is implemented in the U.S. I agree to your language. Or
we can say we intend to move to do this, which is an essential condition
for implementation of the Tokyo Round.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
Strauss: There can’t be one essential condition, as there is total con-
ditionality in the negotiations. We can’t say there is one condition
which overrides everything. We have attempted in every instance to
determine the political difficulties of other nations and solve them
while we solved our own. The Zenith case showed the good faith of
President Carter. We fought against our own company all the way up
to the Supreme Court and we won. This showed the good will of the
President.6
Trudeau: We should say there must be agreement on uniform ap-
plication of GATT rules. Uniform application of GATT rules is essen-
tial, and we agree to move as promptly as possible in that direction.
Lambsdorff: We can accept the last proposal. Trudeau’s proposal
gets around the difficulty expressed by Strauss. More conditions would
tie our hands in Geneva. We should not lose sight of the French objec-
tive, but we need flexibility in Geneva.
Giscard: Dell clearly indicated our position on substance. On the
tariff measures we need to ask approval of our Deputies. We cannot ob-
tain their agreement unless the U.S. takes some decisions in a symmet-
rical manner. We could accept Trudeau’s proposal to use the word
“essential.”
Strauss: This would read “uniform application of GATT rules is es-
sential and we shall move in that direction as soon as possible.”
Carter: Essential is too far-reaching. It would not be appropriate to
put in essential. Perhaps vital.
Giscard: We accept vital. It means that it is a life and death issue. It
is stronger than essential.
Carter: It means life. We can live with vital. I hate to see this as a
prerequisite of all other progress.
Ushiba: I can go along with this.
Trudeau: We can say vital or important or necessary. All go in the
same direction.
Schmidt: We should keep in mind that there are other precondi-
tions as well.
Giscard: We should agree not to have too much technical detail.
Also, we do not want another Kennedy Round where we enact every-
thing and wait for the U.S. Congress to ratify. We want progress before
6 On June 21, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled against the Zenith Radio Corporation’s
contention that the Secretary of the Treasury was required to levy countervailing duties
on imported Japanese consumer electronics exempted from taxes normally imposed
within Japan. (Warren Weaver, Jr., “Court Calls Import Duty Optional, Probably

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Christmas, also. I also note that the negotiators have put in some com-
plimentary language about themselves. Perhaps, we should mention
their names as well . . . Strauss, Haferkamp, Ushiba? (laughter)
Strauss: There is an old Dizzy Dean7 quote “it ain’t braggin’ if you
done it.”
7 “Dizzy” Dean was a baseball player who pitched for the St. Louis Cardinals, Chi-
cago Cubs, and the St. Louis Browns.
148.
Minutes of the Bonn Economic Summit Meeting1
Bonn, July 17, 1978
BONN SUMMIT
Session 4
Schmidt: Let’s now turn to the declaration.
Giscard: (to Schmidt)—Regarding the growth paragraph, I would
hope that you could add some additional language of greater speci-
ficity on growth. If possible, it would give greater strength to the text.
Perhaps indicate anticipated growth increase of ½–1% of GNP.
Schmidt: We would indicate a willingness to say this but others
had criticized mention of this figure.
Carter: What is the most exciting figure, the highest figure, you
would be willing to mention?
Schmidt: I would be willing to say ½% to 1% increase in expendi-
ture. But your delegation turned this down.
Carter: I agree with up to 1%.
Callaghan: I am sure that if the phrase is left in a general way, we
will be asked what was said in the meeting. I therefore agree with Gis-
card and Carter.
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of Cyrus
Secret. Drafted on August 9. For more information on the drafting of these minutes and a
list of Summit participants, see footnote 1, Document 145. This fourth session of the
p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
Schmidt: The U.S. Delegation requested the figure be taken out. Do
I now understand that the U.S. President has changed the mind of the
U.S. Delegation?
Carter: About how much is 1%?
Schmidt: 13 billion deutsche marks.
Giscard: Yesterday Fukuda used the figure of 7% growth. Since
others are using figures in their paragraphs, we might remind people in
the declaration that the Japanese target is 7%.
Fukuda: Others have not mentioned specific growth targets.
Therefore it is not appropriate for Japan to give specific figures. The
Japanese people may feel that Japan has been singled out. The word
“significantly higher” implies 7%. If asked, you can say 7% growth
target is what was meant. You can quote me.
Trudeau: If it helps in this exercise, I can include for Canada a
figure of up to 5%.
Giscard: Now that we have a Canadian figure, we need a Japanese
figure.
Fukuda: But that is not a figure which represents a growth target
for the economy. If Japan is the only one to give a growth target, I can’t
do it. You can tell people that the Japanese Prime Minister has used the
figure of 7%.
Carter: Would you be willing to set a percentage of increase that
you will set as a goal?
Fukuda: Last year our growth was 5.4%.
Carter: Would you be willing to indicate a net increase in growth
of about 1.5%.
Fukuda: The present phrase is all right. If we set a target, we will
would be almost the same thing as setting a target.
Schmidt: Canada has indicated its intention to achieve a 5%
growth rate in 1978. Germany has said it will take additional measures
to increase growth of up to 1% of GNP. Giscard said France will in-
crease its budget deficit by ½% of GNP. Italy has indicated that it will
which have made quantitative pledges, it would be useful if Japan were
to do likewise. Carter has used the phrase “which is 1.5% higher than
the previous year.” This would not single you out. It would be similar
to the foregoing four countries.
Fukuda: In the case of the U.S., it did not spell out its growth rate.
There would be certain criticisms within Japan when we are asked
questions of why we said in the declaration 7% growth.
Schmidt: Maybe we should look for another kind of language
which avoids mentioning the growth rate such as “measures toward
the expansion of domestic demand on the order of 1.5% of GNP.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
setting a target in a different way. We will not oppose the other coun-
tries’ paragraphs, which are somewhat vague. We can say that we will
do higher than last year’s 5.5%. We will obtain our real growth target
announced. This satisfies your intention, doesn’t it?
Schmidt: Could we say Japan will achieve its real growth target as
already announced for FY ’78?
Fukuda: I could agree to buy Carter’s suggestion that we indicate
we will do 1.5 above the previous year.
Callaghan: The press is likely to say what does this all add up to on
unemployment and growth.
Carter: We can say that we all have made several strides forward.
Germany and Japan agreed to greater growth and we agreed to restrict
oil consumption and inflation. It is a brave new world.
Schmidt: We cannot calculate the effect of these measures. We
cannot foretell the results; the situation looks a little brighter.
Giscard: A slightly more scientific answer is needed. The origin of
this effort was in the OECD Working Group, under Charlie Schultze,
working with the European Commission. The OECD indicated that if
growth were 4.5% there would be a certain fall in unemployment be-
cause 4.2% seems to be the threshold in Europe above which unem-
ployment declines. All figures for the Schultze group except those for
the FRG seem to have been taken up here. We will ask the OECD to
assess the impact. But the net results should enable us to pursue an in-
creased growth rate and a decrease in unemployment.
Schmidt: There seems also to be some issue of subsidies and
discipline.
Carter: We think we should say we will look for greater discipline
in the use of subsidies so that they do not distort the normal flows of
world trade. We would like to add a sentence to this effect.
Callaghan: It depends on how we interpret this. I am not ready to
see firms destroyed by world recession when they require subsidies to
keep them going.
Jenkins: Suddenly to insert this at this stage when this is a complex
MTN issue is very difficult.
Giscard: Countries using subsidies feel they do not distort world
trade. We do not believe this sentence would have practical content; in
fact we believe it will have no meaning.
Schmidt: I see this as an instrument for countries to avoid pres-
sures for new subsidies. I do not think it is being pointed against partic-
ipants here.
Callaghan: I don’t particularly want this wording at all.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
Schmidt: The UK has not been mentioned.
Callaghan: If anything would be mentioned, it would be the
common agricultural policy.
Giscard: It is a question of method. We can’t open the door on sub-
sidies at 4:30. We can accept this because it has no practical conse-
quences. But this would not be honest on our part. U.S. firms for in-
stance have favorable contracts on defense production. Is this a
subsidy? Let’s put this on the agenda for the next Summit.
Carter: I will yield on this issue but I do not accept the French argu-
ment. We are concerned about the excessive use of subsidies. We tried
in our phrasing to be as innocuous as possible but apparently this
caused some embarrassment to some countries. We will not insist on it,
but we are concerned about excessive and perhaps growing subsidies.
Schmidt: We must not [now] spend some time on North/South
issues.
Fukuda: We are surrounded by LDCs. We enjoy a close relation-
ship with ASEAN, whose views and philosophy we find compatible
with industrialized nations. The developing countries want us to
suppress protectionism and there are a number of institutional matters
on which the developing countries request our decisions. They want
expanded imports by the developed countries. They also want estab-
lishment of a common fund and want specific consideration by devel-
oped countries of commodities. They urgently want a conclusive atti-
tude on the common fund to achieve results by next year’s UNCTAD
meeting in Manila.2 It is important for the developed countries to take
some improved philosophy or posture. On the common fund, we
should show an attitude of determination to work on the common fund
idea to provide a conclusive idea by the end of the year. This would be
a meaningful gesture to the LDCs.
As for Japan, we will double aid in 3 years. We are also trying to
improve our growth and to provide co-financing through the interna-
tional financial institutions. Some success resulted from the UNCTAD
meeting last March,3 but we must still deal with the mounting debt
problem of LDCs and develop a conclusive attitude on rising debt.
Schmidt: In addition to the general evaluation of the situation, do
you want to alter the communique?
Fukuda: I do not propose any changes, but you mentioned
common fund. In addition to the draft, I suggest that we approach our
3 The negotiating conference on the Common Fund, agreed to at UNCTAD IV in

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
experts to come up with conclusions by the end of the year. The com-
munique is, however, okay in draft.
Andreotti: I am not proposing any changes, but I have two com-
ments. It is important that in addition to concerning ourselves with the
problems of the developed countries we also concern ourselves with
the problems of the developing countries. I was impressed with what
Prime Minister Fukuda said about the problems of the future, such as
the water and arable land. We should study in the future our approach
to the LDCs. It is important to remind people in the developed coun-
tries, particularly our young people, of the problems of the developing
countries—to remind them that 1.5 billion people in this world earn
less than $90 a year. Maybe it will make us more willing to sacrifice in
our own countries if we do not forget world poverty.
Carter: I would like to add on the common fund point in the com-
munique that we should pursue negotiations to a successful conclu-
sion. We should get going on the common fund and make clear that we
are going to go ahead and wrap it up.
Giscard: There is considerable emphasis on multilateral aid in this
paper. It is also important that we give attention to bilateral aid for po-
litical reasons. We should highlight our own aid to indicate the
progress we have made in dealing with the problems of the LDCs.
Schmidt: I see no problem adding Carter’s four words. However, I
support Giscard on aid. Most people in LDCs have no idea of where the
aid they get comes from when it comes from the World Bank. It is also
difficult to raise appreciation for foreign aid when LDCs criticize my
country. LDCs should not see aid as coming out of the vaults of the
World Bank. Aid depends on national legislatures. What Giscard said
was important; not too much aid should be multilateral. We should
make it clear to LDCs where the aid comes from.
With respect to the Eastern countries, I do not agree that we should
say “invite.” We invited them at London to provide more aid and
nothing happened. Instead, they stepped up their deliveries of
weapons and advisers to Africa—including military advisers from the
GDR. Invite is meaningless. We should spell out that the 7 countries
here reproach COMECON for not contributing substantially to LDCs.
The last section of this declaration is meaningless on commodities.
There are no direct German interests involved. There are no Germano-
phone countries. I am talking from a general economic point of view. I
am concerned about and question whether the common fund is essen-
tial, as well as certain commodity agreements. To my mind, stability of
export earnings is even more important for LDCs. A copper agreement
would be good for the Soviet Union and give it a lot of profits. But a
common fund should not enable the rich to get richer. A copper agree-
ment would help Zaire, Zambia and Chile, but it would be better for

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
the U.S. and the Soviet Union. Commodity agreements are of more use
to developed than to developing countries. I don’t think my consumers
and taxpayers should be asked to contribute to the well-being of large
developed countries rather than poor LDCs.
I am extremely dissatisfied with the way in which examination of
stabilization of export earnings has been handled so far. The common
fund and commodity agreements mean large rich countries get more
benefits than poor countries. The great majority of LDCs derive no ben-
efit whatsoever. This is what I feel. We will say this in international fora
about this approach.
I also repeat that I find the language on COMECON too friendly.
Trudeau: You speak from the heart, but you also speak for a lot of
us.
Carter: We should say we deeply regret the failure of COMECON
to assist developing countries.
Trudeau: On the point above, the common fund and STABEX, we
are all growing impatient with the failure to find methods to achieve
this objective. We all want to transfer resources to LDCs. But when we
gave lots of bilateral aid there was a great deal of overlap and
confusion.
On the common fund, LDCs want to stabilize prices and price in-
creases. If third world countries rely on one commodity, they face very
real problems. People may use less sisal, but we can’t be blamed for
that. We should use the time between now and the next Summit to
clarify our objectives and not mix in the common fund, Lome, etc. The
774 always try to do everything at the same instant. The LDCs want
something because it sounds good.
Callaghan: I support Pierre’s point about the risk of countries
going from multilateral to bilateral aid. We can influence governments
a bit when aid is bilateral but very few changes are made as a result.
The common fund idea has changed a lot since 1974 and 1975. It now
has become a political necessity.
Schmidt: I acknowledge that although it will not help 90% of
LDCs.
Callaghan: We must maintain our position on the common fund
until the developing countries move, but when they do, it would be ad-
visable for us to support the second window. If the price is to give in on
the second window and some direct contributions—if that is required
to get it out of the way, we should move at an appropriate moment.
lished at the conclusion of the first UN Conference on Trade and Development in 1964.
For the Lome´ Convention, see footnote 6, Document 24.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
I would like to see agreement to double the capital of the World
Bank, which is $31 billion now. The World Bank handles its affairs well.
I would like to see the World Bank used as the main instrument for the
development process. I hope we can return to this. Also, the level of aid
as a percentage of GNP has substantially declined. This is a bad sign.
On retroactive terms adjustment, we have reduced debt. Let’s face
it, the LDCs will never repay their loans. It would have some meaning
in LDC eyes if we move more in this direction.
Schmidt: This is the first time we are discussing the LDC issue. You
should feel free to put up new ideas on this new subject.
Giscard: At the next meeting we should give more time to North/
South policy. Regarding the paragraph on COMECON, we should say
we invited once more COMECON to do their share in assisting LDCs.
Carter: We should say we deeply regret the failure of COMECON
countries to do their share of financial assistance to LDCs and invite
them once more to do so.
Schmidt: I have a proposal to make outside of the text—that is a
joint procedure among ourselves envisaging further action. Our note-
takers will bring to our attention proposals made in this field. We
should evaluate our situation in the field of development aid. In less
than two years the developing countries will become aware that the
common fund would not really help them. We should prepare for this.
I should also say that nothing has been done on the study of export
earnings since our meeting at Rambouillet.
Trudeau: We should say that we will meet before the next Summit
to tackle this problem. Were you counting on our aides to assess
progress in the next 6 months?
Schmidt: Yes. They should assess progress across the board.
Carter: I would like to propose that we meet in Japan before the
end of June next year.
Schmidt: Our notetakers and aides should follow up our
discussion.
Giscard: We should say that our officials will meet toward the end
of the year to review progress. We should not announce a date for an-
other Summit because the economic situation may make a meeting nec-
essary at one time or another. We should say that the next meeting will
take place as and when circumstances make it desirable.
Fukuda: Followup is an important matter. I would like to urge on
you that we say we will followup in an appropriate phrase in the
communique.
Schmidt: I agree. We should also say we have instructed our Min-
isters to, by the end of ’78, convene in order to review progress in car-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
rying out the provisions of this declaration and that we intend also in
1979 to have a similar meeting between ourselves.
Giscard: We have not said this in the past. We do not want to insti-
tutionalize this. There are two advantages of announcing our intention
to come together in the spring of ’79. If we announce today, people will
not think that such a meeting when called is a signal of urgent danger.
And there will not be such great expectations.
Callaghan: I agree. I would like to institutionalize this body so that
it meets every twelve months. It also reduces pressures from others to
get in.
Giscard: Let’s not be bureaucratic. Let’s keep some flexibility and
say that we have decided to meet again when the situation seems ap-
propriate. We can say we reflected on the invitation of Japan to meet
next year. In the declaration we can say we envisage a similar meeting
between ourselves at an appropriate time next year. We should also say
that we instructed our representatives to, by the end of 1978, convene in
order to review progress in carrying out this declaration.
Schmidt: I think this was an excellent meeting. Let’s now adjourn
and then we can go over to the press building.5
Carter’s remarks to the press at the conclusion of the Summit are ibid., pp. 1309–1310.
149.
Memorandum From John Renner of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the Special Representative
for Economic Summits (Owen)1
Washington, July 19, 1978
SUBJECT
International Economic Policy Balance Sheet
Now that the Bonn Summit is history, we should take a look at
how our international economic policy is doing.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
information. A handwritten notation at the top of the page reads: “DA has seen. 7/21.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Over the last year our efforts have been directed primarily at re-
ducing our large current account deficit and strengthening the dollar.
The depreciation of the dollar should make our exports cheaper and
imports more expensive. When the pipeline is drained of earlier orders,
this change in relative prices should have some impact on our trade
balance. However, it could be several years before the full impact is felt.
Meanwhile no progress has been made and none is expected this
year. The current account deficit for the first quarter of 1978 was run-
ning at an annual rate of $28 billion, almost twice the 1977 deficit, and
no large improvement is in sight. The dollar is hovering around its
all-time low with regard to the Mark and the Yen, and it probably will
sink further.
Our campaign to improve our current account position and
strengthen the dollar, aside from allowing the dollar to float, has had
five major elements. We have:
—Encouraged foreign governments to stimulate their domestic
demand, expecting that this would suck in more imports.
—Attempted to gain passage of an energy bill to begin the pro-
tracted process of reducing our dependence on imported oil.
—Tried to persuade foreign governments to reduce barriers to for-
eign goods, including ours.
—Begun the effort to develop a national export policy designed to
expand our exports.
—Announced an anti-inflation program and have assigned a high
priority to it.
My purpose is to scrutinize each element and suggest what addi-
tional measures should be taken.
Economic Activity Abroad
To date we have been unsuccessful in our efforts to bring about in-
creased economic activity in our major trading partners. The rate of
economic growth in the US in 1977 was greater than that of Japan and
more than twice that in all the other Summit countries. The first quarter
data suggest that the disparity in economic growth may be diminishing
somewhat, in part due to a less bouyant US economy. However, there
is little evidence pointing to a sharp upturn in economic activity
abroad.
If Schmidt and Fukuda deliver on their promises at the Summit,
economic activity in Germany and Japan could pick up. We should
keep a close watch and maintain the pressure on the surplus countries
to expand domestic demand.
Energy Bill
Our efforts to date to gain passage of the energy bill have flopped.
One of the key features of the bill, the COET, appears no nearer passage

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
now than six months ago. All my contacts on the Hill and in the private
sector say it has virtually no chance this year or next.
However, even if the energy bill is passed and even if the domestic
price of oil is brought to the world price level by 1980 as the President
promised at the Bonn Summit, the impact on consumption and produc-
tion will be slow and insufficient. Our oil imports will remain immense
unless we quickly institute additional measures. There are many steps
we could take over and beyond those currently contemplated to stimu-
late domestic production, encourage the shift to other sources of en-
ergy, and to bring about greater conservation.
I think the President should appoint a high-level public task force
and assign the members the job of preparing specific recommendations
on means to this end. The task force should examine the extent to which
incentives and disincentives other than price would be required to re-
duce steadily our oil imports. Here are examples of questions the task
force should consider:
—Are additional incentives necessary to bring about greater
shifting from oil to coal?
—How could public transportation of all types be made cheaper,
more reliable, more pleasant? Should subsidies be used?
—What additional incentives and disincentives would be needed
to reduce the use of private vehicles to and from work?
—Should taxes be increased on luxury and leisure vehicles, boats,
airplanes?
—How much energy would be saved if night-time advertising
were cut in half?
—Should trains, which use electricity, be subsidized further?
—Should research on renewable forms of energy be subsidized by
a substantially greater amount?
Reducing Foreign Trade Barriers
Our bilateral and multilateral negotiations have not produced
much in the way of tangible benefits.
Following intense pressure, the Japanese agreed to take a series of
measures to encourage and facilitate imports. But the results cannot yet
be seen in the trade figures. Nor does the Japanese performance in the
Geneva multilateral trade negotiations suggest that they are serious
about opening their market. The Japanese negotiators have been hag-
gling over every half of one percent decrease in tariffs on items of spe-
cial interest to us. I regret to say that the time probably has come to con-
sider mounting another campaign. This might entail some political
costs but how else can we get the Japanese to move?
The European Community negotiators are more sophisticated and
smoother. But their opposition to big reductions of trade barriers is just
as adament as the Japanese. In Geneva this last week, agreement was

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
reached on a report on the status of the Tokyo Round.2 It has a lot of
nice sounding words but very little hard positive results. In fact, the Eu-
ropean Community withdrew previous tariff-cutting offers, including
the entire paper sector, which is important to us politically and eco-
nomically. Without the support of the US paper industry, the prospects
of getting Congressional approval of the MTNs would be reduced.
In the fall, when the serious, detailed negotiations are joined, we
should insist on:
—Substantial tariff cuts by the EC in the paper sector.
—Major tariff reductions by the Japanese on high technology
products, including computers and related equipment.
To have a reasonable chance of getting these concessions, the US
will have to forego the planned withdrawal of tariff cuts in the textile
and apparel sectors.
National Export Policy
Following the President’s directive to develop a national export
policy, Frank Weil chaired a task force to examine possible steps to ex-
pand exports and has come up with a draft report to the President
based on a consensus of the views of the task force members. Although
this consensus report does not go nearly as far as required to deal seri-
ously with the problem, it has run into heavy opposition. OMB does
not want to spend any additional money; CEA puts its faith entirely in
macro-economic policies; DPS is negative for religious reasons.
I think it is important for the US to have a hard-hitting, practical,
and effective national export policy that will create incentives for ex-
ports and eliminate the multiple disincentives that exist now. This
cannot be done, in my opinion, unless basic attitudes toward the im-
portance of exports change and until national priorities are re-ordered
to subordinate particular policy objectives to the need to export.
Exports are required to enable us to acquire the foreign exchange
to pay for needed and desired imports. Expanding exports would con-
tribute greatly to reducing our current account deficit and to strength-
ening the dollar.
I recommend that you both take every opportunity to stress the
importance of an effective national export policy to the President, Ei-
zenstat, Strauss, and Schultze.
Inflation
We have not cut taxes as planned; we have increased interest rates;
we have jaw-boned. Some think that these measures (especially the in-
2 See Document 144.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
crease in interest rates) threaten recession. But prices continue to go up.
What can we do?
In my opinion, modern societies have a structural bias toward
price increases that, short of a depression, are not responsive to the
standard macro-economic techniques to reduce prices. Demand will re-
main high. I think more work needs to be done on the supply side to in-
crease productivity and production. This requires savings and invest-
ments. Both have been quite low in recent years. This is so because of
uncertainties arising from inflation, unpredictable energy costs, fluctu-
ating exchange rates, and proliferating governmental regulations. It is
also so because the risk-benefit ratio of business investment is low.
In my judgment it would be highly desirable to stimulate business
investment by an appropriate mix of reduced corporate income tax
rates, accelerated depreciation for investment, especially for research
and development and energy conservation and production, and re-
duced capital gains taxes. The loss of revenue should be off-set by re-
duced government expenditures. Certainly the big industrialists will
benefit. But in our system the little guy probably will not be able to im-
prove his welfare unless the fat cats are persuaded to take risks with
their capital.
Summary
We are not doing well. Our international economic policy goals are
not being attained. We need to stress the importance of these objectives
and give higher priority to means to attain these ends.3
cussed how the organization of the international economic policymaking process was af-
fecting the achievement of the administration’s foreign economic goals. (Both in the
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Sub-
ject Chron File, Box 59, Administration’s Policy: General: 1978)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
150.
Memorandum From the General Counsel, Office of the
Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Rivers) to the
Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Strauss) and
the Deputy Special Representative for Trade Negotiations
(Wolff)1
Washington, July 21, 1978
SUBJECT
Extending the Countervailing Duty Waiver
Very shortly you must decide whether and under what circum-
stances, you will ask Congress to extend the authority to waive coun-
tervailing duties.2 As you know, the present authority expires January
3, 1979, and Congress has announced its intention to adjourn sine die on
October 7, 1978. The key question is whether you believe the recent
progress towards a subsidies agreement—in particular the prospect of
progress on agricultural export subsidies—provides a defensible basis
the hope of concluding an acceptable agreement this fall.
Needless to say there are risks, whatever you decide. Treasury has
exercised the waiver fifteen times, on trade valued at approximately
$500 million, on products ranging from canned ham and cheese, to
butter cookies and handbags, and most recently, Canadian groundfish.
(See attached table.)3 There is little doubt that collecting the duties on
January 3, 1979 would disrupt the trade and complicate our efforts to
negotiate a satisfactory conclusion to the MTN. (Treasury and Agricul-
ture are preparing economic analyses; State, a political analysis, of the
consequences of collecting duties on the products involved.) Clearly,
the Europeans (Gundelach, in particular) expect you to seek a waiver,
and failure to even seek one would damage their trust in you. On the
other hand, it is equally clear that seeking an extension of the waiver in
the present climate risks a pre-election Congressional debate on the
MTN and trade policy in general, and the likelihood of undesirable, ex-
traneous amendments.4 Time is short, but there is no shortage of legis-
Printed from a copy that does not bear Rivers’ initials. A handwritten notation at the top
of the page reads: “discuss Finance Committee + Both Staffs.”
2 Congress had granted the President temporary authority to waive the imposition
of countervailing duties on subsidized imports.
3 Attached but not printed is a February 2 table entitled “Current CVD Waivers.”
4 John Donaldson of the STR staff discussed Congressional attitudes regarding an
extension of the countervailing duty waiver in a July 21 memorandum to Strauss and

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
lative vehicles, provided the votes are there to control the matter and
push the bill past the shoals.
If we should fail to gain an extension of the waiver, there is one
other option for avoiding collection of the duties: Treasury could reach
deep into its bag of administrative tricks and come up with a way of
merely “suspending liquidation” of the duties, although technically the
authority does not really exist. This would be an act of desperation
which could compound the problem, i.e., damage our credibility
abroad (we’ve been saying we have no option but to collect the duties
January 3, 1979) and possibly enrage elements of Congress.
Finally, you should be reminded that Murray Finley has thirteen
countervailing duty complaints pending at Treasury involving approx-
imately $1 billion worth of textile products from less developed
countries.
151.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, July 25, 1978
SUBJECT
National Export Policy
Juanita Kreps is sending you the recommendations of the inter-
agency task force on means to increase US exports.2
Increased exports are essential if we are to reduce the current ac-
count deficit. Other measures (energy, anti-inflation, etc.) will help, but
they cannot do the job alone.
Juanita Kreps’ recommendations would put us on the road to im-
proved export performance, which the US pledged to seek in the
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
7/78. Confidential. Sent for information.
recommendations of the task force, which was headed by Frank Weil, was found, but see
Document 15.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Summit Declaration. No doubt there are arguments against each rec-
ommendation. But unless the essential package is approved, they will
not have the desired effect. A few isolated actions will not do the job.
If you approve the package, it would be good if it could be an-
nounced as such, with a certain amount of fanfare. This would give you
an opportunity to make clear that promoting exports is a goal to which
you assign the highest priority. To underline this point, you might indi-
cate your willingness, which you mentioned a while back, to spend a
day with the fifty State governors discussing how each of them could
improve his or her State’s export promotion. Export promotion has
been the step-child for the US Government and, I suspect, for US
business for so long that only strong Presidential leadership, coupled
with concrete measures to stimulate exports, will turn the situation
around.
Expanding US exports should be politically popular. You would
be the first President in recent history to take effective action to create a
national export policy, which would mean more jobs for more
Americans.
I do not want to overstate the merits of Secretary Kreps’ proposal,
because the measures proposed are modest. But they are a beginning
and, if presented as such, would be well received by business and the
public generally.
There is one recommendation in this report on which I do not feel
competent to comment: the proposal for a shift in policy regarding use
of export controls as a foreign policy tool (Item #7). This raises issues
with wider implications, which I have not studied sufficiently to judge.
Otherwise, I recommend approval of the report.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
152.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic
Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) and Robert Ginsburg of the
Domestic Policy Staff to President Carter1
Washington, July 28, 1978
SUBJECT
Export Policy
Attached are:
(1) a memorandum from Commerce setting forth the recommen-
dations developed by the Export Policy Task Force;2 and
(2) separate memos from CEA and OMB setting forth their views
on the Commerce paper.3
CEA recommends that you accept Commerce’s basic package
(items 1–12) except that you reject the proposal for a continuing review
of the need for an export tax incentive. CEA also recommends that you
request a PRC study of the major export barriers (such as Jackson-
Vanik, anti-boycott and anti-bribery legislation, etc.) which it feels were
not dealt with adequately by the Export Task Force. CEA’s general
views are that: our recent export performance has been poor but not
disastrous; the Task Force recommendations are unlikely to have a sig-
nificant impact upon exports; and each individual proposal should be
considered on its own merits, rather than being viewed as part of an
all-or-nothing package.
OMB believes that: the Task Force recommendations are not signif-
icant enough to amount to a “national export policy”; the financial in-
centives called for are likely to be costly in budgetary terms but not
very effective in promoting exports; and that the major disincentives to
exports have not been adequately reviewed. OMB recommends that
you defer all decisions involving increased tax or budget expenditures
until the fall budget reviews and that the Administration undertake,
under White House direction, an intensified review of all potential im-
pediments to exports.
Because of the diversity of viewpoint among Commerce, CEA, and OMB
on the nature of the “export problem” and the Commerce recommendations,
we recommend that you read all three memos.
memorandum.
2 Not attached.
3 Not attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
We believe that your decisions on the specific recommendations
should be taken within the following overall framework:
1. We generally agree with the CEA/OMB conclusion that the Commerce
recommendations are unlikely to have a significant impact on exports. In our
view, the hard truth (and the reason we were hesitant about getting the
Administration involved in a high-profile, public effort in this area) is
that as far as unilateral policy actions are concerned the U.S. can dra-
matically increase its exports only by taking initiatives along the fol-
lowing lines:
(a) terminate or severely curtail our arms sales and human rights
efforts and repeal the foreign bribery and Arab boycott laws;
(b) provide massive tax and/or spending subsidies for exports.
We regard the first set of initiatives as unwise on both policy and
political grounds and the second set as inappropriate for economic and
budgetary reasons.
2. Nonetheless, the Commerce recommendations do include some modest
steps in the right direction. We should take these steps and take credit for them.
Largely because of the depreciation of the dollar, the U.S. export per-
formance is likely to be strong over the next year or more in any case.
(We are already beginning to see improvement in the June export
figures.) Some of this positive performance will redound to the credit of
whatever export policy we announce.
3. The Task Force has made 14 policy recommendations, which
Commerce has divided into 12 “essential measures” and 2 “additional
measures.” Commerce states that the first 12 measures are “essential to
a comprehensive and credible export policy” and that “the elimination
of any of them would substantially weaken the total effect, and the psy-
chological impact would be jeopardized.” We strongly disagree. Many of
these recommendations are relatively insignificant. You should not re-
gard this as an all-or-nothing package. For example, take two of the rec-
ommendations (which we in fact support):
(a) Commerce proposes that you increase Eximbank’s direct loan
fect to $4.1 billion. In light of the facts that we have increased Exim-
bank’s loan authorization 5-fold over the past two years (up from $700
million in FY 1977) and that the present budget mark is already $300
understand how an extra $200 million could be deemed “essential” to a
“credible” export policy.
(b) Commerce proposes that SBA be directed to target up to $100
million of its current authorization for loans to exporters. Since SBA al-
ready does such targeting without any formal requirement, this item is
without real substance.
In addition, the items involving the Justice Department’s enforce-
ment of the antitrust laws are largely window dressing. Accordingly,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
you should feel free to consider each of the recommendations on its own merits,
rather than feeling obligated to approach this package on a take-it-or-leave-it
basis.
4. We do not agree with the OMB recommendation that you should
defer your decisions on the financial incentives in the package until the
fall budget reviews. In our view, that approach is politically unsound
and would provoke genuine criticism that the Administration is not ca-
pable of enunciating any export policy.
5. We do not oppose the CEA and OMB recommendations that the
Administration conduct a serious review of some of the fundamental
barriers to exports such as arms sales and human rights policies. How-
ever, we are skeptical as to the results of such a review and do not want
the Administration to become involved in another public effort which
unduly raises outside expectations and concerns. Accordingly, we rec-
ommend that, if you decide to order such a review, your order not be
publicly announced and the review be held very tightly within the
White House.
Our recommendations on the Commerce proposals follow:
1. Presidential Commitment. Commerce believes that your personal
involvement will give a boost to the export policy announcement. On
the other hand, as we have indicated above, there is substantial doubt
as to whether these proposals constitute a significant enough “policy”
to merit your personal involvement. We recommend that you defer
your decision on this proposal until after you have decided what will
be in the export package and after you have heard from Jody and Gerry
Rafshoon on this.
2. Export Tax Incentive. Commerce proposes that the Administra-
tion reaffirm its opposition to DISC but at the same time state that we
have no philosophical objection to an export tax incentive per se and
that the Secretaries of Treasury and Commerce will be directed to con-
tinue to review the need for an export tax incentive. The problem with
this is that Secretary Blumenthal, Ambassador Strauss, Undersecretary
Cooper, etc., are telling our foreign trading partners that the U.S. does
object to export subsidies and that foreign governments should elimi-
nate or curtail such subsidies.
Another basic problem is that the better targeted an export tax
credit is, the more in violation of GATT and our MTN posture it will be.
We have just completed an interagency effort to develop an export tax
credit, and the best proposal presented was one which you and your se-
nior White House advisers rejected. Further publicly directed review in
this area is a no-win situation:
(a) either we conduct a study and come up dry again, which will
embarrass us and disappoint much of the business community; or

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
(b) we develop a more effective alternative to DISC (which will
likely be illegal under international trade rules) and we then become
obligated to renew our fight on DISC next year—that is a decision
which we should preserve for 1979.
In any case, our major exporters are unlikely to have their confi-
dence and certainty enhanced if we tell them that we are undertaking a
study to develop a substitute for DISC which will channel DISC ben-
efits from them to smaller companies.
We recommend that you disapprove this proposal.
3. Increased Eximbank Funding. Commerce proposes that you in-
crease Eximbank’s direct loan authority from the FY 1980 budget mark
various financial incentives for exports, Eximbank is probably the best
vehicle. A $500 million increase over FY 1979 would be a substantial
initiative for which the Administration could take considerable credit.
We recommend that you approve this proposal.
4. Taxation of Americans Abroad. The Administration has already
made a proposal in this area (which you personally approved last Feb-
ruary), which would cost about $245 million.4 The Ribicoff bill, which
has passed the Senate and which is also a responsible approach to the
problem, would cost about $310 million.5 There is no House bill and the
Ways and Means Committee has not yet even reported out a bill. Joe
Waggonner’s subcommittee has recommended a bill to the full Com-
mittee which would cost about $590 million. Commerce proposes that
the Administration drop its own proposal and support the Ribicoff bill.
While we would be willing to state in the export policy announce-
ment that the Ribicoff bill is a responsible approach, we do not think the
Administration should change its position before conference and be-
fore the House even has a bill. That would merely up the ante by $65
million and encourage a more expensive bill in the House. Treasury’s
Congressional liaison staff and Frank Moore’s shop agree that it would
be unwise legislative strategy to drop our proposal at this time.
Accordingly, we recommend that you disapprove this proposal.
5. SBA Targeting to Exporters. We recommend that you approve this
proposal.
6. Export Consequences of Regulations. Commerce proposes that
agency and department heads be required to take into account the ef-
4 The Tax Reform Act of 1976 contained provisions designed to augment the
amount of taxes collected from Americans working overseas. The Carter administration’s
February 1978 proposal on this issue is described in “New Income-Tax System for Amer-
icans Who Work Abroad is Proposed by Carter,” The Wall Street Journal, February 24,
1978, p. 12. No other record of Carter’s approval of this proposal was found.
5 The Senate bill, which was passed in May 1978, is described in “Senate Votes to

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
fect on U.S. exports of their major administrative and regulatory ac-
tions that have significant export consequences. This could be an im-
portant item in reducing the arbitrary impediments to U.S. exports. We
recommend that you approve this proposal.
7. Use of Export Controls As a Foreign Policy Tool. Commerce recom-
mends that export consequences be weighed as a factor, along with
other factors, when considering the use of export controls for foreign
policy purposes. We agree that the effect on exports should be consid-
ered as a major factor, along with foreign policy, in decisions involving
the use of export controls. However, we do not think that exports
should be given an automatic priority and caution that the reference in
the decision memo to giving “particular weight” to whether the U.S.
goods are available from alternative suppliers may have that effect. We
recommend that you approve this proposal but that you cross out the
second sentence of this item from your decision memo.
8. Guidelines Clarifying the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. Commerce
recommends that the Justice Department be directed to issue guide-
lines clarifying the requirements of the anti-bribery statute. We have
discussed this matter with the Justice Department and they are pre-
pared to provide some affirmative guidance as to the kinds of viola-
tions they deem most serious; however, it would be improper for them
to indicate which violations of the law they will not prosecute. With
that understanding as to the “guidelines” Justice will provide, we rec-
ommend that you approve this proposal.
9. Antitrust Business Review Procedure. We recommend that you ap-
prove this proposal, which calls for prompt Justice Department re-
sponse to business questions on international antitrust issues and addi-
tional educational work by the Justice Department. We have discussed
this item with Justice and, although they regard it as window dressing,
they will be glad to cooperate.
10. Expansion of Webb-Pomerene Exemption to Include Services. The
Webb-Pomerene Act provides an exemption under the antitrust laws
for U.S. firms forming a consortium for the export of goods. Commerce
proposes that we seek to amend the Act to provide a similiar exemption
for the export of services. Some members of the business community
believe that this Act restrains their ability to bid on foreign engineering
and construction contracts. The Justice Department disagrees and
points out that there have not been any prosecutions under the Act in
over 20 years. Justice has agreed to provide us with language for the ex-
port policy announcement which would provide further guidance and
reassurance to businessmen in this area but believes we should not
amend the Act because that would be inconsistent with the Adminis-
tration’s antitrust stance and could provide some encouragement for
foreign cartels. Although we do not regard the issue as vital one way or

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
the other, we recommend that you disapprove this proposal, with the
understanding that Justice will provide helpful language for the export
announcement.
11. Export Assistance Programs. We recommend that you approve
Commerce’s de minimis request for an additional $20 million to pro-
vide better assistance to U.S. exporters.
12. Interagency Committee on Export Expansion. Commerce proposes
that you create an interagency Committee on Export Expansion,
chaired by Commerce, to oversee the Administration’s export effort.
The Committee would publish an annual, public report for the Presi-
dent on the progress made. Our experience over the past several
months has made us very skeptical about the wisdom of, in effect,
making the Export Task Force a permanent Administration body, com-
plete with annual report. We would suggest instead that the export ex-
pansion effort be monitored by the Commerce Department and/or the
EPG. Consideration should also be given to reviving the President’s Ex-
port Council, a private sector advisory group which has been dormant
in recent years. Businessmen continue to be interested in the Council
and would probably appreciate its revitalization. Accordingly, we rec-
ommend that you disapprove this proposal.
13. Agricultural Financing and Assistance. Part A of this proposal
represents existing Administration policy and, accordingly, you need
not make a new decision on this issue. Part B calls for Administration
support of legislation setting up agricultural assistance offices abroad.
The Department of Agriculture is already moving to provide this
assistance under existing authority. We believe there is merit in pro-
viding such assistance but that it should be provided on a case-by-case
basis as it can be justified rather than legislatively mandated. Accord-
ingly, we recommend that you disapprove proposal (B).
14. Multilateral Discussion of Compensatory Defense Agreements. We
recommend that you approve this proposal.
153.
Editorial Note
In early August 1978, Special Representative for Trade Negotia-
tions Robert Strauss wrote to European Communities (EC) Vice Presi-
dent Wilhelm Haferkamp, EC Commission Director General for Ex-
ternal Affairs Sir Roy Denman, and EC Vice President Finn Gundelach
on the issue of the countervailing duty waiver. Strauss, citing recent
discussions with members of Congress, expressed doubt as to whether

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
a bill extending the waiver would pass; moreover, he worried that such
a “bill would serve as a target for the attachment of many protectionist
amendments and with the mood of this country, we would end up
doing more harm than good. Quite frankly, I am becoming convinced
that the risk of regressive legislation is too great for us to gamble on in-
troducing the extension.” Strauss offered a solution, asking “whether
or not any possibility exists for us to make sufficient additional
progress on subsidies by mid-September to encourage congressional
support of the extension of the waiver. I presume that this is not a prac-
tical suggestion because of the time schedule with the August recess.”
(Telegram 199311 to USEC Brussels, August 7; National Archives, RG
On September 14, West German Minister for Economic Affairs
Otto Graf Lambsdorff wrote to Strauss urging him “to use all means at
your command to prevent” the imposition of countervailing duties on
EC goods after the January 1979 expiration of the waiver. Such duties,
Lambsdorff claimed, “would without shadow of doubt call forth a de-
mand for incisive countermeasures on the part of the Community and
impose a strain on the climate of world trade that would be diamet-
rically opposite to our common objectives in the MTN.” Lambsdorff
continued: “If the MTN are to be successful, I feel it is absolutely neces-
sary that a fait accompli be avoided in the vital area of subsidies/coun-
tervailing duties. I fully recognise and very much appreciate all you
have done in talks with the Congress to ward off this eventuality. How-
ever, I do not believe that the suggestion of additional progress on sub-
sidies by mid-September is a realistic option because it amounts to one
partner making unilateral concessions with a view to the final
package.” While West Germany would do all it could “to ensure that
the agreed 15th December 1978 deadline for a successful conclusion of
the MTN is met,” Lambsdorff doubted that the EC would be “prepared
to make unconditional concessions in the final phase now in progress
unless there is some prior guarantee that a satisfactory solution can be
found in the matter of the application of countervailing duties after 4th
January 1979.” Lambsdorff encouraged Strauss to do what he could “to
avert a situation in which the United States would inevitably be held
responsible for endangering the GATT negotiations.” (National Ar-
dorff, Strauss asserted that the administration would continue its ef-
forts to secure the necessary legislation, despite the fact “that the nega-
tive position of some members of the Community at the Bonn Summit
has complicated our present task.” (Telegram 234044 to USEC Brussels,
September 15; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
On September 18, Haferkamp replied to Strauss’s letter of the pre-
vious month. Haferkamp asserted that countervailing duties on EC
goods “would inflict grave damage on our exporters, would lead to
strong pressures for retaliation and since not only Community exports
would be affected could thus unleash a trade war of considerable di-
mensions.” Warning that “the slim chance, as you now judge, of the
waiver being prolonged at this point in time creates a very serious situ-
ation,” Haferkamp stated that it would not be “realistic for us to pro-
pose to our member states that we conclude these negotiations in the
absence of an assurance that the waiver on countervailing duties will
be extended. Nor indeed do Finn Gundelach and I think it realistic to
put to our member states the need for the political decisions which all
of us will have to face in the final stage of the negotiation when it will
be clear that as a consequence of US legislation a trade war is in pros-
pect in only a few weeks time.” Haferkamp assured Strauss that the EC
would continue to “pursue vigorously discussions and negotiations in
Geneva with the aim of concluding these negotiations by 15 De-
cember,” but cautioned “that unless the uncertainty over the imposi-
tion of countervailing duties from 4 January can be resolved the
common assumption of shared responsibility on which we have based
the Tokyo Round would no longer exist and these negotiations could
Duties 1977) The next day, September 19, Denman notified the U.S.
Mission to the EC in Brussels that the EC Council “was unanimous in
its support” for the position set out by Haferkamp. (Telegram 17722
from USEC Brussels, September 19; National Archives, RG 59, Central
On September 19, the head of the U.S. Delegation to the Multilat-
eral Trade Negotiations, Alonzo McDonald, cabled Strauss from Ge-
neva: “To add a sense of urgency and solid credibility to December 15
deadline, we are taking the line here that our only hope to find a solu-
tion to the CVD waiver problem depends on having a completed MTN
package in hand before January 1979. In effect, we are thus attempting
to use the waiver deadline for the same purposes that the expiration of
our negotiating authority served in the Kennedy Round. It is our un-
derstanding that this was Congress’ original intent to avoid a last
minute scramble in which the subsidies issue would be simply post-
poned because it is too hard to resolve. We need some legal or manda-
tory date against which to work to force our other negotiating partners
to close out, particularly the LDC’s who would prefer to wait until the
opening of UNCTAD V next May, thinking that a political furor then
might improve their Tokyo Round results.” McDonald concluded:
“This is not a proposal but an assumed reality. Unless otherwise in-
structed, will pursue the line persistently that CVD waiver deadline

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
forces us to have a completed package in hand by year end.” (National
154.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs (Bergsten) to the Under Secretary of
the Treasury for Monetary Affairs (Solomon)1
Washington, August 7, 1978
SUBJECT
Discussion with Professor Chiaki Nishiyama on August 7, 1978
Professor Nishiyama opened our meeting by presenting a letter
from Prime Minister Fukuda to Chairman Miller concerning Nishi-
yama’s visit.2 He indicated that he was conveying the concerns of the
Prime Minister and referred to his meeting with Secretary Blumenthal
“on Thursday”.3
Nishiyama focused on the increasing Japanese concern over the
“speculative appreciation” of the yen, which in turn was hindering the
outlook for Japanese economic growth. At this point, the GOJ was ex-
Nishiyama stressed that the GOJ did not oppose appreciation of the
yen; indeed, they viewed it as inevitable as long as inflation rates re-
main lower in Japan than in the U.S. However, they believe that recent
background for an August 9 meeting with Chiaki Nishiyama, a professor of economics at
Rikkyo University. In his August 8 cover memorandum to Blumenthal, Solomon noted
that Nishiyama had “also spoken to Bill Miller along the same lines.” Advising that they
“remain noncommittal” for now, Solomon said that it was unclear whether Nishiyama
enjoyed “any official status” or if Matsukawa would espouse “the same line” during a
visit to Washington later that week. (Ibid.) Matsukawa visited Washington August 10–11,
meeting with Cooper, Solomon, and Blumenthal. (Telegram 197372 to Tokyo, August 4;
chives, RG
59, Central Foreign
Policy
File,
and
D780340–0212, respectively)
2 The letter was not found.
and Blumenthal referred to in footnote 1 above. No other record of a meeting between
Nishiyama and Blumenthal was found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
movements in the exchange market had overshot and that the current
equilibrium rate is about 200–210 yen to the dollar.
Nishiyama indicated that the GOJ “was screaming at us” and
“begging us” to do something to reduce the speculation in the ex-
change markets”.4 He made no specific request, but in response to my
question indicated it should be “something like you did for the
Germans”.5 There need be no public announcement of such U.S. steps;
the agreement could be a tacit one with periodic (e.g., semi-annual) re-
view. Nishiyama stressed the political distinction which is felt in Japan
concerning the differences between the U.S. policies toward the two
countries on this issue, but in response to my further question indicated
that they also believed that the U.S.-German agreement had stabilized
the DM market.
In return for USG help on this issue, Nishiyama said that Japan
would offer the following:
—A commitment to sell dollars to keep the yen from weakening
beyond 205:1.
—A reduction in the prime interest rate to 2 or 2½ percent, from
the present level of 3%.
—A supplementary budget in September of 4 trillion yen (about
consideration.
—Periodic, perhaps monthly, review of developments to see if the
agreed targets were being achieved.
Nishiyama indicated that these measures would be aimed at as-
suring Japanese growth of 7% in JFY 78, compared with the current out-
plied that the lower supplementary budget now under consideration
might well fail to achieve the 7 percent target for JFY 78.
In response to my question, Nishiyama foresaw a Japanese current
I indicated that these current account numbers were still very high,
and wondered whether anything could be done about them in the short
4 Japanese concerns about dollar depreciation were reinforced the following week.
sion of economics with Fukuda, who “closed meeting by asking me to report the concern
which he had expressed over the dollar’s decline and I of course said that I would do so. I
have no doubt that his concern is real and that he feels strongly on this matter.” (National
pearing in that day’s Nihon Keizai, a Japanese business newspaper, “that the FRB has
never even once activated the swap with Japan, while it has done so in the cases of Ger-
many and Switzerland.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
run. Nishiyama replied that we should “tell them what to do”. He
quickly added that there was active consideration of emergency import
measures to a total of about $3 billion. However, his failure to initiate
discussion of this issue suggested to me that it was not part of the cur-
rent GOJ “offer”.
I thanked Nishiyama for conveying these thoughts. He urged me
“not to stop there,” but I simply indicated that we would be talking to
him again later in the week.
C. Fred Bergsten6
6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
155.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs (Bergsten) to Secretary of the
Treasury Blumenthal1
Washington, August 14, 1978
SUBJECT
Foreign Exchange Market Conditions
Market behavior indicates a lack of confidence in the U.S. Govern-
ment’s ability to deal with the fundamental U.S. problems of inflation,
energy policy and trade. Monetary policy is regarded as no longer ef-
fective, fiscal policy moves as unlikely in the near future, and the
anti-inflationary program as a failure. The market sees the Administra-
tion as resigned to await future developments, which may, over the ho-
rizon, be helpful but which offer no present incentive to hold dollars.
Adjustment by Japan, in particular, is seen as a long-term process.
There is no fear, at present, that the U.S. will impose controls, either
domestically or over capital movements.
The market does not appear to be very sensitive to or cautious
about the record low dollar exchange rates. There is little caution
1 Source: National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
Confidential. Drafted by Fred Springborn and reviewed by Widman and Hessler. A
stamped notation reads: “Noted by W.M.B.” Bergsten wrote at the top of the page:
“Mike—This is rough but, I’m afraid, an accurate picture. New lows today re all Euro-
pean currencies. Fred.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
among traders in pursuing the practice of selling dollars, covering posi-
tions, and selling more dollars. Interest rate differentials are not impor-
tant factors. The market remains dominated by the professionals; that
is, while corporations and foreign governments have undoubtedly
been trimming dollar positions, there is a large potential for further
shifts out of dollars. The professionals are able to deal on this
presumption.
The market is aware that official intervention is now ineffective,
and that foreign monetary authorities are no longer even seeking to
curb rate movements by large intervention.2 The state has been reached
where, in the absence of some highly visible political action, interven-
tion expenditures are simply swallowed up. There are no credible
trading levels which seem to be dependable.
The main contribution of intervention by the United States is to
demonstrate to foreign authorities, as well as to the market, that the
U.S. continues to adhere to its policy, that we are concerned about dis-
orderly market conditions and that we continue to operate to counter
such conditions. The question is how much we should spend in pur-
suing this objective.
2 Attached but not printed is an “Intervention table showing daily intervention in
dollars by the U.S., Germany, Switzerland and Japan since July 1.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
156.
Summary of a National Security Council Meeting1
Washington, August 15, 1978
IN ATTENDANCE
The President, the Vice President, Chairman Miller, Secretary Vance, Secretary
Blumenthal, Secretary Schlesinger, Messrs. Brzezinski, Eizenstat, Jordan,
Moore, Owen, Powell and Schultze
1. The Secretary of the Treasury and Chairman Miller discussed
the dangers posed by the decline in the dollar abroad.2
2. The Secretary suggested a three-stage approach:
(a) a calming statement to be issued now by Chairman Miller and
himself;
(b) a program of financial measures to strengthen the dollar in the
short term, which could be negotiated in the next few days:
(c) a program of fundamental measures to strengthen the dollar
over the longer term, some of which might be announced by the Presi-
dent Friday.3
3. These suggestions were discussed, as were possibilities for Con-
gressional consultation.
4. The President:
(a) authorized Secretary Blumenthal and Chairman Miller to issue
a calming statement now.4
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 56,
page, and Brzezinski signed at the bottom of the page. The meeting, which took place in
Materials, President’s Daily Diary)
2 An August 16 memorandum from Brzezinski to Carter forwarded a report by
Robert Hunter, who had recently visited Europe: “In all my [Hunter’s] conversations in
Europe, it seems clear that the leadership of the Administration is now being judged—
not so much in terms of issues like the neutron bomb or U.S.-Soviet relations—but much
more on the management of the U.S. economy, the enactment of energy legislation, and
the role of the dollar. Psychologically, the fall of the dollar is having a profound impact in
Western Europe (with continual front-page news) and is having an impact on percep-
tions of our reliability in general.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 92, Finance/International:
3 August 18.
4 On August 16, the White House issued a statement expressing Carter’s “deep con-
cern over developments in foreign exchange markets in recent days.” For the text of the
statement, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book II,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
(b) understood that Secretary Blumenthal and Chairman Miller
would be negotiating about financial steps;5
(c) directed Secretary Blumenthal to submit to him by mid-
Thursday a paper outlining options regarding fundamental measures;6
(d) directed that appropriate steps be taken regarding Congres-
sional consultation.
5. It was agreed that all this should be handled in a way reflecting
the highly sensitive nature of the issues involved.
5 In an August 17 note to Brzezinski on the actions taken in response to the August
15 NSC meeting on the dollar, Owen reported that “Treasury’s discussions about a swap
with the Japanese (which is the most important and difficult of the financial measures)
are not sufficiently advanced to permit a useful progress report.” (Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box
6 In his August 17 note to Brzezinski on the actions taken in response to this
meeting, Owen reported that he expected agency recommendations on energy policy by
the end of the day. On inflation, he noted that Schultze and Blumenthal were “still ar-
guing about whether anything useful can be recommended to the President about infla-
tion now. They will meet to settle the argument in early afternoon. My guess is that
Charlie will win, and he will then give us the memo of which I spoke to you yesterday:
saying that there won’t be any recommendations on inflation to the President for a few
weeks.” (Ibid.) No record of a meeting between Schultze and Blumenthal was found.
157.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Japan1
211040. Eyes only for the Ambassador. Subject: US–Japan Swap.
1. Action: You should call on Prime Minister and indicate to him
that Under Secretary Solomon, in recent phone talks with Matsukawa,
was reflecting views of administration at the highest level: We are pre-
pared to activate a U.S.–Japan swap provided the technical conditions
can be worked out, if the GOJ will take effective measures to reduce
Japan’s surplus—i.e., propose a 4 trillion yen stimulus to Diet and re-
duce discount rate to 2.5 percent, while also following constructive pol-
icies in MTN. Please stress to Fukuda that Solomon’s statement to Mat-
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Solomon, cleared by Special Assistant to Secretary
Vance Arthur Houghton, Owen, and Sydney Goldsmith (S/S), and approved by Cooper.
Sent for information Immediate to the White House.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
sukawa that a swap without these Japanese actions would not have
sufficient effect on the exchange markets to be worth activating is firm
U.S. position, that we are convinced 4 trillion yen stimulus is essential if
Japan’s Summit commitment to 7 percent growth is to be fulfilled, and
that we believe change in discount rate is needed to influence capital
flows. These views should be communicated to Fukuda as a matter of
great urgency and highest importance.2
2. Background: Following information is for Ambassador’s back-
ground: Building on message from Prime Minister Fukuda which was
conveyed to U.S. officials through Nishiyama last week,3 Solomon tele-
phoned Nishiyama Tuesday night4 to indicate a readiness to enter into
discussions with the Japanese on the conditions under which the U.S.
would be prepared to announce readiness to intervene in yen for U.S.
account.
3. Nishiyama had suggested possible readiness of the Japanese to
propose supplemental budgetary measures in the range of 4 trillion yen
and to lower the discount rate by 1 percent. Solomon indicated that
these actions would help create climate of confidence that Japanese
surplus was being appropriately dealt with, and would provide basis
for U.S. to cooperate with GOJ in intervening to deal with market dis-
order. Solomon did not specify trade measures which might also be
taken by GOJ but did say that such measures would add to credibility
of program.
4. Solomon’s message was communicated to Fukuda who then
designated Matsukawa to carry on negotiations on behalf of the Japa-
nese. Timing has become of extreme importance because of develop-
ments in the foreign exchange markets and U.S. desire to announce ac-
tions to deal with this situation at earliest feasible date. In telephone
conversations last night and this morning, however, Matsukawa made
clear that Fukuda could make no promises concerning the size of the
supplemental budget prior to the Cabinet meeting scheduled for Sep-
tember 2. He also said that the lowering of the discount rate would be
extremely difficult since it would bring the rate below the interest rates
offered by the postal savings system. Matsukawa said that the postal
savings rate was under control of a group dominated by consumer in-
terests who would not wish to reduce the rate paid on such savings.
“make clear that USG conditions for agreeing to a swap should not be interpreted by the
Prime Minister or other Japanese officials as diminishing the importance we attach to all
of the other Strauss-Ushiba undertakings (i.e. other than growth and MTN).” (National
3 See Document 154.
4 August 15.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
5. Solomon told Matsukawa that the U.S. could not (repeat not)
proceed with actions signaling a U.S. readiness to intervene in yen in
the absence of Japanese commitments on the satisfactory supplemental
budget and discount rate cut. We therefore will delay any U.S. action or
announcement indicating possibility of intervention activities pending
assessment of GOJ fiscal measures after September 2.
6. As you will appreciate, the fact that these discussions are taking
place as well as the substance of the discussions is being held extremely
closely.5
Vance
5 Mansfield reported on his implementation of these instructions in telegram 15073
from Tokyo, August 21. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
158.
Memorandum From Acting Secretary of the Treasury
Carswell to President Carter1
Washington, August 30, 1978
SUBJECT
Impact of the July Trade Deficit
The large and unexpected increase in our trade deficit (from $1.6 bil-
severe impact on the dollar’s position in the foreign exchange market and
wiped out virtually all the dollar gains achieved through the monetary ac-
tions announced by the Federal Reserve and the Treasury following
your statement on August 16.3 While there may have been special
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
gust 30, 1979. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page. The memorandum was sent to
Carter under cover of an August 30 memorandum from Owen, which both Carter and
Brzezinski initialed. (Ibid.)
2 August 29.
ministration undertook three initiatives to strengthen the dollar. On August 18, the Fed-
eral Reserve Board increased the discount rate by .5 percent. Four days later, the Treasury
Department announced that it would increase its monthly gold sales from 300,000 ounces
to 750,000 ounces. Finally, on August 28, the Federal Reserve Board eliminated domestic
reserve requirements in an effort to encourage U.S. borrowing in the Eurodollar market.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
factors that contributed to the disappointing July trade figures, prelimi-
nary analysis has not identified them.
The markets remain cautious because of the uncertainty created by
the statement that we expect to announce a series of continuing ac-
tions.4 But lacking positive steps in the relatively near term, we cannot be cer-
tain that the decline will not continue or accelerate. Foreign governments
and private traders are stating publicly and privately to us that only
forceful measures to deal with inflation and reduce the trade deficit
will save the dollar from further declines, with serious consequences
for the world economy and our leadership in world affairs.
It also would appear that the Japanese have concluded that U.S.
agreement to intervene in yen is not worth the price that we have re-
quested—a 4 trillion yen supplemental budget and a 1% decrease in the
discount rate as well as further progress on the trade issues. They have
advised us that the overall magnitude of the supplemental budget
would be 2½ trillion yen.5 It seems quite doubtful, therefore, that it
would be advisable to proceed with any IMF drawing as a means of ac-
quiring yen for intervention. While there have been suggestions that
we announce a sizable sale of special drawing rights to the Germans for
deutschemarks to hold for purposes of intervention, there is doubt that
this would have a very significant or lasting impact on the market. In
any event, the German monetary authorities are reluctant to have us continue
to intervene in marks until we have taken more fundamental U.S. do-
mestic measures. They are providing almost no dollar support them-
(Hobart Rowen, “The Fed Raises Borrowing Rate To Bolster Dollar,” The Washington Post,
4 On August 17, after a press conference in which Carter had offered few clues as to
what the administration would do to shore up the dollar’s value, Blumenthal issued a
statement suggesting that “a series of continuing actions” would be undertaken “as deci-
sions are reached over the next few weeks.” (Hobart Rowen, “Statement Follows Carter’s
the dollar at the press conference, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States:
Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book II, p. 1441.
mented: “Although this budget falls short of the four trillion yen that we have felt was
needed to justify activation of a US-Japanese swap, it is a very substantial stimulus (about
package would be a very different situation.” Owen promised that when more was
known about the Japanese package he would “recommend whether a statement should
be issued indicating your pleasure at Fukuda’s fulfillment of his Summit commitment,
similar to the statement we issued after the recent German cabinet decision on growth.”
For Owen’s subsequent recommendation to Carter, see Document 160. The White House
statement on the West German decision was issued on August 3; see Public Papers of the
Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book II, p. 1360.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
selves. Thus, little more can be done with strictly monetary measures other
than a tightening of the domestic money supply.
The EPG is meeting tomorrow morning on specific steps that you
might take to reduce the rate of inflation. Work is also going forward to
provide you with options to reduce imports of oil into the United States
either through a fee or quota system. We would hope to have this work
completed for you by the conclusion of your Camp David meeting so that you
will be in a position to take prompt action.6
Robert Carswell7
6 Carter met with Egyptian President Anwar Sadat and Israeli Prime Minister Me-
nachem Begin September 5–17 at Camp David, where they negotiated framework agree-
ments for peace in the Middle East.
7 Carswell signed “Bob Carswell” above this typed signature.
159.
Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of
State1
29812. USEEC. USMTN. Pass STR electronically for Ambassadors
Strauss and Wolff. Subj: France and MTN—Storm Signals.
1. Summary: With the end of the summer lull, we have begun re-
ceiving the expected signals of trouble brewing on the MTN. This is not
surprising following French discomfiture over the Geneva memo-
randum of understanding2 and the Bonn Summit communique´.3
During the past few days, French Ambassador de Laboulaye has talked
with me and MinEcon has also reviewed the situation with Paye,4
Barre’s diplomatic advisor. (I would appreciate it if our friends could
be protected, and details of this message not get back to French
Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Sent for information to Bonn, Brussels, and the Mission
in Geneva.
2 For information on the Geneva memorandum of understanding, see Document
4 Jean-Claude Paye served as Barre’s counselor for international questions from
1976 until 1979. No record of meetings between Hartman and de Laboulaye or the Em-
bassy’s Minister for Economic Affairs and Paye has been found.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
sources.) French policy on MTN seems to be rather tightly layed down
by Giscard himself. I believe our best approach for the early fall is to
keep in touch informally with the French; to proceed with business as
usual in Geneva; and to take them on frontally only after we have
created a situation in which Community pressures (hopefully with the
FRG in the lead) can be brought to bear on them. The next Franco-
German summit is September 14–15 and we hope that Schmidt will re-
iterate his support for a successful MTN. End summary.
2. Franc¸ois de Laboulaye has made the rounds prior to his return to
Washington, D.C. He told me he had discussed the MTN at the Elyse´e
and had had a long talk with Barre as well. He found both men person-
ally very tough on this subject. His conclusion is that, as far as France is
concerned, there is little chance of meeting the mid-December target for
conclusion of the negotiations.5 The French are acutely sensitive to any
suggestion that the Geneva memorandum of understanding represents
even an implicit agreement or series of potential commitments that
point to probable outcomes on the various subjects.
3. Laboulaye’s judgment is that the French will only let the Com-
munity conclude the negotiations once the French have obtained the
various specific concessions they want. All of this will require time and
much detailed haggling as they see it. They are aware of the problem
with Congress about expiration of our waiver authority on counter-
vailing duties. But this does not give them any real sense of urgency.
4. In a frank talk with us, Paye said that while Barre favors a vig-
orous defense of French interests in the MTN, the most important
factor remains Giscard’s “extreme coolness” on the whole subject. Paye
hinted that he himself has wondered about just why Giscard is so nega-
tive. He believes that Giscard reasons along the following lines: There
will be little positive benefit for French trade interests from the MTN—
especially in a world characterized by rapid and substantial fluctua-
tions in exchange rate relationships. On the other hand Giscard is likely
to have a lot of domestic difficulty, including but not limited to the agri-
cultural lobby, if he agrees to the kinds of things we are asking. (Com-
ment: From a recent talk I had with Chirac6 it is clear that the Gaullists
are watching the government like a hawk on everything that looks like
giving in to US pressure.) Paye thinks that an additional concern for
Giscard is doubt about whether the administration can deliver the
Congress on a final package.
5. We gave Paye the counter-arguments which he already knew
and appeared at least partly to accept. We stressed the urgency of get-
Document 153.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
ting on with the negotiations. In response to a direct question he denied
that France will adopt a spoiling posture aimed at killing the MTN by
pressing the Commission negotiators to drag the thing out. Like Labou-
laye, however, he said that the French intend to fight over every point
of interest to them and will not feel pressured by the December
deadline.
6. Comment: While none of the foregoing is especially new or sur-
prising, it does provide further confirmation that Giscard is personally
controlling the French MTN negotiators. At the appropriate time, Barre
and Deniau might be helpful in working matters out. But I believe that
judgments about this can be made only as specific situations develop
during the fall. Meanwhile I suggest the best course will be to proceed
with business as usual in Geneva; to keep in touch with the French and
maintain good personal relations on MTN matters; and to try to create
a situation in which pressure from within the Community—especially
Schmidt—can be brought into play before we have to lock horns with
them directly. Schmidt and Giscard are to meet bilaterally on Sep-
tember 14–15 and we hope that the FRG can again make clear its com-
mitment to a successful MTN. End Comment.
Hartman
160.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, September 12, 1978
SUBJECT
Letter to Fukuda
Attached at Tab A is a draft reply to the letter from Prime Minister
Fukuda (Tab B)2 that you saw. The reply has been cleared with State,
Treasury, CEA, and Jim Fallows’ office.3
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 11, Japan: Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda,
2 Tab B, attached but not printed, is a September 2 letter from Togo to Carter trans-
mitting a September 2 message from Fukuda on Japan’s economic stimulus package.
Carter initialed at the top of Togo’s letter.
3 In a September 22 note to Carter, Brzezinski noted that he had held back the draft
letter “until the conclusion of the Camp David Summit and in the belief that it would be

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
The judgment of our experts is that Fukuda’s 2.5 trillion yen
stimulus is a good start but is not sufficient to achieve the 1½% growth
increase that Fukuda pledged at the Summit for the Japanese fiscal year
week,4 that Fukuda will decide in November to send a second supple-
mental budget to the Diet in January 1979, if it appears that the 7%
growth target is not going to be achieved. This would be more likely to
affect growth in the Japanese fiscal year 1979 and 1978.
The Japanese are also taking some trade actions to reduce their ex-
ternal surplus; these, too, appear too limited.
We need to persuade the Japanese to take, before you go to Japan
next year for the Summit, the additional growth and trade measures re-
quired to achieve a substantial reduction in their external surplus. Oth-
erwise your visit will take place under the shadow of growing
U.S.-Japanese recrimination. The attached reply was drafted with this
in mind.
Tab A
Letter From President Carter to Japanese Prime Minister
Fukuda5
Washington, September 25, 1978
Dear Mr. Prime Minister:
Thank you for your letter of September 2.
The actions that you have taken reflect the spirit of international
cooperation which was evident at Bonn. Your decision to expand do-
mestic demand through additional public investments is a welcome
step toward achieving the 1½% increase in Japan’s growth rate that you
pledged at Bonn. I know that you are also taking additional measures
to foster a more rapid reduction in Japan’s current account surplus. I
am confident that if it appears in the next few months that your growth
strengthened if you could refer to passage of the natural gas legislation. I think it best not
to delay any longer.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 11, Japan: Prime Minister
4 Ushiba and Minister of Agriculture Ichiro Nakagawa visited Washington for talks
transmitted the text of the STR press release issued at the end of the visit. (National Ar-
the Mission in Geneva, September 12, provided a summary of the talks. (National Ar-
5 No classification marking.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
and current account targets are not being fulfilled, your government
will take the additional measures needed to this end.
The fulfillment of our mutual Summit commitments will be vital to
the success of the May 1979 Tokyo Summit. I have this very much in
mind as I review the steps needed to fulfill the commitments that I
made at Bonn.
My primary goal is to reduce the rate of U.S. inflation, both for do-
mestic reasons and because this is a major cause of the foreign ex-
change disorders that concern us both. We are beginning to see some
progress, as reflected in the decline of U.S. wholesale prices last month.
But further measures are needed. I have a three-point program in mind:
First: I intend to carry out the tight fiscal policy that I described at
Bonn. I am now looking for opportunities to reduce expenditures, in
order to curtail the FY 1977 budget deficit. In January I will present to
the new Congress an FY 1980 budget which should bring the deficit
down still lower, to somewhere in the thirties of billions of dollars. This
is causing a good deal of pain in the government departments con-
cerned, but I will hold to this policy. In so doing, I expect to work
closely with the Congress, which is sensitive to growing pressure by
the voters for a reduction in government spending.
Second: We are considering how to strengthen U.S. Government ef-
forts to restrain wage and price increases. Intensive staff work is now
going on about possible new steps. I hope that we will soon be able to
announce them.
Third: We will seek to ensure that U.S. Governmental actions do
not contribute to inflation.
On the energy front, I have been working hard to persuade the
Congress to pass key parts of the energy bill, especially the provision
for phased de-regulation of natural gas, which would account for the
largest part of the energy savings I pledged at Bonn. I cut short my va-
cation to resume this effort.6 By the time the Congress adjourns in Oc-
tober, we will see how successful the effort has been and what the im-
plications are for future policy. I take the energy pledges that I made at
the Summit seriously, and mean to fulfill them.
Progress on both the inflation and energy fronts should strengthen
the dollar and thus help to meet the concerns that you have expressed
to Ambassador Mansfield.7
brary, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)
7 Possibly a reference to an August 16 discussion in which Fukuda told Mansfield
that “he was particularly worried about the declining value of the dollar. As a key cur-
rency, if the dollar’s credibility were to be lost, it would become virtually impossible for
other economies to maintain orderly and stable management.” Fukuda asked Mansfield

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
I am confident that the post-Summit actions which have been
taken, and which will be taken, by the Japanese, German, and Amer-
ican governments will lead to improved world economic prospects.
This will be a difficult and prolonged process, but we have made a
good start. I welcome your letter as evidence of our continuing cooper-
ation in this process.
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
161.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, September 15, 1978
SUBJECT
IMF–IBRD Meeting
I agree with Mike Blumenthal’s recommendation that you speak
If you spoke about your efforts to fight inflation, reduce oil im-
ports, and expand exports, I believe you could make the same favorable
impression on this audience that you did on your Summit colleagues.
Since this audience is made up largely of bankers, who have a lot more
to do with the buying and selling of dollars than your Summit col-
leagues, this should help to strengthen the dollar.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 92, Finance/Dollar: 1978. Confidential. Sent for
information.
2 In a September 15 memorandum to Carter, Blumenthal urged him to reconsider
his decision that Blumenthal deliver a statement on his behalf to the opening session of
the annual joint IMF and World Bank meeting, which was scheduled to be held in Wash-
ington September 25–28. Blumenthal asserted: “Recent developments in the exchange
markets have placed the state of the dollar and the conduct of U.S. economic policy
squarely at the center of world attention. Under these circumstances, your failure to ap-
pear at the meeting may be taken as an indication that you do not place the dollar
problem high on your list of concerns. Your mere absence could, therefore, adversely af-
fect the dollar in the market.” (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Conversely, if you do not appear, this might be taken as a sign of
benign neglect, which would adversely affect the attitudes of the audi-
ence and might affect the strength of the dollar.3
Denis Healey has indicated to our London Embassy that he is trou-
bled by the possibility you will not appear. When Mike Blumenthal met
today with his small advisory committee of top bankers and ex-
Secretaries of the Treasury, they expressed a strong hope you would
appear.4
I have written a three-page speech which (if I do say so myself)
should get a good reaction—from the audience and the US media. If
you decide to appear, I will submit it to you, after it has been reviewed
by Treasury and Jim Fallows.5
3 In his September 15 memorandum to Carter, Blumenthal suggested that he “indi-
cate at a minimum that you will announce in the near future a significant strengthening
of our anti-inflation program, and reaffirm your determination to achieve an effective en-
ergy program.” He also recommended that Carter “reaffirm your August statement of se-
rious personal concern about the dollar situation,” as well as “demonstrate to this audi-
ence that you are determined to deal with our fundamental economic problems.” (Ibid.)
4 No record of this meeting was found.
5 Hutcheson reported in a September 21 memorandum to Owen that “the Presi-
dent’s schedule does not permit his speaking at the annual IMF–IBRD meeting this year.”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File,
Subject Chron File, Box 92, Finance/Dollar: 1978) In the end, Carter did address the
opening session of the IMF-World Bank meeting; for the text of his September 25 re-
marks, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book II, pp.
162.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, September 21, 1978
SUBJECT
Probable Decisions at Forthcoming Meetings of IMF and IBRD
As you know, the IMF membership has been engaged for the last
year or so in negotiations on an increase in quotas and an allocation of
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
memorandum from Owen, who noted that State, CEA, and OMB concurred in Blumen-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
special drawing rights (SDR). We have indicated our agreement in
principle to a quota increase and have taken a sympathetic view
toward a modest SDR allocation, but have refrained from indicating
figures we could accept, largely out of concern that a premature agree-
ment on these questions might jeopardize Congressional action on the
Witteveen Facility.2
Apart from the U.S., the Fund membership is now ready to settle
these issues during the upcoming meetings.3 There is a need to reach
agreement and assure that the IMF will be capable of playing its central
role in managing the international monetary system. We are under con-
siderable international pressure to conclude the agreement—and I
think it would be highly desirable, and important for the dollar, for us
to take a positive, constructive attitude. On the basis of intensive con-
sultations with the Congress, I am persuaded that there is broad under-
standing and support for U.S. agreement to go ahead, and that an an-
nouncement of an agreement at the meetings will not cause serious
problems for the Witteveen Facility.
In the absence of strong advice to the contrary from key Con-
gressmen that remain to be contacted in the next couple of days, I in-
tend to announce our agreement (probably on Sunday4 in the Interim
Committee meeting where this is being negotiated) to an increase in
quotas and an SDR allocation.
The quota increase will be in the range of 40–50 percent, with
agreement most likely on 50 percent, implying an increase in the U.S.
quota of about $5 billion. The authorization would probably be sub-
mitted to Congress sometime next year. However, assuming appropri-
ations will be required as a result of the compromises we have had to
accept on the Witteveen Facility, an appropriation would not be
billion per year for a three-year period.5 No Congressional action on the
SDR allocation is required.
thal’s recommendations; both Carter and Brzezinski initialed Owen’s memorandum.
2 Schultze argued strongly in favor of supporting IMF quota increases and new
SDR allocations in a September 14 memorandum to Blumenthal. (Carter Library, Staff Of-
fice Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 20, De-
partment of Treasury: Blumenthal)
3 Blumenthal is referring to the joint IMF–World Bank meeting held in Washington
September 25–28.
4 September 24.
that the new 3-year annual SDR allocation would be “most likely 4 billion.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Our agreement to these actions should be received quite positively
by the press, the exchange markets, and our colleagues abroad.6
W. Michael Blumenthal7
mented: “The amounts that Mike has in mind are reasonable in terms of world liquidity
requirements: 50% quota increases were recommended by the IMF management; a 4 bil-
lion SDR allocation is a good compromise between the management’s proposal for 4–6
billion and the German desire to settle on lower amounts.” On September 24, the Interim
lion SDR. (Hobart Rowen, “Finance Chiefs Agree to Boost IMF, World Bank Resources,”
7 Blumenthal signed “Mike” above this typed signature.
163.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1
Washington, September 22, 1978
SUBJECT
A Political Assessment Of The Tokyo Round
This memorandum will enlarge upon the brief reference to the
Tokyo Round and its negative aspects in last week’s summary.2 For
sometime now, I have wanted to give you a personal report on the ne-
gotiations. I have been reluctant to add to your concerns, which I know
are many, but I sense that the time has arrived to give you my judgment
of where we are and where we are heading.
Background.
Twenty months ago, as you know, the Tokyo Round was in danger
of foundering. The political will of key participants—an indispensable
ingredient for such an ambitious undertaking—had been sapped by the
oil crisis and the ensuing global recession. Repeated efforts by the pre-
vious Administration to revitalize the negotiations had failed. Many
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
better we bargain now, (obviously) the better in Congress next year. J.”
2 The summary was not found.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
governments, faced with growing protectionist pressures, wished the
negotiations would go away.
At the Downing Street Summit, under your leadership, we began
the task of moving the negotiations from a state of inertia to one of ac-
tion. In the past sixteen months, I can report, we have continued to
make slow but steady progress. The status of each phase of the negotia-
tions was described in detail in the “Framework of Understanding”3
which was reported to the recent Bonn Summit.
Our work has been painstaking, because of the recalcitrance of
many of our trading partners. Concessions have been difficult for ev-
eryone concerned. Trade liberalization is never easy, but never so diffi-
cult than in the face of domestic economic problems and the resulting
mounting protectionist pressures. Many serious issues remain, in-
cluding several which could jeopardize the entire negotiations. I am far
from certain, but nevertheless, I am hopeful that with luck it will be
possible to conclude the international negotiations by December 15—or
60 days thereafter—and then turn our full attention to the task of do-
mestic implementation.
Domestic Implementation.
Our present plan is to submit the domestic implementing legisla-
tion to Congress by mid-March of next year, for consideration and deci-
sion under the up-or-down-vote-no-amendments procedures set forth
in the Trade Act. If such a schedule is adhered to, the legislation will
likely be voted on by the House and Senate next summer.
The package of implementing legislation which we would send to
the Hill next spring would, under the most favorable circumstances, be
as complex and controversial piece of legislation as any to be consid-
ered by the next Congress. Because of the nature of the negotiations, it
is not yet possible to describe with precision what the final package will
contain. There still exists the risk that in some critical areas, most no-
tably agriculture and subsidies, we will fall unacceptably short of what
we must have to sell the deal at home. The reason would be simply that
our trading partners, despite their sincere efforts, have been unable to
deliver the necessary concessions to satisfy our agricultural constit-
uents even though it will exceed what has been done before or what
they expected this time.
If there is to be a deal, there is no question that it will contain both
pluses and minuses. It will address subjects which are both politically
sensitive and disparate, ranging from tariffs to government procure-
ment policies, from customs valuation to the difficult problem of sub-
sidies and countervailing duties.
3 See Document 144.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Throughout these negotiations I have consulted closely with the
Congress, and sought to respond to the needs of individual Members.
Wherever possible, we have attempted to include in the package fea-
tures to add political buoyance to offset those negative aspects we
could not avoid. At the present time, because we do not yet know fully
what concessions our trading partners will be able to deliver, it is not
possible to say whether the package is a net plus or net minus in terms
of domestic political acceptability. It is probably one of those issues that
will hurt in the short run and be praised in later years.
As our consultations with Congress have progressed, I have noted
a steady chilling in the atmosphere on Capitol Hill, exemplified most
recently in the soundings we have taken regarding obtaining an exten-
sion of the waiver on countervailing duties. Congressional concerns
over import penetration in sensitive sectors, such as steel and textiles,
combined with large trade deficits, have created an atmosphere which
is the worst imaginable in which to seek approval of the results of the
Tokyo Round. I cannot overemphasize this negative attitude that pre-
vails, even among some of the most ardent supporters of a liberal trade
policy.
It is my present view that the final package will be adopted, but
only after a bruising and costly fight. It will pit the relatively small and
disorganized, although highly respected, constituency which supports
liberal trade against a formidable coalition of labor and management
from numerous industries, most notably textiles, steel, dairies, and
chemicals. It will require an effort on the part of the Administration not
a great deal less than was mounted in the case of the Panama Canal
Treaties4 and the natural gas compromise,5 and the chance of success is
little, if any better. Needless to say a failure would be a major setback
for the Administration and for the credibility of the United States in its
international economic relations. It could also trigger a world-wide
protectionist retrenchment that would endanger the western world’s
economic prosperity as well as political stability. Obviously, we must
go forward. While the agreements themselves certainly will not dra-
4 Reference is to the Carter administration’s effort to secure ratification of the
Panama Canal Treaties concerning Panamanian control and operation of the Panama
Canal. The United States and Panama signed the two treaties in September 1977, but the
Senate did not vote to ratify them until March and April 1978.
5 Reference is to the agreement on the pricing of natural gas reached in April 1978
by members of Congress with help from Carter administration officials. (Steven Rattner,
“Conferees on Energy Agree on Gas Pricing, Ending Long Impasse,” The New York Times,
bill to send it back to a House–Senate conference committee for changes. (Richard L.
Lyons, “Senators Reject Attempt To Scuttle Gas Compromise,” The Washington Post, Sep-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
matically change the patterns of world trade they will help move in the
right direction.
I assure you we are going forward aggressively and will continue
to press for the best result possible but you should be aware of the
probable domestic political costs that Congressional consideration will
entail.
All of this, of course, must be evaluated by you in the broader con-
text of Administration policy, and from a longer, historical perspective.
In the coming weeks and months as we proceed we must evaluate, and
re-evaluate, the results of the Tokyo Round and reach our decision as to
how best to proceed. It was to alert you to the problems I foresee and to
encourage such an evaluation by the appropriate advisors that I have
written this memorandum. Accordingly, I am sharing copies of this
memorandum with Blumenthal, Brzezinski, Owen, Cooper and
Eizenstat.
164.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, September 27, 1978
MEMORANDUM FOR
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Secretary of Defense
The Attorney General
The Secretary of Commerce
The Secretary of Labor
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
Chairman, Council of Economic Advisers
Special Representative for Trade Negotiations
Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs and Policy
SUBJECT
Study on Export Disincentives
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 91, Export Controls: (National Export Policy):
memorandum from Owen, who noted that Schultze, Blumenthal, Solomon, Cooper, and
Weil all supported studying U.S. export constraints. Owen also noted that Blumenthal,
Solomon, and Cooper believed “that review of these constraints was probably the single
most important action that could be taken to promote US exports.” (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
The President has approved the recommendations set forth in Sec-
retary Kreps’ memo on “National Export Policy” that the economic
consequences of governmental constraints on U.S. exports should be
taken fully into account in actions by relevant agencies.2
A thorough study of existing constraints on exports would help in
carrying out this decision. The PRC will now conduct such a study. To
avoid overlap with ongoing interagency consideration of strategic ex-
port controls and other East-West trade matters, the group will focus
on measures that affect our ability to compete for markets in the
non-Communist world.
Henry Owen will chair an interagency policy group consisting of
Assistant Secretary level representatives from your agencies. The task
of the group will be to study potential constraints on exports, evaluate
their overall effect on U.S. policies and export sales, and recommend
any needed changes in existing policies and legislation. The group will
prepare a report for consideration by the Policy Review Committee that
will include:
—a detailed description of the export constraint and its policy
rationale;
—an assessment of whether the measure in question achieves its
primary objective;
—an evaluation of the trade and employment impact;
—a review of the foreign policy consequences;
—an assessment of the likely effect on exports and other policy ob-
jectives of retaining, terminating, or moderating the constraint.
The report should be ready for PRC review by December 1, 1978.
Please let the NSC Staff Secretary know the name of your repre-
sentative on the interagency group as soon as possible.
Zbigniew Brzezinski3
tember 26, Carter announced his administration’s export promotion program, which in-
cluded measures both to assist exporters and to reduce domestic and foreign export im-
pediments. For Carter’s remarks announcing the program, as well as a more detailed
statement about it, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978,
Book II, pp. 1630–1635.
3 Aaron signed the memorandum for Brzezinski above this typed signature.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
165.
Memorandum of Conversation1
PARTICIPANTS
Ambassador Olivier Long, Director General, GATT
Dr. Gardner Patterson, Deputy Director General, GATT
Under Secretary Richard Cooper, E
Mr. Ernest Johnston, E
David R. Moran, EB/OT/GCP—Notetaker
SUBJECT
MTN
The following is a non-verbatim summary of the discussion. Fol-
lowing pleasantries, Mr. Patterson noted that the issue of the CVD
waiver extension2 may be just what is needed in terms of establishing a
credible date for the conclusion of the MTN but that the EC was most
upset at developments.
Cooper: Of course, there is no way of getting an extension of the
waiver without agreement on the codes. I would be interested in your
interpretation of why the EC considers this such an intense issue. It cer-
tainly is not a new problem and they are not being taken by surprise.
That is why we pushed for agreement by July 15th, to give the Congress
time to consider the matter.
Long: As I see it, there are three factors. First, the EC has always
considered it a purely US issue. Second, the US did not make clear to
the EC the link between the July 15 deadline and this issue. Third, the
community has taken the position that it will not negotiate under
threat.
Cooper: At least on the second point the EC was well informed. I
told Haverkamp myself and I know Strauss has made it clear.
Long: Perhaps, but it didn’t register. Never once did I hear anyone
from the EC make the connection.
Cooper: Well, you have talked to Ambassador Strauss so you
know our plans about going to the Congress. I admit they are risky.
Long: If you want to reach agreement by December, you need
movement from the UK and France. I would be interested to know if
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot
marking. Drafted by David Moran on September 28 and cleared by Ernest Johnston,
Cooper’s Executive Assistant. The meeting took place in Cooper’s office.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
you see any way something can be done. It is obvious in France that the
Prime Minister is interested, but Deniau is not being helpful. He has
political ambitions. The way to become popular is to take protectionist
positions. France wants selective safeguards without fail. We must
have more flexibility in the French position and the only way to get that
is to go directly to Barre. You can’t rely on the Germans. They are inter-
ested in preserving EC unity on these issues and may hide behind the
fact that they are in the chair to avoid taking a position. Their silence
makes it difficult for the Commission, which is the least protectionist of
all, in the EC’s international deliberations.
Cooper: It is your impression that the UK has maintained its sticky
position since July?
Patterson: Yes. There has been no movement.
Long: The British are very interested in the subsidy question. With
their nationalized industries, they are very suspicious of anything
dealing with industrial subsidies. They also feel they must have selec-
tive safeguards.
Patterson: With loose selectivity and sloppy dispute settlement,
they would have a free hand.
Long: The position of the EC is just that—loose selectivity and
weak dispute settlement management means the big powers have a
free hand.
Cooper: What position do the Nordics take?
Long: On selectivity, they are afraid their markets will be flooded
so they side with the EC. On dispute management, they are small coun-
tries so they do not.
Patterson: Other small countries may go along with the EC on se-
lectivity, such as New Zealand. They may see others, Singapore, Brazil,
etc. as the trouble makers and believe they won’t be affected.
Long: Safeguards and dispute settlement are important. If we pro-
vide for a highly permissive atmosphere, we will have hurt trade for
the next 20 years, even with a good package otherwise.
Cooper: I agree entirely. We have already said that we may be able
to accept tightly circumscribed selectivity. That has been and remains
our position. To yield now could undermine the whole trading system.
State and some other agencies would oppose any compromise on this.
Ambassador Strauss knows this position.
Patterson: Lining up on selectivity, the Nordics are out front of the
EC, the LDCs are dead against it. New Zealand may be with the EC, but
not Australia.
Cooper: What about dispute settlement. I was not aware the EC
would attempt to undermine a tight procedure.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
Patterson: Perhaps some of the background. The EC advanced a
draft proposal. The US negotiators didn’t know what they were doing
and gave the EC reason to believe the US would accept the EC pro-
posal. In the Secretariat, we saw the danger in the EC position and put
forward an alternate draft of our own. We talked to the US negotiators
and got them to support the Secretariat draft. The EC, of course, then
thought they had been cheated.
Long: Even worse. The EC felt they had been cheated and that the
US had used the Secretariat to do it, which was not true. It was our own
draft based on our dissatisfaction with the EC position, but the EC is
sure the Secretariat was a US tool.
Patterson: Time is getting short. The EC still has not agreed to ne-
gotiate on the basis of the Secretariat draft on dispute settlement. If we
wait too long we will run into problems, for the fundamentals of the
dispute settlement mechanism will need to be worked into the various
codes. It is difficult to focus the attention of the top negotiators on this.
Long: There are increasing problems with the LDCs. They are in-
creasingly taking a unified position and their positions are stiffening.
They are coming under the influence of UNCTAD. We must disabuse
them of the notion that they have anything to gain by seeking to delay
the final MTN results until UNCTAD V,3 when they would hope to get
more. The time has come to try and speak in leading LDC capitals—
India, Brazil, Yugoslavia, which are key. They also do not recognize
that the trade system for the next ten years will have to provide some
differentiation between say Brazil and Upper Volta.
Cooper: What is your impression of the role the LDCs have played
in the Codes?
Long: In so far as they are given a chance to participate and get
what they want, they are prepared to take part in at least some of the
codes, government procurement and subsidies. If we are honest, up to
now the LDCs have been kept out. The subsidies draft was drafted by 5
DCs. Now we need to take the LDCs in to anything being done on the
codes. This is our only chance to bring them along.
Patterson: Another problem is to work out something in the codes
to accommodate some of the LDC concerns. What they would really
like is no countervailing duties on subsidies for LDCs, but that is not
practical.
Long: It is important to get Argentina, Nigeria, Yugoslavia, Brazil,
and Mexico to go along. The others will then follow along out of the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
herd instinct. The Yugoslav delegate is very important, Tomic4 is very
good. He is a reasonable man.
Long: Have you given any thought to the post Tokyo Round yet?
We need to initiate formal discussions as soon as the MTN is finished.
What kind of GATT do we want after the Tokyo Round for example.
Cooper: Yes, that is important and we have been giving it some
thought.
Patterson: There is a danger of delay. We cannot leave things dan-
gling. We need to decide how to implement the codes. We can expect
trouble right away given the general mood of protectionism.
Long: Let’s assume we have a package by December 15. Then we
have six months to prepare. By July 1, we must know what we want to
do and how to do it.
Cooper: I agree completely. I would also like to note that we feel
completely stymied by agriculture. We have offers on the table but
have nothing from the Community. What is the situation?
Long: Gundelach still has to deliver. You know, now they have no-
body of stature after Rabot’s death. The only thing to do now is to press
Gundelach to deliver. The new EC Director General for Agriculture Vil-
lain will not become involved.5 He is an internal man and won’t get in-
volved in the MTN. He knows he can only bloody his fingers.
Cooper: We could use some help from the GATT on this. It is a
very serious issue. Grains are very important.
Patterson: The EC view is that the US doesn’t want to do anything
on wheat. There is a wide impression that the US is dragging its feet.
There is no real negotiation on prices, stockpile levels and financing
even though some of these points have been tabled. The issue is tied up
with the subsidy question. We need to quantify things. There are large
differences and time is short.
4 Petar Tomic was a Yugoslav representative in the MTN negotiations.
5 After the death of Louis-Georges Rabot in June 1978, Claude Villain became EC
Director General for Agriculture in July.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
166.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Extension of the Countervailing Duty Waiver
As I have previously informed you, the expiration on January 2,
1979 of the authority to waive the imposition of countervailing duties
poses a serious threat to the MTN. Once the waiver authority expires,
countervailing duties will have to be assessed on a range of products
from various countries. The European Community has indicated that it
would be politically intolerable for them to conclude an MTN package,
including a subsidy countervailing duty code, in December only to
have countervailing duties imposed in a manner inconsistent with the
code after January 2, 1979.
We need a waiver extension to cover the period from conclusion of
the MTN until it is voted upon by the Congress. Because the waiver au-
thority includes provisions protecting U.S. industries from subsidized
competition (i.e., no waiver may be granted unless adequate steps are
taken to “reduce or substantially eliminate” the adverse effect of the
subsidy), extension of the waiver authority for some seven months
should impose no burden on U.S. industries and workers.
The attached draft legislative proposal2 would provide for an ex-
tension of the waiver authority, provided that the President on or be-
fore January 3, 1979, determines that an agreement on subsidies and
countervailing duties has been reached and that agreement on the
MTN as a whole has been substantially concluded.
I have discussed this issue with the House and Senate leaders and
key members of the Ways and Means and Finance Committees. The
legislation we need will not be easy to obtain, but they have agreed to
go forward. They have requested from us a Presidential Message to the
Congress proposing the necessary legislative initiative. I have attached
typed notation reads: “IMMEDIATE ACTION REQUESTED.” Carter wrote at the top of
the page: “Bob—Don’t embarrass us with Congress’ rejection. J.” Attached is a September
28 note from Hutcheson to Strauss, in which Hutcheson notes: “The attached was re-
turned in the President’s outbox today and is forwarded to you for appropriate handling.
The President signed the statement to the Congress today.”
2 Not attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
a draft statement from you to the Congress3 and a draft legislative
proposal.
3 Not attached. Carter sent a message to Congress requesting an extension of the
countervailing duty waiver on September 28. For the text of the message, see Public Papers
167.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, October 3, 1978
You may be interested in my impression of prevailing attitudes
toward developments in the U.S. economy, based on last week’s Bank/
Fund meetings with two dozen finance ministers and the world’s
leading private bankers. Their views are fairly homogeneous, along the
following lines:
—In general, they are strongly supportive of our efforts to reduce
oil imports, increase exports, reduce the budget deficit and strengthen
our efforts to contain inflationary impulses. Progress on all these fronts
is viewed as critical to restoring a stable dollar and insuring the long
term viability of the U.S. economy.2
—They are guardedly optimistic about our balance of payments
current account deficit next year, whereas Morgan Guaranty projects a
40% reduction and the IMF staff, 50%. The envisioned reductions stem
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
tialed “C” at the top of the page. The memorandum was sent to Carter under cover of an
October 4 memorandum from Owen, who noted that based on his impression of the re-
cent joint IMF-World Bank meeting, Blumenthal’s memorandum represented “a bal-
anced and accurate report. It is worth reading, since it indicates what kinds of US policies
would persuade these people to buy, rather than sell, dollars.” (Ibid.)
2 Carter made a checkmark in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
3 On September 27, The Washington Post and The Wall Street Journal published re-
ports of Blumenthal’s September 26 speech before the joint IMF–World Bank meeting.
(Hobart Rowen, “Current Account Deficit to Drop Sharply in 1979,” The Washington Post,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
primarily from forecasts of more rapid growth abroad and moderately
slower growth here.4
—It is assumed, however, that reduction of these orders of magni-
tude will not solve our problems with the dollar unless it is combined
with an effective anti-inflation program. Here there are still serious
doubts among foreign officials and private bankers about our will-
power and ability to succeed.
—On the fiscal side, they view the budget deficit as the litmus test
of our willpower. The considerable reductions that have been made
from the $66 billion deficit we inherited are attributed to shortfalls and
“Congressionally imposed” reductions in our tax cut proposal, rather
than to Administration initiatives. Your willingness to trim all the fat
from our budget will be watched closely. (In this important regard, I
wish some of my foreign colleagues could have heard your excellent
DNC speech).5
—On the monetary side, official and private money managers are
wary of Administration attempts to exhort the Fed not to tighten mone-
tary policy. They view inflation as being both monetarily and fiscally
induced, with further discipline needed on both fronts. There is con-
cern that the Fed will prematurely begin easing monetary policy once
we have settled on a tight budgetary and wage/price policy. To be
sure, there is some concern about overkill if we tighten up too severely
on both fronts. But many remember the damage done in 1968 when the
Fed too abruptly eased monetary policy in the aftermath of that year’s
tax increase.6
—This prevailing sentiment has important implications for the
dollar. Adjusted for current rates of inflation, interest rates in the U.S.
are essentially zero, whereas investors can earn a positive real return on
German and Swiss money market instruments. As long as this relation-
ship prevails money managers will continue to seek out German and
Swiss investments. Until our anti-inflation efforts yield tangible results,
this tendency will likely be exacerbated if it appears that the Fed is too
quickly letting down its guard.
—This predicament is complicated by the uncertainty frequently
voiced about Chairman Miller. He is still viewed as an unknown quan-
tity. His actions are being closely watched to see whether he will main-
4 Carter made a checkmark in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
5 Carter made a checkmark in the margin adjacent to this paragraph. For the text of
his remarks before a September 27 fundraising dinner for the Democratic National Com-
mittee at the Washington Hilton Hotel in Washington, see Public Papers of the Presidents of
6 Carter made checkmarks in the margin adjacent to this and the next two
paragraphs.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
tain what they regard as tight and responsible monetary policy in the
period ahead. Any indications otherwise will likely have a negative im-
pact on the dollar.
In summary, the world’s official financial leaders (unlike the pri-
vate people who are moving money around in huge quantities) are be-
ginning to appreciate and even applaud our economic initiatives. They
are anxiously awaiting your anti-inflation proposal and will judge its
success by the discipline it imposes on the government itself. And they
are hopeful that the Federal Reserve will refrain from prematurely
easing monetary policy.
W. Michael Blumenthal7
7 Blumenthal signed “Mike” above this typed signature.
168.
Letter From President Carter to French President Giscard
d’Estaing1
Washington, October 6, 1978
Dear Valery:
Thank you for your letter informing me of the policies that France
has adopted in fulfillment of its Summit pledges.2 I am glad to learn of
your contribution to the common effort—in stimulating growth,
fighting inflation, and freeing up the French economy.
Meanwhile, I am moving actively on the other fronts that we dis-
cussed at Bonn: The Congress will soon pass our energy bill; I will
shortly announce a new anti-inflation program; and we have tried re-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 6, France: President Valery Giscard
signature under cover of an October 4 memorandum, in which he noted that the letter
“tactfully” encouraged Giscard to meet his Bonn G–7 Summit commitments on trade.
Owen commented: “While the Germans and Japanese have adopted measures to stimu-
late growth, and the U.S. will soon be acting on inflation and energy, the British and
French are not fulfilling their part of the Bonn agreement. Bob Strauss (who cleared this
letter, along with State, Treasury, and Jim Fallows) tells me that their trade negotiating
positions haven’t changed since the Summit.” (Ibid.)
2 Owen forwarded Giscard’s undated letter to Carter under cover of his October 4
memorandum (see footnote 1 above).

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
cently to make clear the constructive U.S. attitude toward European
monetary arrangements.
Among the Summit pledges, however, it is trade that is most on
my mind at the present time. Failing an MTN agreement, there will be a
great upsurge of protectionist sentiment in this country, which would
be as politically divisive in the free world as it would be economically
damaging. This protectionist sentiment is now being held back, in good
part, by the promise of MTN progress. To fulfill this promise, I need
your help.
It is crucial that the MTN negotiations be concluded by December
15, as agreed at the Summit, if there is to be any prospect of Congres-
sional approval of an MTN package in 1979. Securing that approval
will require a massive Administration effort, which I will gladly make.
The chances of success will depend critically on whether the agreement
that emerges from negotiations achieves the main goals that we and
our aides discussed at Bonn—including substantial tariff cuts, move-
ment on agriculture, progress on subsidies and other non-tariff meas-
ures, and an effective procedure for resolving disputes.
I hope that you and I can continue to stay in close touch about
steps to fulfill our Bonn pledges. In cooperation, I’m sure that we can
move the Summit package toward fruition.
I also want to thank you for seeing Zbigniew Brzezinski on
Monday.3 I found his report of his conversation with you extremely
useful, and I welcome opportunities like his trip to keep in direct touch
with you on critical issues facing our two countries.
With best regards,
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
3 October 2. A memorandum of conversation of Brzezinski’s meeting with Giscard
is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
169.
Message From the President’s Assistant for National Security
Affairs (Brzezinski) to West German Chancellor Schmidt1
WH81325. Dear Mr. Chancellor, You may remember that when in
Bonn I mentioned the President’s hope that you would be able to en-
courage the French and British to adopt more forthcoming positions in
MTN, in fulfillment of their Summit commitments—even as the US and
Germany strive to fulfill their Summit commitments.2 You asked for in-
formation about the items on which we were having most trouble with
the French and British. Here is this information, which has been pro-
vided me by Bob Strauss. It is a candid statement and should be held
closely.
I am sending this off immediately since I gather from your staff
that it would be helpful for you to have this information before you
meet with Prime Minister Callaghan.
Begin text
October 12, 1978
MTN—UK and France
1. Agriculture. The most serious problems with respect to France
arise in the field of agriculture:
—In order to conclude MTN negotiations, we must reach agree-
ment on an effective discipline regarding the use of agricultural export
subsidies. If we do not have agreed rules about the extent to which the
use of subsidies is appropriate, there will be frequent sharp conflicts be-
tween the Community and the US in the future.
—Successful conclusion of negotiations also requires improved
market access for a number of US agricultural export items including
such Mediterranean products as citrus and tobacco. France is reluctant
to see the Community give concessions in this area, even though the
products are not competitive with French products.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Charlie Channels. Sent with the instruction to deliver at opening of business.
2 During their October 3 meeting in Bonn, Schmidt promised Brzezinski that he
would “be helpful in seeking French and British cooperation but stated he needs more
detail and that Strauss tends to ‘cry wolf’ too often.” (Memorandum of conversation, Oc-
tober 4; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside the

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
2. Industrial negotiations. Both the United Kingdom and France
are resisting liberalization of industrial trade:
—Both countries are wary of adopting even nonbinding guidelines
which might inhibit direct subsidies for domestic industries.
—The British seek to dilute the government procurement rules by
limiting the amount of transparency in their procurement process, thus
frustrating the opening of their market to foreign goods. They also
want to limit the coverage of any government procurement code.
—The British are also strongly opposed to lower tariffs on plastics,
fertilizers and electrical machinery.
3. General. Both the French and British want to weaken the dispute
settlement mechanism in the proposed codes so that the enforcement of
the rules becomes more difficult, seeking a free hand to take unilateral
and selective action without adequate international controls.
4. US concessions. The British and French have sought some things
from us in these talks. They seek the removal of American Selling Price
on chemicals, repeal of our restrictions on imported scotch and cognac,
application of an injury test before we would impose countervailing
duties on their subsidized goods, and some improvement in the safe-
guards rules. We can only be responsive to these requests in the context
of a major settlement.
5. Timing. We need to complete the negotiations by December 15 if
an MTN agreement is to be ratified by the US Congress in 1979. Failing
such an MTN agreement, there will be a revival of protectionism, in the
US as elsewhere, that will do great economic and political damage.
End text.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
170.
Letter From the Chairman of the Subcommittee on Trade of
the House Ways and Means Committee (Vanik) and the
Ranking Minority Member of the Subcommittee (Steiger) to
the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Strauss)1
Washington, October 17, 1978
Dear Bob:
All of our efforts to legislate an extension of the authority to waive
the imposition of countervailing duties, as well as to enact other sorely
needed trade legislation, the adjustment assistance bill, came to naught,
as you know by now, in the waning hours of the 95th Congress.
Since a number of us on the House Trade Subcommittee worked
very hard to respond to the request of the President and to your own
plea to extend the waiver,2 we want to share with you some thoughts
on this problem in terms of the future legislative posture.
All of us involved in this issue knew the extension of the waiver
would be difficult. It proved impossible. Further, many of us feared
that the textile question would be finally joined with the issue of ex-
tending the countervailing duty waiver. That prediction proved to be
100 percent correct.3 We mention this only because we believe there is a
lesson in the last few weeks for all of us.
We believe this lesson is that we should not attempt to extend the
waiver unless it is done in the context of obtaining international agree-
ment on a code of discipline over subsidies and countervailing duties
which meets U.S. objectives, and, more importantly, in the context of
domestic implementation of such an agreement. To attempt to extend
the waiver in any other context will once again bring forth the indi-
vidual commodity concerns that we were faced with in our attempts to
enact the waiver extension in the last Congress.
As you know, the votes in both Houses to withdraw textiles from
the MTN were overwhelming. We believe that strength will be suffi-
cient post elections in the new Congress to produce the same outcome
for any new attempt to legislate a waiver extension. The only possible
qualification on this assessment would be if our important textile offers
were withdrawn administratively or if there were clarification of a
“snapback” provision.
2 See Document 166.
scinding the U.S. authority to negotiate on textiles in the MTN. (Dennis Farney,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
In this connection, we believe the lesson we have learned should
be communicated to our trading partners, particularly those in the Eu-
ropean Communities. We strongly urge you to tell them that in this ef-
fort on this very important issue, both Houses of Congress approved
the extension of the countervailing duty waiver on two separate occa-
sions.4 Being familiar with the many issues involved in those votes, we
believe the proper interpretation of them is that the Congress wants
above all else an international discipline over subsidies which distort
international trade.
On that note, we would hope that you would indicate to your col-
leagues in the negotiations our belief that our Members are prepared to
be understanding of the concern over the termination of the waiver au-
thority. Particularly, we believe that the Congress would be willing to
extend retroactively the treatment provided in the new code to those
cases involving the assessment of countervailing duties which under a
new international code of discipline would not be subject to counter-
vailing duties.
Bob, we do not believe those doomsayers on the failure of the ex-
tension of the waiver on countervailing duties. We all worked very
hard (including my staff and your own staff—Alan Wolff, Dick Rivers,
John Greenwald and John Donaldson). We believe we were unsuc-
cessful because of forces beyond our immediate control. We just feel
strongly that we should focus on concluding the negotiations and leave
any legislation on countervailing duties to the implementing phase.
Sincerely yours,
Charles A. Vanik
William A. Steiger
“Congress Lacked a Unifying Philosophy Amid Concern Over Inflation, Spending,” The
4 Both the House of Representatives and the Senate passed legislation that included
provisions extending the countervailing duty waiver, but the provisions were in different
bills. (“Treasury Is Seeking Way to Blunt Impact Of Countervailing Duties on Trade

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
171.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, October 18, 1978
SUBJECT
Summit Follow Up and Preparations
1. Bonn Follow-Up. In one sense, the Bonn strategy seems to be
working: The Germans and Japanese have both taken stimulus action;2
the US emphasis is shifting to fighting inflation; and Japan and the US
are taking actions to promote exports and imports, respectively. If con-
tinued, as the IMF Managing Director’s annual report makes clear,3
these trends point the way to a gradual reduction of external imbal-
ances and strengthening of the dollar. There are two flaws in this pros-
pect, however:
1) The foreign exchange markets don’t believe that the US will ac-
cept the tight fiscal and monetary discipline that Germany, Japan, and
others have found necessary to bring inflation under control. So long as
this view prevails abroad, the dollar will continue to decline.
2) Japan, the UK, and France lag in fulfillment of their Bonn trade
commitments. This blunts the effect of domestic policies in the main in-
dustrial countries in reducing the US external deficit and the Japanese
external surplus.
We can do something about both these problems:
—The Europeans and Japanese can be convinced that the US is se-
rious in tackling inflation if we make clear that the FY 1980 budget ex-
penditure and deficit levels will be substantially below those now gen-
erally assumed. Hard budget target figures may persuade them (where
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
both initialed at the top of the page. An attached October 18 note from Owen to Brzez-
inski reads: “You asked me to postpone putting in this memo until after Camp David.
I’ve brought it up to date. I’d like to get it in tonight, since part of it bears on the decisions
he will be making tomorrow about his anti-inflation program.” Two previous
memoranda from Owen to Carter on Summit follow-up and preparation, August 11 and
August 16, are ibid.
on July 28. (John Vinocur, “Stimulus, Tax Cuts Announced in Bonn,” The New York Times,
on September 2; see Document 160.
3 Apparently a reference to the IMF Annual Report of the Executive Board, published
immediately before the IMF annual meeting. A story on the 1978 report was published in
the September 18 edition of The Wall Street Journal. (Richard J. Levine, “Dollar’s Weakness
on Currency Markets Seen to Be Beyond Quick or Easy Remedy,” The Wall Street Journal,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
rhetoric has not) that we are ready to accept the same temporary
slow-down of growth that they did to reduce inflation. If so, the dollar
should begin to rise.
—The Japanese will be more likely to follow sensible trade policies if
we can make clear to them that this will have an important bearing on
whether your pre-Summit trip to Japan next year is a success. (This
may mean delaying your answer to the Japanese invitation for a while.)
The French and British are more likely to be forthcoming on MTN if they
feel pressure from the Germans, as well as us. Schmidt will be hitting
Callaghan on this point when they meet this week, and we’ve asked
him to hit Giscard too.4
2. Preparations for Tokyo. The Japanese are proposing a Summit,
with a preceding bilateral visit by you, in the last week of June.
The two most promising items for this Summit will be energy, in
which Fukuda has a special interest, and North-South relations, which
the Japanese think is especially appropriate for the first Summit to be
held in Asia.
On energy, the most actionable items seem to be (i) a fund for
aiding LDCs to produce and conserve energy, which may be proposed
by the World Bank as a result of the study they were asked to under-
take by the Bonn Summit, and (ii) multilateralizing the arrangement for
joint energy research and development that is now being negotiated by
the US and Japan. The Summit will also presumably commend the US
for fulfilling its energy commitment—assuming that we follow the
prices to world levels, as pledged at Bonn.
On North-South relations, I have asked people in the executive
branch, the World Bank, and Sol Linowitz’s Hunger Commission6 to
4 During an October 5 telephone conversation, Carter urged Schmidt “to work with
Prime Minister Callaghan and President Giscard to ensure a constructive outcome of the
MTN.” Citing the “strong protectionist pressures” under which he labored, Carter said
that should the MTN fail, “it would be very difficult for him to resist these pressures.”
Schmidt replied that he had asked Brzezinski “to send him a paper on the real facts of this
matter and how he (the Chancellor) could be of help.” Carter offered “that Giscard and
Callaghan would listen to” Schmidt. (Memorandum of conversation, October 5; Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 36, Memcons:
5 On October 15, Congress passed five bills that together established the nation’s
energy policy; Carter signed the bills into law on November 9. See Foreign Relations,
on signing the bills, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter,
6 On September 5, Carter established a Presidential Commission on World Hunger;
a week later, on September 12, he named the 14 members of the commission, including
Sol Linowitz as chairman. For Carter’s approval of the creation of the commission, see
Document 298. Documentation on the commission’s work and final report is in Foreign
Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
start thinking of what new initiatives could be surfaced, besides the en-
ergy fund for LDCs mentioned above. I am attracted by the possibility
of an international effort to increase research in LDCs regarding agri-
culture. The Foundation for International Technical Cooperation7 that
we expect to propose to the Congress next year could play a substantial
part in such an effort.
As work progresses, I will submit specific proposals for your
review.
7 See Document 311.
172.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, October 24, 1978
SUBJECT
Tokyo Summit
My Japanese opposite number has inquired informally my view
about a two-day Summit in the period June 24–26. I told him, after
checking with Phil Wise,2 that you were free during this period. He
now wants to know whether you would accept an invitation, if one is
forthcoming, to attend a Summit during those dates. The Japanese
would like an affirmative answer, so that logistic preparations for the
Summit and your bilateral visit can begin now (even though the FRG
did not begin these preparations until three months before the
Summit).
I believe that we should respond as we did in preparing for Bonn:
that we agree in principle to the Summit, will keep open your schedule
for the time that the host country has in mind, and suggest deferring a
final commitment to a specific date until preparatory work has pro-
gressed sufficiently to provide a clearer view of what is likely to be ac-
complished. You will recall that Schmidt suggested this approach in his
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Both Carter and Brzezinski initialed at the top of the page.
2 Phillip J. Wise Jr., was named the President’s Appointments Secretary in May
1978.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
initial Summit invitation to you, and you responded in terms that em-
phasized the undesirability of agreeing on a specific date before prepa-
rations had progressed further. That emphasis gave us bargaining le-
verage: You did not agree to a specific date until Schmidt privately
indicated to us that he would take further economic stimulus action, if
it proved necessary.
Now, as before the Bonn Summit, there are important actions we
want the Summit host country to take. Now, as before Bonn, there is
considerable uncertainty as to whether these actions will be taken:
Japan is not doing as much as it should to reduce its external surplus. If
the Japanese believe that we are unlikely to fix a Summit date until
there is some evidence of further progress, they may react as Schmidt
did—by trying to produce that progress.
State (Dick Cooper) and Treasury (Tony Solomon) concur.
RECOMMENDATION
1. That you authorize me to advise my Japanese opposite number
(and my opposite numbers in other countries) that you agree in prin-
ciple to a Tokyo Summit, that you are free in late June, and that you be-
lieve that now—as in preparing for Bonn—it would be well to avoid a
commitment to a specific date until preparations for the Summit are
more advanced.3
2. That you take the same line with Ambassador Mansfield, when
you see him Friday.4
3 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation.
4 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation and initialed “J.” A memo-
randum of conversation of Carter’s meeting with Mansfield on Friday, October 27, is in
the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
173.
Letter From the Head of the Delegation to the Multilateral
Trade Negotiations (McDonald) to the Special
Representative for Trade Negotiations (Strauss)1
Geneva, October 27, 1978
Dear Bob:
As a result of my conversations with Denman over the last few
days, it now appears to me that we have two broad options for han-
dling the expiration of the waiver and the completion of the MTN. Nei-
ther of these options is very appealing; both entail serious political dif-
ficulties and risks.
Under the first option, we would take the administrative steps nec-
essary to mitigate the effects of the expiration of the CVD waiver. I
know this is likely to involve political and legal risks, but I believe that
we can find lawyers who can find a way to do it, in appropriate consul-
tations with Congressional leaders. If not, this would be the first time
that our system would have proved so rigid as to force us into a com-
pletely irrational situation that makes us the unwilling victims of future
events.
Provided we can find a reasonable administrative solution, I am
sure that we can successfully close out the MTN according to schedule
by December 15. We still have a few difficult hurdles to jump over, but
each day a larger and larger proportion of the details of a package are
falling into place. I repeat, we can do it, and the package is a very
worthy one that our country and the world desperately need.
The other option involves riding out the storm until the Congress
can pass an extension of the waiver. Under this option we could still re-
solve many of the technical issues in the MTN before the end of the
year, but we could not put the overall political package together until
Congress passes an extension of the waiver. I think there is a good
chance that we could persuade the EC to react relatively mildly to the
implementation of countervailing duties on January 3, as long as they
remain convinced of the prospects of early Congressional action on a
waiver. We would not, however, be able to go to the Congress with a
completed subsidy agreement.
I am convinced that under any circumstances it would be ex-
tremely difficult to persuade the Congress to pass a clean waiver exten-
sion bill; delay in the subsidy negotiations would make it that less
likely, further postponing final Congressional action until the end of

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
next year or later. Moreover, every delay jeopardizes everyone’s posi-
tion. We cannot hold our offers much longer, the EC is worrying about
this, and even the Japanese think it will be very difficult to keep their
support base together past January. This extended agony gains us
nothing but opponents, creates new political problems with every new
Congressional suggestion, provides a field day for the protectionists
and jeopardizes the final approval of the package if it is ever com-
pleted. Frankly, this is far less attractive than the first option.
I have not mentioned a third option of getting them to change their
minds since this is such a longshot that it seductively leads us into
number two.
In sum, we need the highest degree of urgency possible given in
Washington to finding a solution. As we discussed by telephone, I
talked with Henry Owen about this and he was not fully aware of what
Washington needs to do to preserve our Bonn agreement on a De-
cember 15 finish. He has promised to get onto it immediately with a
new appreciation of the seriousness of the situation. I will continue a
few calls a day to keep up awareness from here to supplement your pri-
mary efforts.
Look forward to seeing you on November 9. In the meantime, you
can count on me to keep pushing flat out across the board.
Best personal regards,
Alonzo L. McDonald2
Ambassador
2 McDonald signed “Al” above this typed signature.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
174.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, October 31, 1978
SUBJECT
Reactions in Summit Countries to Your Anti-Inflation Program
We asked US posts abroad to report reactions to your new
anti-inflation program.2
Official statements in Summit countries are favorable: The German
Cabinet spokesman, the Japanese Chief Cabinet Secretary, and the
French Economic Minister all issued supporting statements. Callaghan
indicated a willingness to do so.
The exchange markets are, as you know, more sceptical: A Bank of
Canada official expresses concern as to whether the US will “be willing
to bite the bullet (and to keep biting) on macro-economic policy man-
agement.” German bankers and press cite budgetary deficits as the real
cause of inflation, and predict that “with real US interest rates still low
by German standards . . . pressures on the dollar would be continuing”.
French exchange dealers mention the need for the Fed to raise interest
rates. Bob Roosa believes that the basic reason the exchange markets
are reacting so adversely is that your speech was over-billed: They ex-
pected tighter budget controls, higher interest rates, and new measures
to stimulate capital formation.
Nowhere among these reported reactions is there a demand for
stronger US intervention. Perhaps the demand is there but unex-
pressed; or perhaps they feel that the pressures are now too great to be
overcome by intervention—that only domestic US policies can do the
trick.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Sent for information.
sponse to Carter’s new anti-inflation program. (National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
cluded reductions in government spending, Federal employment cutbacks and Federal
pay limits, regulatory reform and deregulation, opposition to Federal income tax cuts,
voluntary price and wage controls, and the submission of anti-inflation legislation to
Congress in January 1979. For the text of Carter’s announcement, see Public Papers of the
from Carter to Andreotti, Callaghan, Fukuda, Giscard, Jenkins, Schmidt, and Trudeau
describing the program are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 92, Finance/International:

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
British officials are an exception to some of the reactions described
above: They seem to set more store on guidelines than the Continental
countries; they fear overly restrictive US monetary and fiscal policies;
and some of them doubt that domestic US policies, alone, will meet the
need—international monetary action is required, as well, in their view.
But they are a minority in the overall reported European reaction.
175.
Briefing Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary
of State for Economic and Business Affairs (Hormats) to the
Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Market Reacts to Measures to Support the Dollar
Market reaction to the forceful measures announced this morning
(Tab 1) was immediate.2 The dollar experienced a strong recovery in
hectic trading. Within an hour after the announcement, the dollar
moved by as much as 5 percent against major currencies. The deutsche-
mark/dollar rate moved by mid-morning from yesterday’s fixing of
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Under Secretary for Economic Af-
fairs, 1978–1980 Files Pertaining to International Monetary Affairs, OECD, Documents,
on November 1 by John Lefgren (EB/IFD/OMA) and cleared by Acting Deputy Assis-
tant Secretary of State for International Finance and Development Michael Ely. Printed
from a copy that does not bear Hormats’ initials. A handwritten notation at the top of the
randum from Thomas Forbord of the Office of Monetary Affairs to Cooper; Forbord’s
memorandum notes that Hormats’ memorandum had been prepared at Christopher’s re-
quest. (Ibid.)
2 Tab 1, attached but not printed, is an undated paper describing the administra-
tion’s dollar support program. On November 1, Blumenthal announced a series of meas-
ures designed to shore up the value of the dollar. The program included an increase in
eral Reserve of a 2 percent supplementary reserve requirement on time deposits ex-
ceeding $100,000; increases in monthly Treasury gold sales; and coordinated foreign ex-
change market invention by the United States, West Germany, Japan, and Switzerland.
Backing this market intervention were facilities in the amount of $30 billion, secured
through a U.S. drawing on the IMF; SDR sales to West Germany, Japan, and Switzerland;
increases in U.S. swap arrangements with West Germany, Japan, and Switzerland; and
issuance of U.S. securities denominated in foreign currencies. For the text of Blumenthal’s
announcement of the program, as well as Carter’s introductory remarks, see Public Papers

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
178 to 187. The pound sterling on the London Exchange plummetted
within two hours after the announcement the Dow Jones Industrial Av-
erage was up 20 points. The price of U.S. Treasury Bills increased no-
ticeably as investors attempted to shift their portfolios into dollar de-
nominated assets.
The price of gold immediately fell after the announcement of the
Administration’s intention to intervene in exchange markets in order to
support the dollar. The London gold fixing closed today at $225.00 per
ounce compared to a price of $242.60 yesterday afternoon.
Most traders agree that the new measures were announced at the
right psychological moment. The sudden move caught many traders
off guard and as a result they have realized exchange losses from going
short on dollars. The announcement has also caused severe foreign ex-
change fluctuations in forward markets.
The Deutsche Bundesbank has publicly endorsed the Administra-
tion’s new measures and announced that it stands ready to cooperate
with the Federal Reserve in market interventions. The Japanese Gov-
ernment welcomed the actions to support the dollar and the Finance
Minister expects that they will help stabilize the international monetary
system. The Swiss National Bank has expressed its great satisfaction of
the measures to strengthen the dollar and feels that the U.S. program
will have the intended effect.
The U.K. will have no direct involvement in the support of the
dollar, but the Prime Minister has expressed his approval of the pro-
gram and his belief that it will dampen speculative capital movements.
The Administration’s complete package and its effects on ex-
change markets will take time to evaluate. The use of foreign currency
denominated securities is a major innovation and a sure signal that we
are dead serious. The Administration’s strong and decisive action has
caused exchange losses for people who thought that the dollar could
only continue its decline. Speculators will likely be more cautious in the
future, which may help moderate exchange rate movements.
The Department of State played virtually no role in the developing
and assembling of the Administration package.3 Treasury informed us
that the Secretary was informed at some point, but Under Secretary
that developments in the foreign exchange market just before the announcement of the
dollar support program, “largely reflecting disappointment over the Administration’s
anti-inflation program, precipitated the forceful U.S. response. Advance notice (about a
half hour) of the U.S. announcement was given to the French and British Governments.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
Cooper was not involved. It appears that the program was put together
oil prices before the upcoming OPEC meeting. At the end of the memorandum, Forbord
added a handwritten note: “Exchange rate changes at 4 p.m. from yesterday’s close: DM
intervention to support the dollar; trading was hectic and confused. Tom F.”
176.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, November 3, 1978
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #78
1. Opinion
The Dollar and the Administration
Your decisive actions this week have demonstrated the leadership
required abroad to indicate the seriousness of purpose of the U.S. Gov-
ernment on economic matters. One lesson to be drawn, however, con-
cerns the organization of the Government to handle questions like this
one. It took many months for the economic decision-making process to
apprehend and adequately respond to the political impact of the
dollar’s decline. It is also not clear that we have a comprehensive
strategy to solve the fundamental problem—the failure of the US to ex-
port enough goods and services and the non-competitiveness of major
industrial sectors (auto, steel, textile).
Both illustrate the need for more centralization of the process—
within the White House—and clearer lines of authority. Increasing the
White House role would also facilitate the relating of economic to polit-
ical issues, so that we will be in a better position to decide these two
halves of policy in tandem. We succeeded this time—finally; but we
cannot be sure that the system will respond effectively the next time.
1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 42, Weekly
the page.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
At my request, Henry Owen has set up an informal mechanism of
regular consultations with Tony Solomon, Dick Cooper and other offi-
cials as appropriate.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the U.S. dollar.]
177.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, November 4, 1978
SUBJECT
MTN Crisis
1. Problem. Bob Strauss has written you (Tab A)2 about the MTN
crisis: The EC refuses to make any major MTN negotiating decisions
until your authority to waive imposition of countervailing duties has
been extended by the Congress. If progress in MTN negotiations must
thus be postponed until early 1979, these negotiations may not be con-
cluded in time for the Congress to approve any MTN agreement in
1979. This delay could doom the negotiations.
2. Strauss Proposal.
Option #1: Bob will try to persuade Schmidt, Barre, Jenkins, and
others next week to complete the MTN by December 15, with the Euro-
pean Council of Ministers not formally approving the resulting MTN
agreement until waiver authority has been extended by the new
Congress in 1979. He would like also to tell them that the Secretary of
the Treasury will “suspend liquidation” of the countervailing duties,
i.e., postpone collection of these duties, with importers posting bond to
cover any potential liability, until the Congress has enacted MTN im-
plementing legislation that would include retroactive forgiveness of
any duty liability. He stresses that this action may not satisfy the
Europeans.
Option #2: If his visit to Europe does not produce a favorable out-
come, Bob indicates that the International Emergency Economic
1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Material, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, National
2 Tab A, attached but not printed, is a November 1 memorandum from Strauss to
Carter.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
Powers Act could be invoked to postpone any collection of counter-
vailing duties for 60 days, thus allowing the Congress time to act. He
points out that this course would engender a strongly negative reaction
on Capitol Hill.3 He is not recommending this course, only pointing out
that it will then be the only alternative to serious MTN delay, since he
believes that calling a special session of the Congress to extend the
countervailing duty waiver would be undesirable.
Bob says that he will seek your guidance early next week.
ideas about how to make it more attractive.
—State suggests assuring the Europeans that we will strongly re-
sist any Congressional pressures for renegotiation of the MTN agree-
ment that we would submit to the Congress in January.
—Treasury believes that Bob should assure the Europeans we will
submit a waiver extension bill to the Congress January 2. (The bill
could then be dropped if it attracted undesirable amendments.)
—CEA recommends that whatever subsidy code is included in
MTN be made retroactive to January 2, 1979, so as to protect our
trading partners against economic damage from countervailing duties.
All of these agencies have strong reservations about Option #2—
on legal, political and foreign policy grounds. CEA would preclude it
altogether; Treasury would only consider it in case of dire necessity.
The State and Treasury memoranda are attached at Tabs B and C.5
4. RECOMMENDATION: That you tell Bob Strauss if you talk with
him—or authorize me to tell him if you do not—that:
a. You give him authority to speak on your behalf in assuring the
Europeans that we will follow the course that he describes in Option
#1—with such of the improvements suggested by State, Treasury, and
CEA as he believes have merit.
b. If this trip fails to persuade the Europeans, he should then
submit to you his considered view regarding invocation of the Interna-
that the International Emergency Economic Powers Act “was enacted by Congress in
1977 to revise and delimit Presidential authority to regulate international economic trans-
actions during wars or national emergencies.”
memorandum to Owen; Solomon discussed it in a November 3 memorandum to Owen;
and Nordhaus in a November 2 memorandum to Schultze. Cooper’s and Solomon’s
memoranda are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Sub-
Council of Economic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Subject Files.
5 Tabs B and C are not attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
tional Emergency Economic Powers Act. Analysis of this course should
proceed, but there is no need to decide the issue now.6
6 Carter indicated his approval of both recommendations and wrote below: “I
talked to Bob. J.”
178.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic
Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Enrolled Bill H.R. 9937—Bank Holding Company Act Amendments of 1970
THE BILL
H.R. 9937 terminates the President’s authority to negotiate cuts in
U.S. tariffs on textiles and textile products in the Multilateral Trade
Negotiations (MTN). The enrolled bill also authorizes the General
Services Administration to sell 978,000 rare silver dollars it now has in
storage to raise revenue.
ARGUMENTS FOR SIGNATURE
1. The textile and apparel industry has lobbied intensively for the
MTN exemption provision of H.R. 9937. This industry which employs
over 2 million people, including many low-skilled and minority
workers, would strongly support a decision to sign this enrolled bill.
2. The sale of rare silver dollars by GSA would net an estimated
$24 million in revenue for the Treasury.
ARGUMENTS FOR VETO
1. Withdrawal of our MTN tariff offer on textiles and textile
products would seriously hamper our efforts to conclude a MTN
package.
—At best, this action would trigger a series of retaliatory with-
drawals by our trading partners. These retaliatory withdrawals would
1 Source: Carter Library, White House Central Files, Subject File, Box TA–29, TA
the top of the memorandum reads: “Last day—Saturday, November 11.” Eizenstat did
not initial the memorandum.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
be made on those agricultural and industrial products that have the
greatest potential for increased U.S. exports if present offers are
maintained.
—At worst, the withdrawal of our textile offer would result in a
complete collapse of the negotiations. Failure of the MTN would mean
the loss of new agreements on export subsidies, trade safeguards,
customs valuation and government procurement, as well as the loss of
foreign tariff cuts. Failure of the MTN would also damage the overall
climate for international economic cooperation.
2. Acceptance of the MTN exemption provision in the enrolled bill
would undoubtedly lead to requests for similar treatment by other in-
dustries. Congressmen would be under intense pressure from impor-
tant industries in their districts to extract similar concessions in their
behalf.
DISCUSSION
Although the industry would clearly prefer that you sign the en-
rolled bill, the negative reaction to a veto would not be as strong as we
had originally anticipated. The recommended veto message empha-
sizes our interest in the prosperity of the industry and pledges us to
take further action on its behalf.2 In view of these commitments, key
union leaders have agreed to downplay their disapproval of a veto and
stress the positive elements of our policy toward the industry.
We have already responded to the legitimate concerns of the tex-
tile and apparel industry by limiting our tariff cut offers in these
products to less than one-half of the level consistent with the general
tariff-cutting formula. Although this industry accounts for only 10 per-
cent of dutiable trade in the industrial sector, more than 50 percent of
our industrial sector exceptions have been taken on textile goods. These
exceptions have been designed to give the greatest protection to the
most import sensitive segments of the industry. Overall, we are pro-
posing to reduce textile tariffs from their present average level of 24
ning in 1980. This gradual phase-in will help to ease adjustment
problems in the industry.
A successful conclusion to the MTN is already in jeopardy over the
issue of the countervailing duty waiver extension. To completely ex-
empt textiles from our tariff cut offer, as required by H.R. 9937, would
only throw more fuel on the fire. The authorization for GSA to sell
silver dollars can be resubmitted at any time with good prospects for
passage. We will not have another opportunity to negotiate a compre-
hensive trade package in the foreseeable future.
2 The recommended veto message is not attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
VOTES IN CONGRESS
vote of 48–13.
RECOMMENDATION
OMB, STR, CEA, State, Treasury, Commerce, Labor and Agricul-
ture recommend that you veto H.R. 9937. The General Services Admin-
istration recommends that you sign the enrolled bill. Anne, Frank, Bob
and I recommend that you veto the bill and issue the attached veto
message to limit adverse reaction to this decision. It has been cleared by
Jim Fallows.
DECISION
Sign H.R. 9937
Veto H.R. 9937 (Recommended)3
3 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation; how-
ever, on November 11, Carter vetoed H.R. 9937. For the text of Carter’s veto announce-
ment, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book II, pp.
179.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1
Washington, November 13, 1978
Pursuant to my telephone conversation with you,2 this will advise
that everywhere I went this past week, I found encouragement to com-
plete the trade negotiations by the end of the year except for France.3
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
marking. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page.
(Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)
orandum, but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “SUMMARY: Strauss Meeting
with Barre.” Telegram 20886 from Bonn, November 10, reported on Strauss’ discussion
with Lambsdorff, and telegram 20887 from Bonn, November 10, recounted Strauss’
meeting with Schmidt. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
10, reported on Strauss’ discussion with Barre. (National Archives, RG 59, Central For-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
The French are negative and Giscard is specifically upset over our
failure to extend the waiver of countervailing duties. In addition to the
issue, he probably is using this as an excuse to delay the successful con-
clusion of the Tokyo Round which has been the goal of the French
throughout the negotiations.
Schmidt had been with Giscard the week before and had talked
with him by phone since that time. He confirmed the hard negative atti-
tude of the French and specifically suggested that a call from you to
Giscard would be particularly effective.4 He further suggested that if,
in connection with the call, you were inclined to accept the invitation to
join them in the meeting they are having shortly after the first of the
year,5 it would be particularly flattering. If you do talk with him, please
keep in mind that we have a December 15 closing deadline which we
badly need for Congress. It will still take at least 7–8 months for a vote.
Chancellor Schmidt also specifically requested that I advise you
directly that he personally would be appreciative if the percentage of
German marketing of U.S. bonds abroad be kept cloudy.6 He advised
that he was under considerable criticism directed toward his permit-
ting German investment capital leave the country at a time when they
are having their own problems.
I am leaving today for Geneva where we will spend the week with
all nations represented. If the French don’t veto action, we can com-
plete these negotiations on schedule.
on Strauss’ conversation with Jenkins, and telegram 7336 from Copenhagen, November
13, recounted Strauss’ meeting with Danish Prime Minister Anker Jorgensen. (National
respectively)
4 In a November 13 memorandum to Carter, Owen recommended that Carter tele-
phone Giscard as “Schmidt is anxious for us to convince Giscard ‘that the failure to pass
the waiver was an accident due to last-minute maneuvering in the Congress and was not
a deliberate plan to pressure the EC.’” According to Owen, Carter’s call to Giscard “could
be decisive.” Carter indicated his approval of Owen’s recommendation. (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File,
Box 12, France: 1978) Carter and Schmidt discussed Giscard and the MTN during a tele-
phone conversation on November 20. (Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal
5 Carter, Giscard, Schmidt, and Callaghan met for informal discussions at Guade-
6 Carter highlighted the section of this paragraph containing this sentence and
wrote in the adjacent margin “Schultze.” In his November 13 memorandum to Carter
(see footnote 4 above), Owen wrote that he would advise “Treasury of Schmidt’s point
about bond sales.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
180.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Telephone Conversation with French President
Giscard d’Estaing
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
President Valery Giscard d’Estaing
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the multilateral trade
negotiations.]
The President asked President Giscard for his very rapid and enthu-
siastic help to conclude the MTN successfully. We really need his
assistance in this. The President understood that the meeting is going
on today,2 and what we would like to do is meet the December 15th
date that they set as a goal in Bonn. What are President Giscard’s
thoughts about this?
President Giscard said he would be very frank with the President.
Since 1974, France has been rather reluctant about these negotiations,
because they think that it is difficult to understand why in the world of
today—with the new competitors that will come, like the Japanese and
the Far East countries—we engage ourselves in a difficult negotiation
for reducing tariffs which are already very low, and open to all the
competition of the world. So basically, he doesn’t realize why they give
so much effort which is not obviously needed. When it was suggested
in 1972 by President Nixon, then the world was different: a world in
which trade was growing, oil was very cheap—a different world. So
basically, France is not enthusiastic about MTN. And so they “con-
tribute not to oppose to a rule” that seems to be desired by the United
States and some others. But France is not very eager, he must confess.
On the other hand, the vote by Congress on the waivers is not polit-
ically . . . the vote on special protection for special sectors that the
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Oval Office. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “ok—cc: Susan. J.” Carter’s handwritten
notes on the conversation are in the Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal For-
from USEC Brussels, November 24, provided a summary of the Council’s discussions,
and telegram 22146 from USEC Brussels, November 22, reported on the discussion of the
D780481–0124, respectively)

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
Senate voted three weeks ago. The President vetoed a part of the Bill,
on textiles,3 and there is another part that has been adopted by the
Senate and which is absolutely against MTN negotiations.
The President said that the Congress did not act in time, but he has
no doubt that they will act very early in 1979.
President Giscard said that what he would suggest is that France is,
really and for national and for objective reasons, rather reluctant about
this, and it is not a mystery. He can send someone. The President’s
envoy—Mr. Strauss—is very energetic, but perhaps too much, because
he took for granted that he could obtain what he asked for—but he
probably didn’t. Would it be useful to have a frank and exhaustive ex-
ploration between the President’s people and his?
The President said “yes.” He asked whether President Giscard
agreed that they will try to meet the December 15th deadline which
they established in Bonn.
President Giscard said that he doesn’t know, because this deadline
was upset by this vote of the Senate. The President thinks this vote will
be reversed—but only at the beginning of January, not before.
The President said that the problem is that the Congress did not
vote. The legislation that we need and expect was inadvertently killed
in the last few hours of the Session because Congress didn’t get around
to it; they did not take affirmative action, they just failed to take af-
firmative action. He has no doubts that we can repair that very early in
the next Session, if we can have the implementation of the agreement
even contingent upon action by the Congress: this would suit him o.k.
President Giscard asked what the importance is for the President of
the December 15 deadline.
The President said that it is just that all of them agreed—including
President Giscard—at Bonn to have December 15 as a deadline, and if
we go back on that plan then it leaves the entire matter extremely un-
certain. He has, as he is sure does President Giscard, substantial protec-
tionist sentiment in the U.S., and we are trying to do everything we can
to prevent tariffs from being too high.
President Giscard said that, frankly, they could not commit them-
selves to this deadline, whatever the content is, because they have a
basic “place” on the substance. So he does not know if there is a chance
before December 15th to have agreement on the substance. He doesn’t
know. This discussion today is a discussion between the Nine, and he
thinks that they will keep their formal position. But then they will have
3 Regarding the legislation forbidding the granting of tariff concessions on textiles,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
to review the problem with the U.S. negotiators. There is also the case
of Japan, because Japan is not bringing to that negotiation the part that
it must bring.
The President said that he sees. He has not been involved, and is not
familiar with the details of the negotiations, and that is not something
he is looking for (laughs). But he wanted to let President Giscard know
how important it is to us to have the schedule maintained and, obvi-
ously, if they cannot agree, that would be an additional problem that
they would have to face, frankly. Also the need for the Congress to give
him authority for the countervailing duties is also important. And if we
fail to keep our part of the agreement, including the countervailing
duty legislation, then obviously we could not conclude the agreements.
He would guess that each one of the nations, after the agreements are
reached on the MTN, would have to refer the agreement back to parlia-
ments for ratification.
President Giscard said that for France, there is no need for ratifica-
tion, because it is covered by the Rome Treaty, but for the others, they
have to. He will give proper attention to this matter because the Presi-
dent had mentioned it to him. He cannot commit himself to a final
agreement before December 15th, because he does not know if sub-
stance will be satisfactorily settled for that moment. But they will try to
see if that is indeed (possible?).
The President said that that is very encouraging. Are there any
other items President Giscard would like to discuss with him now?
President Giscard said that there is no other item he wants to discuss
for the moment. If there is one, he will send a message to the President.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the multilateral trade
negotiations.]
181.
Editorial Note
In a November 18, 1978, memorandum to President Jimmy Carter,
Zbigniew Brzezinski, the President’s Assistant for National Security
Affairs, discussed a forthcoming telephone conversation that Carter
was to have with French President Vale´ry Giscard d’Estaing (see Docu-
ment 180). Brzezinski noted that there were two issues to be discussed:
the U.S. approval of France’s desire to sell Framatone nuclear reactors
to the People’s Republic of China and France’s position on the multi-
lateral trade negotiations (MTN). Brzezinski advised Carter to link the
two issues, “coupling the good news to Giscard about the nuclear re-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
actor issue with a request that he play as helpful a role as possible in
moving us toward the MTN outcome we desire by the December 15
deadline.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Mate-
sentative for Economic Summits Henry Owen also urged this course on
Carter in a separate memorandum, also dated November 18. (Ibid.)
In a November 21 memorandum to Brzezinski, National Security
Council Staff member Robert Hunter discussed Carter’s telephone con-
versation with Giscard, which had taken place that morning. Hunter
reported that Carter “did not follow the suggested scenario” of linking
the nuclear reactor sale and the trade negotiations, noting that Carter
“went straight to MTN, and got an essentially negative response from
Giscard.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Mate-
Owen reported to Carter on November 22 that the EC Council of
Ministers had decided on November 21 “by a vote of eight to one that
the European Commission would try to complete negotiations with the
US and others by December 15, which is just what we wanted. The
French objected but did not block action. The issue will come up again
at the EC Summit December 4–5. Giscard could try to block action there
if he wished, depending on how much he was moved by your call. We
will be trying to figure out what additional actions we can take to influ-
ence the outcome of this December meeting.” Carter initialed Owen’s
memorandum. (Memorandum from Owen to Carter, November 22;
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
In a November 28 memorandum to Carter, Owen urged Carter to
telephone West German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt before the De-
cember 4–5 meeting of the EC Council in order to discuss France’s posi-
tion on the multilateral trade negotiations. Owen wrote: “Up to this
point Schmidt has not wanted to use his capital with Giscard on MTN,
since he thought that the US could bring Giscard around. It is impor-
tant that he realize this hasn’t worked, and that it’s now up to him to
persuade the French. Our ambassadors in Europe believe that he has
the influence to do so, if he wants to. He will likely want to if he be-
lieves there is no other way to save MTN—and if he realizes that col-
lapse of MTN could affect wider US-European relations.” Owen noted
that the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations, the Department
of State, and the Department of the Treasury all concurred in his recom-
mendation. Carter disapproved Owen’s recommendation, writing on
the memorandum: “Draft message instead.” (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 28, Hotline: Ger-
urging him to speak to Giscard about the MTN. (Message WH81566

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
from Carter to Schmidt, December 2; Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File,
The EC Council did not take up the issue of the multilateral trade
negotiations during its meetings on December 4 and 5, but postponed
discussion to a special Council meeting “in the near future.” (Telegram
Central Foreign Policy File, D780502–0924)
182.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, November 29, 1978
SUBJECT
Japan
At lunch last week, Jacques deLarosiere, head of the IMF, praised
the US and Germany for effectively carrying out the agreed Summit
strategy, and said that his main worry about the world economy now
was Japan’s failure to fulfill its Bonn growth commitment. His IMF staff
calculates that Japan will only achieve 5% growth; this means a large
continuing Japanese surplus which will disrupt world trade and
growth. To persuade Japan to adopt a more stimulative Japanese do-
mestic policy:
—He is now sending an IMF mission to review the Japanese
economy; on the basis of its report, the IMF will publicly press Japan to
improve its performance.
—He hopes that the US and other Summit countries will make
clear to Japan that its failure to adopt more stimulative policies would
result in its being isolated and blamed at the Tokyo Summit for the con-
sequent threat to world recovery.
He was glad when I told him that we were maintaining steady
pressure on Japan to change its ways; he saw your decision not to fix a
Summit date until we could see how Summit preparations were pro-
gressing as a useful element of this pressure.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
Comment: The Tokyo Summit’s success will turn on a change in
Japanese policy, as the Bonn Summit’s success turned on a change in
German policy. We will have to apply the same combination of carrot
and stick that turned the FRG around. At the international Summit re-
view December 11, I hope that the other countries’ representatives will
join me in pressing our Japanese colleague for new Japanese policy de-
cisions. As at Bonn, we have one thing going for us: the Japanese are
anxious that the Summit in their capital be a success.
We will submit proposals to you as to how Ohira could be ap-
proached on this issue early in his term. A pre-election telegram says
that he told the Embassy he “saw it as essential to move immediately to
cope with Japan’s trade imbalance,”2 and he generally has the reputa-
tion of being more expansionist than Fukuda. On the other hand, press
reports quote him as saying that he is less firmly committed than Fu-
kuda to the Bonn 7% growth target.3
3 An article published in the November 29 edition of The Washington Post, for ex-
ample, noted that while “Fukuda had promised repeatedly during the past year that
Japan would reach a growth level of 7 percent in the current fiscal year,” Ohira, while not
“expressly abandoning that goal,” had “suggested during the campaign that strict adher-
ence to that goal could cause a new bout with inflation. That could be taken to mean he
may retract or slack down some of the public-service spending that Fukuda had initiated
in supplementary budgets.” (William Chapman, “Japan’s Ohira: Keeping Tradition,” The

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
183.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, December 1, 1978
SUBJECT
MTN (U)
You asked why failure of the MTN would hurt the US more than
France or others.2 (C)
1. In the long run, I don’t believe it would: A failure of the MTN
would hurt all nations by triggering a spiral of protectionism that
would lower living standards, reduce employment, and weaken the in-
ternational cooperation on which everyone’s security depends. (U)
2. In the short run, the US national interest might be more adversely
affected than that of the European Community. The US, as a strong
economy, would lose opportunities for expanding its exports. And the
influence that it exerts through a worldwide trading system, of which it
is the leading member, would be reduced. By contrast, the weaker
members of the European Community (France, Britain, and Italy)
would lose fewer opportunities for increasing exports, since they are
less competitive. And the protected market open only to EC members
and associated states that the Community has built would help shield
these weaker members from the effects of an MTN failure. (C)
3. I doubt, however, that France wants a failure of the MTN. Gis-
card is trying, rather, to get the best deal he can—one that will protect
French agriculture and industry from the effects of trade liberalization.
MTN delay is one way of trying to achieve this objective; the more
MTN is delayed, the more watered down the final agreement is likely
to be. Bob Strauss is resisting both the delay and the watering down—
because they would reduce the usefulness of MTN and because they
would make it harder to secure Congressional approval. (C)
4. Our main ally in all this is Germany. With a strong and open
economy, Germany’s interest in concluding an early and far-reaching
MTN is similar to ours. Giscard will not push his MTN views too hard
if he believes that this would cause a Franco-German rupture. He is
bluffing and under-estimates the risks that his tactics entail for the
MTN; Schmidt is well positioned to call his bluff. (C)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Sent for information. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page.
2 In a November 29 handwritten note to Owen, Carter asked: “Why does a failure of
MTN hurt the U.S. more than France or other countries involved?” (Ibid.)

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
184.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, December 8, 1978
SUBJECT
Two Years Down; Two to Go (U)
After each half year in 1977, I sent you an appraisal of the Adminis-
tration’s foreign policy record.2 Two years since you took office may be
an even better time to review both the record and the tasks ahead. I
haven’t tried to examine the whole field—focusing only on a few sa-
lient areas. (U)
1. War and Peace. The main accomplishment of the last two years
was in reducing the chances of war in the two most dangerous areas of
possible US-Soviet conflict: (C)
a. In the Middle East, there is a greater chance of setting in motion a
process that could lead to peace than at any time since the creation of
b. In Central Europe, a NATO buildup has been launched, which
seems likely to restore the military stability that had been called into
question by Soviet military programs in the mid-1970s. (C)
These are big improvements. There are still a lot of risks ahead,
particularly in unstable countries on the periphery of the USSR, but
we’re clearly better off than in December 1976. This improvement was
made possible because we had our priorities right: During the cam-
paign you said that the main focus of US foreign policy should be on
constructive cooperation with our friends. What we have done to this
end in Europe and the Middle East has been more important in re-
ducing risk of war than anything that has been, or could have been, ac-
complished in direct dealings with the USSR. (C)
Substantial progress has also been made in those dealings, how-
ever; the main advantage of SALT–II3 may be in paving the way for a
more ambitious SALT–III agreement, in which we can get at the prin-
cipal cause of nuclear instability: technological change. This argues for
seeking a SALT–II whose ratification will not provoke such intense op-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 59, Administration’s Policy: General: 1978. Confiden-
tial. Sent for information. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Generous. J.” Brzezinski
also initialed the memorandum.
2 See Document 91.
3 Reference is to the ongoing second round of U.S.-Soviet Strategic Arms Limitation
Talks.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
position or leave such a residue of bitterness in this country as to
prejudice our ability to move quickly to far-reaching follow-on nego-
tiations. (C)
2. Prosperity. The second test of a successful foreign policy is
whether it helps or hurts our economic well-being. (U)
You worked out a strategy with our partners at Bonn that is
bearing fruit: Germany and Japan have taken stimulus measures; the
US is giving fighting inflation top priority; and these policies are
creating a convergence of economic policies that Jacques de Larosiere,
head of the IMF, believes portends a steadily improving world eco-
nomic situation. (U)
We have also taken a stagnant Multinational Trade Negotiation and
brought it to the verge of success. (U)
Energy remains a problem, but we’re moving in the right direc-
tion—toward deregulation, which will allow market forces to reduce
oil imports and spur oil production. Your recent anti-inflation deci-
sions have strengthened OPEC confidence in the dollar and thus mod-
erated pressures for price increases.4 (C)
These achievements create a good prospect for a strong dollar and
a continuing reduction in the US external deficit. To fulfill this pros-
pect, we will need in the next two years to: (U)
—press Japan to adopt a more stimulative domestic policy (de La-
rosiere considers Japan’s failure to fulfill its 7% growth target world
economic problem #1);5 (C)
—ratify and implement an MTN agreement (an effort that Bob
Strauss says will make the Panama Canal look like a picnic);6 (C)
—allow the US oil price gradually to rise to world levels, as
pledged at Bonn; (U)
—press your export promotion program, even when this conflicts
with other US objectives; (C)
—make our exports more competitive, by increasing US invest-
ment and productivity—even if this means tax changes and cutting
back on otherwise desirable government regulations. (C)
Arab Emirates, Iran, and Kuwait in a November 24 memorandum to Carter. He noted
that “for virtually all Government leaders I saw, the single most important economic event of
the recent past has been the dramatic reversal of the fortunes of the dollar. This action has
made a deep impression. It is seen as a major event, a specific Carter initiative, greatly
benefiting each of the countries involved. Without it, a major (15% or more) price increase
might well have been inevitable.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
5 See Document 182.
6 Carter underlined the phrase “make the Panama Canal look like a picnic” and
wrote in the adjacent margin: “nothing could do this.” See footnote 4, Document 163.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
More important than any of these will be how we prosecute the
fight on inflation, which is treated under (4) below. (U)
3. North-South. You said in the campaign that you would restore
morality to US foreign policy. This means different things to different
people. To me, it means helping the one billion people in the world
who live in desperate poverty. (U)
Most of these people are not in the middle-income developing
countries; these countries, moreover, do not need concessional aid.
What they need is a good MTN agreement, and strong multilateral fi-
nancial institutions from which they can borrow on hard terms. We
have moved actively to achieve both. This Administration’s lead in
creating the new IMF facility and our progress in making up our World
Bank arrearages is in refreshing contrast to past US neglect of these two
institutions. The case for thus helping middle-income countries is clear
in terms of US self interest: They are increasingly important economic
partners. (U)
The case for helping poor developed countries rests on a longer
term consideration, our interest in meeting global problems, and on
moral grounds: When Bob Lipshutz swore in members of the Hunger
Commission,7 he referred to a quotation from Matthew; when I had
looked it up, it seemed to me the best justification of aid to poor coun-
tries that I had read: “In as much as ye have done it unto one of the least
of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.” We’re not ashamed to
take moral considerations into account in our private lives; there’s no
reason we shouldn’t do so as a nation, as well. (U)
Your Administration has significantly increased foreign aid. The
biggest increase has been in multilateral aid; this makes sense because
one US dollar here mobilizes three dollars from other donors. You have
also improved the quality of aid by directing concessional develop-
ment loans and PL 480 more clearly to the needs of poor people in poor
countries—leaving hard loans to meet the needs of middle-income
countries and SSA to meet political needs. This maximizes the amount
of concessional aid available for the poor. (U)
We have moved toward the developing countries’ views about the
Common Fund, although it’s not yet clear whether this will result in
agreement. (U)
North-South oratorical tensions persist, and this will continue for
some time. But US substantive policies toward LDC’s have improved
and this should be reflected in these countries’ attitudes, as well as
prospects. (U)
January 1977 until October 1979.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Our main North-South task in the next two years will be to con-
tinue these policies. The most important innovation may be creation of
the Foundation for International Technical Cooperation with devel-
oping countries announced in your Caracas speech.8 The Ford and
Rockefeller Foundations are so impressed that they have said they
might contribute $10 million. (U)
All this may have only a limited political pay-off, at least in the
short run; aid recipients are not noted for their gratitude. But it will
have a lot to do with what happens to a good many human beings—
and thus with whether your effort to restore moral purpose to US for-
eign policy succeeds. (U)
4. Conclusion. A common thread runs through this memo: Your
foreign policy achievements to date have been considerable—more
than most Presidents can count in their first two years; ultimate success
rests on continuing these policies in the next two years. (U)
But here is the dilemma: Success of your foreign policy also rests
on your anti-inflation program achieving its goals. This will probably,
as I suggested after the London Summit, have to be our central task for
the next several years: Like European countries and Japan in the early
1970’s, we will have to stick to tight fiscal and monetary policies, de-
spite the pressures that slowing growth and rising unemployment may
create for premature reflation. (U)
This anti-inflation campaign will, by its nature, call into question
some of the other policies described above—e.g., the NATO defense
build-up, allowing US oil prices to rise to world levels in 1980, and in-
creasing our aid for developing countries. Posing this dilemma doesn’t
tell us what decisions we should make about these problems. But it does
suggest how we should make them. When other industrial countries
faced similar choices, we were quick to remind them that their deci-
sions affected us and that we wanted to be consulted. The reverse is
even more true, given our central position in the alliance. (C)
This won’t be easy: It’s hard enough to make choices within the
pluralistic US government, let alone involve other countries. Yet it will
be the price of holding together the alliance among industrial democ-
racies on which our security and prosperity depends. A defense pro-
gram that involves less than a 3% increase, an aid program that doesn’t
rise as rapidly as we had hoped, oil prices that reach world levels in
1981 rather than 1980—these changes may be manageable. But only if
our allies feel that their views and interests have been taken into ac-
count, as we make these hard choices in the next two years. (C)
8 See Document 311. Carter proposed the initiative in his address to the Venezuelan
Congress in Caracas on March 29. For the text of his remarks, see Public Papers of the Presi-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
185.
Memorandum From the Head of the Delegation to the
Multilateral Trade Negotiations (McDonald) to the Special
Representative for Trade Negotiations (Strauss)1
Geneva, December 11, 1978
SUBJECT
Suggested Approach for Gaining Public and Congressional Approval for Tokyo
Round Results
Lord Macaulay of England said more than a century ago that
moves toward freer trade are among the greatest benefits that a gov-
ernment can bestow on its people, but are almost always unappreciated
at the time. During the ensuing century, that view has been repeatedly
confirmed. Moreover, the complexities of modern economic society,
the broad scope of the Tokyo Round negotiations, and the present un-
certainties in the world economic environment all add to the normal
difficulties of gaining public understanding and support for trade leg-
islation in 1979.
To build a solid, favorable constituency for the upcoming trade
bill, we must expand our sights beyond the Tokyo Round results and
put forward a comprehensive U.S. trade program. Such a program is
not only timely, it is essential to capitalize on the benefits negotiated in
the Tokyo Round.
To illustrate the overall approach schematically, tariff reductions
should account for only about 10% of the total program; the complete
Tokyo results about 40–50%, and the domestic and implementation
parts about 50–60% of the completed package. With a comprehensive
domestic program, a broad-based support group can be developed, in-
cluding interest groups that might otherwise oppose tariff reductions
or at best stay neutral.
While broadening the scope of appeal by means of domestic pro-
gram elements, building a positive constituency also calls for exploiting
fully the favorable nontariff measures that comprise the major compo-
nent of the Tokyo Round, the substantial and unprecedented agricul-
tural results and the reforms of the international trading system that
clearly open the way toward fairer trade.
When presenting the Tokyo Round results, the enormous strides
represented by the establishment of monitoring groups under the new
notation top of the page reads: “Vera—make copies for appropriate people Wolff, Vine,
Rivers, Donaldson, Geza, Kelly etc.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
series of codes should be emphasized along with the added disciplines
and increased transparency obtained throughout the trading system.
These key elements can serve to clearly identify the Tokyo Round as
“the fair trade round” since they outweigh the substantial but relatively
less important movements toward trade liberalization which are less
popular short term.
Furthermore, since tariff reductions as usual represent the most
distasteful element for those directly concerned, this aspect should be
downplayed to reflect its much diminished importance. Although the
exclusive aim in the first five rounds and clearly the predominant result
in the Kennedy Round, tariff actions account for no more than one
quarter of the scope of the Tokyo Round. To reflect properly their re-
duced standing, we should differentiate our reports and commentaries
(including those from advisory groups) between (1) authority already
delegated to the Executive Branch by the Trade Act of 1974 (e.g.,
tariffs), and (2) the rest of the Tokyo Round results that require Con-
gressional approval. To do otherwise might encourage opinions to
follow traditional thinking on relative importance, thus focusing exces-
sive negative attention on this limited subject on which no further Con-
gressional approvals are required.
INITIAL IDEAS ON TRADE PROGRAM CONTENTS
The program should cover all three of the above subjects—in order
of importance: (1) the elements of a comprehensive trade program,
(2) benefits from the Tokyo Round, and (3) balanced tariff adjustments
by all major trading nations. Priority efforts should be aimed soon at
filling in the contents of the overall program since, with their domestic
focus, they will influence predominately the attitudes of the general
public and members of Congress.
ELEMENTS OF A COMPREHENSIVE U.S. TRADE PROGRAM
Elements making up the comprehensive trade program should be
fundamental in nature and devoid of superficial gimmicks. They
should be sound and necessary policies for a successful, long-term U.S.
position in international trade. To the extent that items with less eco-
nomic impact are considered, they should be only those with wide pop-
ular appeal that would help significantly to expand the positive con-
stituencies for the program. An initial list of program elements would
include the following:
A. Investment Incentives
The greatest trade threat that the United States faces is the possi-
bility of its vast productive base becoming obsolete and uncompetitive.
For this reason, a foundation stone for any effective trade program over
time must be an incentive program to encourage new investments and

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
capital formation sufficiently to keep competition keen and provide for
a continual renewal and restructuration of our industrial base.
To maintain a healthy international position, we must invest at
levels comparable to our major trading partners and those rapidly ad-
vancing among the ranks of nations. We are not doing so today. For ex-
ample, the Japanese are currently making capital investments at a per-
centage rate of GNP approximately double that of the United States.
Instead of improving our relative situation, this discrepancy can only
contribute to a deterioration of our worldwide competitiveness. More-
over, the resulting competitive gap cannot be indefinitely bridged by
currency devaluations and import constraints without leading us into a
spiral of decline as an economy and ultimately loss of position as the
key world power.
The sentiments against capital investment incentives are evident,
particularly among those who strive for greater income and wealth re-
distribution. But it can be argued that our country has acted to redis-
tribute income far more than any society to date. Almost half of our fed-
eral budget is allocated to transfer payments, rather than to the
provision of public services. This represents a massive redistribution of
income. To support a reasonable redistribution effort, our economic
base must flourish. To do this, as a capitalist society intending to re-
main one, we must keep attractive the desire to seek out and to take en-
trepreneurial risks for commensurate gains for those persons and en-
tities with access to capital.
Our capital investment pattern has been lagging in recent years,
slowing our growth prospects, discouraging job formation possibil-
ities, limiting productivity improvements and weakening our innova-
tive thrust. The commercial risks today appear too frequently to out-
weigh the prospective gains, thus making conservation of capital a
higher motive than placing that capital at entrepreneurial risk to search
out new thresholds of opportunity.
Investment incentives are particularly important to our heavy in-
dustries requiring continuing streams of high capital investments.
Since more of these industries now feel threatened than in earlier years,
they are in the forefront of those concerned currently with tariff reduc-
tions. Consequently, an investment incentive program, in addition to
its fundamental long-term benefits, would be immediately helpful to
swing a majority of the business community positively behind the
overall effort, reducing to a strictly secondary position their concerns
over trade liberalization measures. Such an incentive program would
have to be tailored to be consistent with the new subsidies code
obligations.
B. A Sensitive and Effective Adjustment Assistance Program
The United States does not have an effective adjustment assistance
plan that aids in the restructuration of our industrial base. We need one

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
to facilitate the mobility of employment from declining or obsolete ac-
tivities into growth sectors that are economically promising. This is one
of the major concerns of organized labor, and in some of our heavily
populated geographical sections, a totally legitimate one. Furthermore,
this is one of the early expressed concerns of the Administration that
clearly merits attention without further delay as a natural complement
to any international trade liberalization plan.
C. Major Program for Retraining and Reformation of Personnel
We must anticipate that due to continuing technological advances
and shifts in market demand, we need a reasonably mobile work force.
With today’s accelerated pace of change, this probably means re-
training and preparing many employees for shifts in skills once or
twice during the course of their working lives. Although the above
factors dwarf the importance of imports in establishing this need, the
idea is superficially popular to blame imports—partly because this
falsely implies there is a ready solution.
Again, a substantial retraining program is not only needed for do-
mestic reasons but would gain labor support and represent a positive
appeal to the general public as a fairer redistribution restructuration.
D. Accelerated Domestic Procedures
Many complaints have been registered by all of our advisory
groups—industrial, labor and agriculture—on the complexity and
slowness of our domestic procedures in dealing with trade problems. A
plan for accelerating and simplifying these procedures to deal more
forthrightly and promptly with complaints is clearly called for and
would be very popular. These improvements could be linked with the
implementation moves for the Tokyo Round codes, facilitating domes-
tically the handling of escape clause actions, anti-dumping cases and
subsidy/countervail claims, among the more important.
E. Procedural Customs Improvements
There are a number of these that could stand attention and simpli-
fication. Some of these ideas are already assembled by Senator Dan-
forth’s staff and framed into a bill. By combining these ideas with the
implementation steps for the new customs valuation code, another
center of support might be added.
F. Adapted Buy America Program
Complementing the government procurement code will be the do-
mestic need to adapt and reinforce our Buy America procedures. Al-
ready there is a group in the Senate, headed by Senator Heinz, strongly
advocating further Buy America measures. There is wide popular sup-
port for this activity. If their concern could be refocused on non-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
signatory countries and non-covered market sectors, this merged aim
might shift around another interested group who will be working ac-
tively with or against us.
G. Specialized Programs for Sensitive Industrialized Sectors
A number of sectors would respond favorably to across-the-board
programs that would reflect genuine government concern about their
needs and an appreciation of some of their international difficulties.
Such sectors are steel, chemicals, textiles, and perhaps non-ferrous
metals. The individual elements of these programs have already been
developed within STR and other departments or are anticipated, but
they need to be packaged and communicated as a cohesive series of ac-
tion steps to obtain positive public impact.
H. Continued Export Effort
The recent program of the President to expand the U.S. export ef-
forts could be reinforced as a part of the overall trade package. This is of
keen interest to Congress where there is considerable sentiment that
more needs to be done. This interest was emphasized during MTN
briefing sessions recently in Geneva with Representatives Ullman and
Gradison and Senator Moynihan.
I. Automatic Import Licensing
In the current international economic environment, we face
problems of rapid import buildups in sensitive industries in unpredict-
able amounts from communist countries. Unfortunately, our ability to
monitor these rapid shifts has not increased appreciably over the years.
In fact, many in Congress and in industry complain that trade informa-
tion in sensitive products is neither good enough nor up to date.
Therefore, we should take advantage of the trade agreement’s uni-
form rules on automatic import licensing to establish an import li-
censing system of our own. Through this system, we could require an
import license, which would be nondiscriminatorily and automatically
granted, for shipments from communist countries and for sensitive
products. In the case of sensitive products, this would allow the gov-
ernment some early warning on potential escape clause cases. In a situ-
ation such as this year’s textile import surge, this system would have al-
lowed us to get a handle on where the explosive growth was coming
from.
As we have experienced over the past few years, our economy is
vulnerable to exports from communist countries. Their labor situation
and lack of relevant cost structure, combined with their hunger for
hard currencies, causes apprehension of potential trade disruption and
unemployment among domestic industry and labor. An automatic im-
port licensing system would enable us to monitor all key movements,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
giving us the ability to stop trade disruption before it reaches a crisis
level.
J. Permanent Private Sector Advisory Group on Trade
During the Tokyo Round, discussions on a continuing basis have
been carried out in Washington and Geneva with advisory groups
from agriculture, industry and labor. As a part of a comprehensive
trade program, a permanent advisory system could be designed that
would contribute invaluable knowledge, experience and insight into
practical trade problems. This system could provide a continuing dia-
logue on trade issues that would improve communications and under-
standing between the private sector and the Administration.
K. Reorganization and Reinforcement of Trade Policy Apparatus
The U.S. has given much less attention to trade policy than its
major trading partners. It is now timely for this passive posture to
change. The results of the Tokyo Round call for a new measure of con-
tinuing international involvement on trade questions. Our trade def-
icits call for reinforced handling of trade relations on an aggressive
business like basis.
Congress is well aware of this need and would be receptive to ad-
ministrative initiatives. Senators Long, Ribicoff and Roth, and Chair-
men Ullman and Vanik in the House have advocated clarifying the
decision-making process on trade issues and centralizing the adminis-
tration of U.S. trade policy. This move, which could in fact determine
how effectively the U.S. exploits the Tokyo Round benefits, could help
to coalesce the support of similar thinking groups as a part of the
overall program. A White House reorganization study group already
has been studying this issue, and their report could be ready by March.
Undoubtedly other elements and suggestions should also be incor-
porated in a final program. Even so, if realistic results were put forward
on the above items only, such a program could serve to build a broad
based and solid constituency, while putting in place the foundation
blocks for a vastly improved and more effective U.S. trade policy for
the years to come. This would represent a fundamental Administration
accomplishment.
ORGANIZATION AND COORDINATION OF THE EFFORT
This approach lends itself to a special project organization to carry
out this one-time effort. The project unit would need to be clearly rec-
ognized as in charge of the effort with clear-cut responsibilities for pro-
ducing the kinds of results needed within a very short time period.
Group requiring collaboration and close cooperation include the
following:

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
1. The Executive Departments directly concerned with trade policy:
These include the Departments represented on the TPC and the EPG.
Since a combination of initiatives across Executive departments would
be necessary, the project group should be comprised of members from
each of these entities to facilitate pulling together the package.
2. The advisory groups in labor, agriculture and industry: An expanded
contact program with these groups could review elements of the pro-
gram as they are being developed.
3. Members of Congress: An intensive series of consultations to ac-
quaint members of Congress with the key elements of the program to
build in the ideas of domestic program elements is essential in building
a trade constituency. This is anticipated by the notice period called for
in the Trade Act and is already well underway with the frequent
meetings and briefings regularly arranged between key Committee
leaders and their staff and MTN negotiators.
4. Liberal Trading Groups: These groups, including special trade
promotion associations and consumer groups, are ready to be
mobilized.
5. The General Public: An extensive program of communications, in-
cluding speeches, articles and explanatory materials, is needed before
and throughout the period of Congressional consideration.
This memorandum is only a thought starter for upcoming discus-
sions with leaders in the Administration concerned with trade policy.
From the Geneva perspective, we should have the major elements of
the international negotiation completed or sufficiently in view before
Christmas so that this effort could be organized and launched in early
January. The work should parallel the period of Congressional review.
It should build up as an intensive effort during the time of consulta-
tions with Congress and the drafting of the trade legislation (January
through March) and continue through the period of Congressional de-
liberations (April through August).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
186.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, December 13, 1978
SUBJECT
Your Meeting with Jenkins2 (U)
Since I sent you a briefing memo on this subject before leaving
Friday3 to attend a Bonn meeting of the Summit follow-up group, three
things have happened:
1. EMS: The Italians have now decided to join. You might indicate
to Jenkins your pleasure with this development. (C)
2. MTN:
a. The European Council of Ministers met yesterday to review MTN;
all countries except France argued strongly for completing the negotia-
tions this week.4 Strauss feels that we can get such an agreement if the
Commission and the other eight members don’t lose their nerve in the
face of French opposition. You may want to mention our satisfaction
with this meeting and with the helpful role that the EC negotiators5
(Haferkamp and Denham) played in it, stress that we rely on the con-
tinued support of the Commission and other members of the European
Community, and ask if Jenkins has any suggestions as to what we
could do to help him get EC support for completing MTN in December.
You might add that he can count on your strong personal commitment
in obtaining Congressional extension of the countervailing duty
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit
Memos. Confidential. Sent for information. Both Carter and Brzezinski initialed at the top
of the page.
2 Carter met with Jenkins, as well as U.S. and EC officials, on December 14 from
dent’s Daily Diary) A memorandum of conversation is in the Carter Library, National Se-
3 On Friday, December 8, Owen forwarded to Hunter a memorandum for Carter on
the Jenkins visit; Owen’s memorandum to Carter is dated December 12. (Note from
Owen to Hunter, December 8; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Mate-
Briefing Book)
4 The EC Council of Ministers held a special meeting on the multilateral trade nego-
reported on the meeting, and telegram 23480 from Brussels, December 12, transmitted a
translation of the oral declaration made at the end of the meeting. (National Archives, RG
5 Carter underlined the phrases “helpful role” and “EC negotiators.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
waiver6 and approval of the final package—stressing that any signifi-
cant MTN delay beyond December would involve serious risk of the
Congress not being able to pass on MTN in 1979. (C)
b. Giscard’s economic assistant called me today to say that Giscard
would like either to send a special envoy (Trade Minister Deniau) to
Washington to see you and Strauss Monday or to receive a US envoy
(he mentioned me) in Paris Friday or Monday7—so that Giscard could
convey his view to the US, as well as get some clarification of the US
view. (You will recall that Giscard raised the possibility of a special
envoy with you on the phone a few weeks ago.)8 After checking with
Strauss, Blumenthal, Brzezinski, and Cooper, I am calling back to say
that you would not be available, but that Deniau could come here
Monday to see Strauss and others (including perhaps the Vice Presi-
dent); failing that, McDonald (our Geneva trade negotiator) and I could
come to Paris Monday.9 (C)
You may want to mention this to Jenkins, and assure him that we
are not trying to make an end run around the Commission; we have
made clear to the French that there can be no question of our negotiating
with them, since our negotiations are with the Commission. You might
mention that we’ve heard from the British and others that Giscard is not
well informed on MTN, and we think it might be useful to make sure he
gets a full and accurate picture of what’s going on. If Jenkins has any
advice on what to say to the French, we’d welcome it. My guess is the
French will say they don’t like the substance of the intended MTN
agreement. (C)
Given the sensitivity of the issue of France’s role on MTN, I believe
that Jenkins might talk about it more freely if he saw you alone. I will
bring him to the Oval Office for this purpose when he arrives. He said a
while back that he would be glad to meet with you alone for a few
minutes before the larger meeting, if you thought this would be
6 Carter underlined the phrase “countervailing duty waiver.”
8 See Document 180.
9 Carter wrote “ok” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
10 Carter and Jenkins met privately in the Oval Office, accompanied by Owen and
larger meeting. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No mem-
orandum of conversation was found. In a December 14 memorandum to Brzezinski, Erb
reported: “In his private talks with the President and Strauss, Jenkins seemed relatively
optimistic about the intentions of the French, apparently feeling that the request for the
Owen/McDonald mission to Paris is a tactical move rather than a signal that the French
have decided to block an MTN agreement.” Erb cautioned, however, that “the emphasis
that Jenkins placed on the need for balance in the MTN package foreshadows some very
difficult negotiations in the days ahead.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 12, Europe: 1978)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
187.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1
Washington, December 20, 1978
SUBJECT
Fastener Import Relief
I have sent you a separate memorandum through regular channels
reporting the results of our interagency deliberations on the fastener es-
cape clause case.2
I believe this is a critical case for our trade policy. We intend to
submit to Congress for approval early next year the most ambitious
package of trade agreements ever negotiated. Before that package can
be considered, we will need Congressional approval of an extension of
our countervailing duty waiver authority (otherwise the EC cannot fi-
nalize the agreements). In my judgment, a recurrence of the kind of
override fight we had earlier this year3 would seriously undermine our
chances of getting an extension and thus of concluding our trade
negotiations.
Moreover, there is a growing feeling in the Congress that we are
rejecting relief in so many cases that the Trade Act is not working as
originally contemplated. Frankly, this feeling has little foundation—
but it is certainly prevalent.
I have talked to a number of your strongest free trade supporters
and they think relief in this case, at this time, is absolutely necessary to
manage our trade program in Congress in 1979.
All of the agencies which have worked on the case appreciate these
broader considerations, and reflect them in taking positions favoring
relief of some kind.
Of the two options we have presented to you in my other memo,
Option 2 represents the minimum we need to satisfy the domestic in-
dustry and the Congress. I have sounded out representatives of the
2 The memorandum was not found. In October, the ITC again ruled that imports
were harming the U.S. fastener industry. (“ITC Says Imports Aren’t Hurting AMF Sub-
3 In April, the Carter administration successfully convinced a majority of the
members of the House Ways and Means Committee not to vote to override Carter’s deci-
sion against providing import relief to the U.S. fastener industry. (Clyde H. Farnsworth,
Carter’s decision not to provide import relief, see Document 102.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
domestic industry and know they would react favorably to this
approach.4
4 Carter announced his decision to provide import relief to the U.S. fastener in-
dustry on December 22. Noting that his relief measures differed from those recom-
mended by the ITC, Carter granted a 15 percent tariff increase for 3 years. For the text of
Carter’s letter to Congress and memorandum to Strauss conveying his decision, see
Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book II, pp.
2283–2285. Strauss forwarded a proclamation giving effect to this decision for Carter’s
signature under cover of a January 3, 1979, memorandum. Carter initialed at the top of
Strauss’ memorandum and wrote “done reluctantly.” (National Archives, RG 364,
dential Proclamation 4632, “Temporary Duty Increase on the Importation Into the United
States of Certain Bolts, Nuts, and Screws of Iron or Steel,” was issued on January 4, 1979.
For the text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1979, Book
188.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, December 30, 1978
SUBJECT
Report on post-Summit and MTN meetings in Europe
This memorandum summarizes two meetings I attended on your
behalf recently in Europe, about which other heads of government at
Guadeloupe will have received reports from their representatives, and
which revealed Allied attitudes on problems that may surface at
Guadeloupe: (U)
I. December 11 Summit Follow-Up Meeting in Bonn2
1. Macro-Economic Policy
(a) Japan: Most members of the seven-nation Summit review group
voiced deep concern over Japan’s failure to achieve its growth target or
increase access to its import market. Most agreed that these changes in
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
tial. Sent for information. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page.
2 Owen reported on the December 11 follow-up meeting in greater detail in a De-
cember 13 memorandum to Carter. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Japanese policy are necessary to achieve the dramatic reduction in
Japan’s external surplus which is the key to a successful Summit in
1979, as change in German policy was to a successful Summit in 1978.
Japanese responses made clear that they believe their existing policies
are adequate to reduce their external surplus. My Japanese colleague
and I arranged further US-Japanese talks to try to resolve these differ-
(b) US Inflation: There was strong approval of your November 1
decisions.3 The only concern was whether the US will stick to tough
fiscal and monetary policies during the several years that other coun-
tries, notably Germany and Japan, believe on the basis of their own ex-
perience will be required for success.
2. Energy: Passage of the energy bill was welcomed. The Germans
would like us to meet our Summit commitment to raise US oil prices to
world levels by December 1980, but will understand if we let the target
date slip to October 1, 1981, when control legislation expires. They say
that letting decontrol slip beyond that date would raise doubts as to
whether the US commitment would ever be fulfilled. (C)
3. North-South: There was general support for the proposal that the
World Bank has developed, in response to the Bonn Summit’s direc-
tive, for large-scale IBRD lending to help LDCs explore for oil—and
also for the World Bank proposal to convene a spring meeting of donor
nations to coordinate their bilateral aid to LDC energy programs. It was
agreed that these World Bank proposals had been among the more
useful Bonn results. (U)
4. Tokyo Summit: We agreed that no commitment to a specific date
(June 28 and 29 were preferred) should be sought until the next
meeting of our Preparatory Group in March, when it could be deter-
mined how much progress was being made. (C)
II. December 18 Meeting with French Trade Minister Deniau (who
had wanted to come to Washington to meet with you)4
1. Agriculture: The French say that the language that the US and the
EC have agreed on to prohibit agricultural export subsidies that dis-
place other countries’ exports in third markets will be seen by French
farmers as a threat to the EC’s Common Agricultural Policy. Al Mc-
Donald, our Geneva trade negotiator, and I pointed out that this was a
problem of perception, rather than substance, since this language did
not pose such a threat; we suggested that the perception should be cor-
4 A memorandum of conversation of the meeting on December 18 among Owen,
Deniau, and other U.S. and French officials is in the Carter Library, National Security Af-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
rected by clarifying statements. (We could not go further in conceding
to the French on this point without forfeiting the support of US farm
groups, which want to be protected against subsidized export competi-
2. Tariffs. The French say that they would find it difficult to secure
public acceptance of eight-year tariff cuts of about 30 percent, as now
planned, against the background of present high French unemploy-
ment. They propose that the MTN commit its signatories to cuts of only
half this size, with further cuts to be decided after four years. We said
that it would be difficult to secure enough US Congressional and public
support to overcome protectionist opposition to MTN, unless it opens
up new markets for US exporters, which requires substantial (i.e.,
around 30 percent) tariff cuts. We thought that it might be possible to
organize these cuts into two four-year phases with timing of the second
phase being somewhat flexible, but we could not agree that a new deci-
sion would be needed to proceed to the second phase. (C)
3. Conclusion: The discussion was more friendly than I had ex-
pected. Deniau said that the countervailing duty issue was no longer a
problem, since it was understood that the EC would only formally ap-
prove an MTN agreement when the CVD issue was resolved by the
Congress. (In the meantime, Treasury will require affected importers to
post bonds, rather than pay the duties.) He stressed political difficulties
in France: The Gaullists and Communists were both attacking the gov-
ernment for yielding to external pressure. I described our political
problems and the need to conclude Geneva negotiations by the end of Jan-
uary; McDonald did a superb job of outlining the concessions the US
had made to date in MTN, which would benefit France. (C)
We won’t know till negotiations resume in Geneva whether the
compromises that Al and I described will be acceptable to Giscard. At
the EC meeting later that day Deniau outlined the French position on
agriculture and tariffs but did not object when the chairman said that
there seemed to be a good basis for proceeding to a conclusion of the
negotiations, so our meeting with him may have done some good. (C)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
189.
Paper Prepared by the National Security Council Staff1
Washington, undated
MULTILATERAL TRADE NEGOTIATIONS
Major progress was made in the Multilateral Trade Negotiations
(MTN) during the month of December. Few issues remain outstanding.
The United States has reached close-out understanding with a large
number of developed and developing countries covering agricultural
and industrial tariffs as well as non-tariff measure codes of conduct. (U)
European Community (EC)
The United States and the European Community have not re-
solved all bilateral issues. We are both seeking a more “balanced”
package. However, a U.S./EC joint statement was issued on December
22 reflecting our present level of agreement.2 We and the EC have es-
sentially resolved our differences on non-tariff measures, agriculture,
and reforms of the General Agreement. We have reached bilateral
agreement on the safeguards code, but the EC must bring the LDCs on
board before negotiating positions can be finalized. Tariff negotiations
with the EC will recommence on January 7th. (C)
The French Position. The French continue to voice dissatisfaction on
several points and remain among the only holdouts in the negotiations.
First, the French oppose agricultural agreements that they perceive
might undermine the EC Common Agricultural Policy (CAP). This has
led to French opposition to an agreement on agricultural subsidies as
well as to the establishment of an agricultural council in the GATT.
Second, the French maintain that the U.S./EC tariff package is not suffi-
ciently balanced. Third, the French have stated that a significant tariff
cut staged over an eight year period is politically unacceptable. They
have proposed implementing tariff reductions in two stages. The
second stage would not be implemented automatically but only after a
review of the economic situation and a positive decision by participants
to continue. (U)
French opposition on these issues is clearly linked to the French
domestic political situation. The Gaullists and the French Communists
together are attacking the MTN and exerting considerable pressure on
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects
Sent to Carter under cover of an undated memorandum from Owen, who noted that the
paper was being forwarded at the President’s request. (Ibid.)

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
Giscard d’Estaing. This pressure is particularly important to Giscard as
this is the run-up period before European Parliamentary elections.3
Giscard has been reported to be seeking time to make structural adjust-
ments in the French economy. In European meetings Giscard has re-
cently expressed concern about foreign competition but has been re-
buffed by Schmidt who strongly supports an open world economy. (C)
U.S. Response to the French. The United States has indicated a will-
ingness to seek presentational devices which would help the French
deal with their political problems. However, we do not see the need to
concede on substantive points. The negotiated language on export sub-
sidies will not undermine the CAP. It enables signatories to maintain
but not to increase existing market shares through subsidization of ag-
ricultural products. A GATT agricultural council, also opposed by the
French, is intended only to be a consultative forum whereby nations
could discuss their agricultural policies—not to pose a threat to the
CAP. On balancing of tariff offers, we will continue negotiations in Jan-
uary until a mutually satisfactory balance is achieved. Furthermore, we
can agree to adjust the presentation of arrangements that are made for
implementing tariff reductions. We can agree to implement tariff re-
ductions in two stages with an evaluation of the international economic
situation at the end of the first stage. However, we could not agree to a
situation whereby a positive decision would be required to activate the
second stage of tariff cuts. (C)
Developing Countries in the MTN
A number of developing countries have joined the negotiations. A
final effort with LDCs is now needed to close out as many tariff agree-
ments as possible and to lay a basis for their participation in the
non-tariff codes. (U)
Attempts to block imports from these countries may be popular
but they increase inflation, reduce productivity, and waste the oppor-
tunities which appropriate adjustment and trade expansion create. The
steady direction of our policies must be to encourage the movement of
capital and labor to their most productive uses and to bring the ad-
vanced developing countries into the world economic system. (U)
Schedule for 1979
Tariff negotiations are scheduled to resume in Geneva on January
7. Our objective will be to finalize tariff offers and the entire MTN
package within a few weeks. The EC has expressed its intention to
submit the results of January negotiations to the EC Council for ap-
proval on February 6, 1979. The U.S. Congress will have been notified

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
by January 4, 1979 of our intention to enter into a final agreement. This
will initiate the required 90-day period for congressional comment and
thereby enable the United States to sign formally an MTN agreement in
early April 1979. (U)
Countervailing Duties
The EC will meet February 6 to review what should then be a com-
pleted MTN agreement. The EC will not give formal approval to an
agreement until the Congress has resolved the countervailing duty
issue. We have told the Europeans that we would ask the Congress to
extend our authority to waive countervailing duties early in the new
session. In the meantime, Treasury will ask affected importers to post
bonds, instead of collecting countervailing duties. (C)
190.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, January 3, 1979
SUBJECT
Tokyo Summit
1. Japanese Communications. We have had two letters from Prime
Minister Ohira regarding the Summit: (U)
a. A December 22 letter inviting you to a Summit in Tokyo. It sug-
gests the last week in June, but indicates that a final decision on timing
should be deferred until preparations are further advanced, as you
have proposed (Tab B).2 (C)
b. A December 26 seven-page letter about his economic plans for
the new year, full of optimism about prospects for reducing Japan’s ex-
ternal surplus, even though he implies that he is not planning a high
growth target for next year. He indicates that he will send an emissary
in January to describe his plans in more detail; and he agrees to our pro-
posal for a January meeting of U.S. and Japanese technicians to resolve
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Brzezinski initialed the memorandum on Owen’s behalf. Carter initialed “C” at the top of
the page.
2 Attached but not printed.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
differences between the two countries about future economic projec-
tions (Tab C).3 (C)
2. At the moment we are generating more friction than progress in
our efforts to convince the Japanese—just as we were in our efforts
vis-a-vis the FRG at the same stage before Bonn. The main need is per-
sistence. The Japanese have a considerable capacity for adjusting to
facts; if they become convinced that we mean business, there is a fair
chance that they will take some of the additional fiscal, monetary, and
trade actions we want—particularly if the January and February trade
figures do not confirm their hopes for a large decline in their surplus. In
line with this strategy, I enclose a proposed reply from you to Prime
Minister Ohira, which has been cleared with State, Treasury, and
Bernie Aronson (Tab A).4 (C)
RECOMMENDATION
That you sign the letter to Prime Minister Ohira at Tab A.
3 Attached but not printed.
4 Attached but not printed is a copy of the signed January 3 letter from Carter to
Ohira.
191.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1
Washington, January 5, 1979
SUBJECT
Extension of the Countervailing Duty Waiver Authority
The expiration on January 2, 1979, of the authority to waive the im-
position of countervailing duties has seriously hampered our efforts to
conclude successfully the Tokyo Round of Multilateral Trade Negotia-
tions. This issue arose in the closing days of the 95th Congress and, al-
though legislation to extend the waiver was passed twice by the Senate
and once by the House, in varying forms, it proved impossible to enact
this necessary legislation.
tion indicates that Strauss signed the original.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
In a series of consultations with the Commission of the European
Community (EC) and with officials of various EC Member States, we
have given assurances that we will do everything that can be done
under the law to avoid any disruption of trade. In particular, we have
given assurances that, in lieu of collecting duties, Treasury will sus-
pend liquidation of duties on the affected products beginning January
3rd, and that bonds or other security will be utilized to protect the rev-
enues of the United States. We have also given the EC our commitment
to go forward with legislation early in the 96th Congress seeking an ex-
tension of the waiver authority. On the basis of this commitment, the
EC is concluding the MTN negotiations with us.
In going forward, we recognize that there are risks that either the
waiver legislation will be blocked or become the target of unacceptable
amendments (e.g., from the textile industry). If events warrant, we may
have to fall back to making the waiver extension retroactive as a part of
the unamendable package of legislation implementing the results of the
Tokyo Round. However, there is something of a chicken and egg
problem—we cannot submit the MTN package to Congress for imple-
mentation until it is signed and the EC has reiterated that it is not pos-
sible to sign final agreements until the waiver issue is resolved.
We need and we should seek to obtain a waiver extension for a
limited period (i.e. from the date of its expiration until such time as the
MTN implementing legislation is voted upon by the Congress). Be-
cause the waiver authority includes provisions protecting U.S. indus-
tries from subsidized competition—no waiver may be granted unless
adequate steps have been taken to “reduce or substantially eliminate”
the adverse effect of the subsidy on U.S. producers—extension of the
waiver authority for this limited period will not impose added burdens
on U.S. industries and workers.
We have the support of key Congressional leaders, including
Speaker O’Neill and Chairmen Long, Ullman, Ribicoff, and Vanik. In
addition, we are working with representatives of industry, agriculture
and labor to avoid potential opposition. Although I have no illusions
about the difficulty of this enterprise, I am reasonably hopeful of
success. Accordingly, I am attaching a draft message to the Congress as
well as a draft legislative proposal providing for an extension of the
I recommend that the attached message and draft legislative pro-
posal be transmitted to the Congress on January 15, 1979. All interested
2 Attached but not printed.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
agencies, and in particular Treasury which administers this law, join in
this request.3
3 In a January 15 message to Congress, Carter requested an extension of the coun-
tervailing duty waiver until September 30, 1979. For the text of Carter’s message, see
Congress approved the extension in March. (“Senate Passes Duty Waiver,” The New York
192.
Memorandum From the General Counsel, Office of the
Special Representative For Trade Negotiations (Rivers) to the
Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Strauss) and
the Deputy Special Representative for Trade Negotiations
(Wolff)1
Washington, January 16, 1979
SUBJECT
DISC in the Subsidies Code
As this issue may boil up during my absence from the office this
week, I have prepared the following memo explaining how DISC has
been handled in the negotiation of a code on subsidies and counter-
vailing duties:
Trade Act Mandate: Congress in the Trade Act of 1974 and its legis-
lative history mandated the President to negotiate new rules on the use
of subsidies affecting international trade, particularly export subsidies.
DISC and the European Tax Practices: Meanwhile, the EC brought a
GATT complaint against the U.S. alleging DISC to be an export subsidy
in violation of the present GATT Article XVI.2 The U.S. “counter-
claimed” against Belgium, France, and the Netherlands alleging that
their income tax practices (failure to tax income from exports that were
run through paper tax-haven subsidiaries; non-arm’s length pricing be-
tween such subsidiaries and their parent companies) were likewise vio-
lations of the present GATT Article XVI.
2 Article XVI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade deals with
“Subsidies.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Panel Discussions: The GATT panels found the DISC to be an export
subsidy and a violation of present obligations. The panels also found
against the European tax practices. In the latter cases, however, the
panels may have gone further than was necessary and wrote opinions
directly calling into question a keystone of European tax systems (the
“principle of territoriality”, i.e., European tax systems do not purport to
tax income generated abroad).
Congress and DISC: Meanwhile Congress in the tax legislation of
1977–78, expressly declined to repeal DISC, despite Administration
recommendations.
Problem: In the light of these developments, how does one nego-
tiate a code on subsidies and countervailing duties, especially one
which prohibits export subsidies and asks developing countries to ac-
cept an obligation to eliminate their export subsidies? Keep in mind
that the DISC has been found to be a violation of the present rules. Keep
in mind also that Congress is not about to repeal the DISC under the
present circumstances. Predictably, our trading partners made the re-
peal of DISC a pre-condition for the negotiation of a code on subsidies
and countervailing duties.
Tactical Solution: A year ago, we told our negotiating counterparts
that we would repeal DISC when they agreed to adopt the panel re-
ports on the European tax practices in toto, (something we knew they
could not agree to) thereby creating a deadlock on the issue. A year
passed, during which we negotiated a subsidies code containing,
among other things, a flat ban on export subsidies on industrial
products. Export subsidies are identified in the code both by means of a
general definition, and by an “illustrative list”. Two months ago, we
told our negotiating counterparts, ‘Wouldn’t it be a pity if our work of
the past year were to be lost because of our inability to resolve this
DISC/direct tax practice issue? What we need is some language in the
illustrative list saying, in effect, signatories are concerned about the re-
lation between direct tax practices and trade and agree that there
should be a post-MTN conference on direct tax practices with a view to
supplementing this illustrative list.’ This has resulted in two alternative
formulations in the attachment.3 Both versions: (1) freeze the present
situation and put the DISC issue in abeyance; (2) set the stage for an in-
ternational tax conference that Conable and others have sought for so
long, and (3) sets the precedent of amending and supplementing the
subsidies code.
DISC Lobby: The DISC lobby is angry because:
3 Attached but not printed is an undated paper entitled “Annex A—Illustrative List
of Export Subsidies.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
(1) Some of them think the subsidies code repeals DISC. (It does
not; this is not a self-executing agreement. Even after the subsidies code
is accepted by the Congress, the DISC will remain in place until it is
specifically repealed by the Congress.)
(2) They say the Code “puts another nail in the coffin of DISC”;
(3) They fear it changes the politics of DISC (e.g., Kennedy can
make another GATT argument as to why DISC should be repealed);
and
(4) Probably, because they view the subsidies code as effectively
deterring any additional export tax incentives.
Counter-arguments:
(1) The subsidies code does not materially affect the legal standing
of the DISC, either as a matter of domestic law (it will not be repealed)
or under the GATT (the panel report on the DISC is a fact of life and we
go no further toward incriminating the DISC).4
4 DISC lawyers make an argument that if Version 1 is adopted in approving the
subsidies code, Congress will be implicitly accepting the panel report on DISC. I believe
any such objection can be met by a disclaimer in the legislative history of the imple-
menting legislation. [Footnote in the original.]
193.
Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Economic and Business Affairs (Katz) to Secretary of
State Vance1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Strauss’ Talk with the Textile Industry
Bob Strauss has held a series of talks with representatives of the
textile industry seeking their support (or at least neutrality) for the
MTN package when it is before Congress. In return he is offering a tex-
tile “program” responsive to many of the industry’s long-standing
complaints over our administration of import restraints on textiles.
This program was presented to and reportedly accepted by textile in-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot
Drafted on January 19 by Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Trade
Policy William Barraclough.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
dustry and union representatives at a meeting with Strauss in New
York January 19.2
We had a last minute opportunity January 18 to comment on
Strauss’ proposal. We were able to change some of the more objection-
able elements to where the proposal is at the margin of acceptability.
Our changes were, STR tells us, accepted by the industry. Although I
am sympathetic to Strauss’ objective of counteracting the severe
damage the textile industry can do us on the Hill, the concessions he is
making will haunt us in the future and aggravate the foreign policy
problems, particularly with LDCs, arising from the textile restraint pro-
gram. For example:
—we will negotiate with Korea, Hong Kong and Taiwan cutbacks
in the levels of exports to us which they are otherwise permitted under
our bilateral agreements which still have three years to run. Discus-
sions with Hong Kong are already underway. Those with Korea will be
the most difficult.
—we are accepting a relationship (even if ill-defined) between
growth in textile imports to growth in our domestic market, a concept
we have consistently avoided in the past and which could put us in vio-
lation of our obligations under the multi-fibre agreement.3 This was the
key demand of the industry.
—by promising to deal with disruptive imports from any source,
we are opening ourselves to pressures to restrain imports from small or
single-product suppliers whom we have so far left uncontrolled (e.g.,
Chile, Costa Rica, Sri Lanka, Indonesia).
In general, the Strauss proposal will lead to industry expectations
which we will be under immense pressure to fulfill, even if doing so en-
tails higher foreign policy costs than we have been willing to accept up
to now.
Mike Blumenthal and Charlie Schultze have expressed concern
over Strauss’ proposal. They find its inflationary implications most dis-
turbing, particularly if a direct link between imports and domestic
market growth is in the event established.4 They have considered
2 No record of this meeting was found.
3 See Document 8.
4 In a January 22 memorandum to Strauss, Schultze expressed concern that the draft
textile plan was structurally biased toward increasing restrictions on imports over time
and that “such a program of restrictions for textiles may invite other groups to escalate
their demands.” Schultze asserted that “the consequences of the draft as it now stands for
our anti-inflation efforts and the precedent it may create for generating demands by other
groups, lead me to question seriously whether the advantages of concluding such an
agreement at this early stage are worth the costs.” In a January 23 memorandum to
Strauss, Blumenthal echoed Schultze’s concerns and criticized the program’s ambiguous
language. Blumenthal suggested three options: “meet the textile industry head on;” with-
draw all non-woolen textiles from the MTN deal; or establish “a looser textile program.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
taking their concerns to the President but I do not know if they have de-
cided to do so.
Strauss intends to submit his proposal to the President and ask
him to meet with the industry and its Congressional supporters. How-
ever, the President would not be asked to endorse personally the spe-
cifics of the understanding Strauss has reached with the industry. Thus,
no paper detailing the specifics would be officially issued and the
status of the understanding beyond the personal commitment of
Strauss will be left somewhat vague.
Strauss is doing what he believes he must do to remove one of the
major obstacles to Congressional approval of extension of the counter-
vailing duty waiver and eventual approval of the MTN results.5 The
price he is paying to achieve this, in my judgment, may mortgage our
future ability to administer a tolerably acceptable textile restraint pro-
gram. It is a close call as to whether you should personally interfere at
this point but, on balance, I suggest you not do so. You may, however,
wish to discuss this with Mike Blumenthal and Charlie Schultze.
5 In a January 24 memorandum to Blumenthal, written in response to Blumenthal’s
January 23 memorandum to him (see footnote 4 above), Strauss asserted that “a positive
program” for the textile industry was “essential to passage of the CVD waiver bill and to
passage of the MTN legislation. That is not all that is at stake, we are really putting on the
line our future relationships with our major trading partners, which would deteriorate
sharply in the absence of adoption of the MTN package.” Asserting that the draft plan
“involves little more than what we do now,” Strauss addressed each of Blumenthal’s crit-
icisms in turn and suggested that the program was “ ‘tilting the emphasis’ instead of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
194.
Memorandum From the U.S. Executive Director,
International Monetary Fund (Cross) to the Under Secretary
of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs (Solomon) and
Members of the International Monetary Group1
Washington, February 5, 1979
SUBJECT
IMF Consideration of Substitution Account
Background
In recent months there has been a renewal of interest in the possi-
bility of establishing a substitution account for shifting official dollar
claims to official SDR claims.2 In the IMF, the Interim Committee com-
munique last fall stated that this matter would be “kept under re-
view,”3 and some Executive Directors have recently proposed that the
Board consider it promptly. In the Congress, Reuss and Javits have
urged that such an account be established.
The U.S. has made clear that we have an open mind about ideas for
evolution of the system; that we have no interest in preserving an artifi-
cial role for the dollar and are prepared to contemplate a reduction in
its relative role; and that in considering substitution proposals our ob-
jective will be not to resist change but to ensure that any change will be
an improvement from our own point of view and that of an open and
stable system.
The substitution issue is on the agenda of the next Interim Com-
mittee meeting (March 7), and the IMF staff has prepared the attached
paper for Board discussion February 12.4 It argues the case for substitu-
tion on grounds that:
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Under Secretary for Economic Af-
fairs, 1978–1980 Files Pertaining to International Monetary Affairs, OECD, Documents,
Confidential.
in both late 1977 and late 1978 stimulated interest in the creation of a substitution account.
(Boughton, Silent Revolution, pp. 937 and 939)
printed in de Vries, The International Monetary Fund, 1972–1978: Cooperation on Trial, vol.
III, Documents, pp. 239–242.
tary to Members of the Executive Board on “Review of the Question of a Substitution Ac-
count, and Related Issues” is in the National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Under Secre-
tary for Economic Affairs, 1978–1980 Files Pertaining to International Monetary Affairs,
etary Group.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
—it would represent an evolutionary move to strengthen the
system and enhance the position of the SDR;
—without it there is a risk of continuing instability as governments
seek to diversify reserves;
—the time to act is now, since the November 1 measures have sta-
bilized markets and fundamentals are improving.
Three types of substitution are mentioned in the IMF staff paper.
Some comments on each type follow.
Type A—SDR-Denominated Claims Issued by the United States
1. This is basically a guarantee scheme, not necessarily involving
any permanent substitution of SDRs for dollars, increasing the use of
SDR more as a unit of account than as an asset. (The claims issued by
the U.S. would be very similar to SDRs, without the Fund-related provi-
sions for designation, acceptance limits, guaranteed usability at “equal
value” exchange rate, etc. However, if and when the account were li-
quidated, the U.S. obligation would presumably be to pay not SDRs but
whatever number of dollars is called for under the SDR guarantee.
2. The exchange risk, and attendant possible gains or losses, is
borne entirely by the United States. The IMF paper rather passes this
off, saying the risk is less than what U.S. has taken on by DM and Swiss
franc borrowing, which ignores the fact that we borrowed to accumu-
late resources for market operations rather than to mop up dollars.
3. U.S. legal and financial considerations need to be explored to de-
termine possibilities for carrying exchange risk. We think it is probably
legal for ESF to carry risk, but its resources are woefully inadequate.
The General Account can borrow in foreign currencies, but there may
be problems in its borrowing (and repaying) in dollars with foreign
currency or SDR guarantee. We are researching this question.
4. Characteristics of the Type A “guarantee” proposal make it look
more like a dollar support exercise, and less like a long-term evolution of
the system toward the SDR.
5. There could be an incentive for long-term deposits (beyond 10
years), raising questions about our debt management policies and the
ceiling on long-term issues by the Treasury. Similar questions would
arise under Types B and C.
Type B—Allocation of SDRs by the Fund
1. Similar to Witteveen’s proposal last year for an SDR allocation
tied to equivalent deposit of dollars by each participant. This time IMF
staff says “U.S. could use its SDR allocation to buy dollars from those
countries prepared to absorb additional dollars,” presumably in re-
sponse to earlier criticisms that the U.S. was not paying out any
“assets” under the Witteveen scheme. The staff paper also says that
since SDR allocations must be proportional to quotas, this approach

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
“would involve heavy reliance on a mechanism through which many
countries would sell their newly allocated SDRs for dollars to a few
countries.”
2. Proposal was discussed in IMF Board last year, before alloca-
tions for 1979–81 were agreed. Several (especially U.K. and Belgium)
were in favor, some with comment that U.S. should participate by
paying gold or other assets. Some were opposed such as Germans who
feared vicious cycle of substitution leading to more dollars leading to
more substitution; and Italians, who wanted straight SDR allocation
and felt that proposal would provide no future control over interna-
tional liquidity. Many took no definite position but saw both pros and
cons in the idea.
3. Type B provides the clearest and most immediate substitution of
the three varieties.
Type C—SDR-Denominated Claims Issued Through an Account
Administered by the Fund
1. This is the most novel approach. While no details are provided,
one can envisage an account in which—at least at present interest
rates—dollars deposited long term and earning say, 9 percent, could be
used to pay SDR interest of, say, 6 percent and accumulate the differ-
ence for meeting the exchange risk.
2. If the U.S. were to pay interest to the account on the dollar de-
posits in the form of SDR, at least when it had SDRs, and the account
were to pay out interest in the form of dollars, the account would gradu-
ally be transformed from dollars to SDRs.
3. Thus a form of Type C could be envisaged under which there
would be a partial SDR guarantee, to the extent funds were available
from the interest rate differential. The only U.S. obligation would be a
claim against our future SDR earnings and allocations.
Questions for IMG
1. Would a move toward official substitution benefit the dollar in
terms of short-term market psychology? If so, is one of the three ap-
proaches (or some alternative approach) preferable to the others?
2. Does it make sense to introduce schemes for official substitution
without action on private international use of the dollar, or future offi-
cial accumulations?
3. From the point of view of the U.S. long-term interest in a
smoothly functioning international monetary system, and assuming
substitution can be introduced without other major changes in the
system, is substitution in the U.S. interest and worth the financial costs?
I.e., is it the best use of U.S. resources in terms of exchange rate guar-
antees or giving up claims to future SDR allocations or earnings?

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
4. What are the prospects of negotiating substitution without other
major changes in the international monetary system (most importantly,
toward asset settlement and central control of international liquidity)?
Would such changes be in the U.S. interest? In assessing this question is
there a distinction to be made between movement toward such a
system in the long run vs. the short run?
195.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Proposed Trade Arrangement with Textile Industry
I sympathize greatly with Bob Strauss’ effort to work out an ar-
rangement with the textile industry which would help assure passage
of the MTN legislation and countervailing duty waiver extension bill.
The industry could clearly cause us major problems and the stakes for
the Administration are extremely high.
However, it is my judgment that the program which has been negotiated
would be extremely costly to a number of key Administration interests:
—It would add to inflation by cutting back import levels, and would
be widely perceived and publicly described as inconsistent with the basic
policy thrust of the Administration.
—It would be an extremely dangerous precedent, inducing numerous
other industries to seek protectionist commitments from the Administration
as the price of their support for the trade legislation over the next six
months.
—By providing for sharp rollbacks in import quotas, it would re-
verse the whole history of United States trade (including textile) policy which
has always permitted at least minimum growth for foreign suppliers.
Despite these severe problems, I would regard the package as barely ac-
ceptable if it were adopted in the context of successful conclusion of the MTN
1 Source: National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
sification marking. Sent to Blumenthal for his signature under cover of a February 5
memorandum from Bergsten, who wrote: “Attached is the textile memo for the Presi-
dent, per your directions. I have informed Wolff of your view. His only response was to
reiterate that they will be doing all these things anyway, so explicit announcement of the
program adds nothing. This is of course fraudulent.” (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
legislation (and the earlier CVD waiver extension). In the absence of such an
outcome we would get the worst of both worlds—no MTN and a highly re-
strictive textile program. In fact, the textile program should go into effect
only upon successful completion of the MTN legislation.
I therefore recommend:
—That no textile program be accepted until absolutely essential to as-
sure industry support for the MTN legislation.
—That its implementation be conditioned on successful conclusion of the
MTN package including our implementing legislation.
—In the interim, that further efforts be made to improve the specifics of
the program; most notably, its rollbacks of import levels and perhaps
the “global import evaluation” which implies a USG commitment to
global rather than country quotas.
W. Michael Blumenthal2
2 Printed from a copy with the signature “Mike (per copy)” above this typed
signature.
196.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council of
Economic Advisers (Schultze) to President Carter1
Washington, February 6, 1979
SUBJECT
Proposed Administration Textile Program
This proposal is a significantly restrictive international trade meas-
ure.2 I recommend that you agree to it only on the condition that it goes
into effect after the MTN is signed and in hand.
The industry is finally getting in this program what they have been
seeking from the U.S. Government for years. It includes a very restric-
tive mechanistic “ratchet” effect (Import Control #4) that prevents im-
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 86, Textiles. No classification marking.
2 Attached but not printed is a February 6 paper entitled “Administration Textile
Program—Pursuant to the President’s Statement of November 11, 1978.” On November
thority to participate in textile negotiations in the MTN. For the text of Carter’s veto state-
ment, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book II, pp.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
porters from getting back to agreed upon import quotas on any cate-
gory of imports if they should fall short in a given year. This sets a very
bad precedent. This provision virtually guarantees substantial import
restraint for many of the textile and apparel categories, because they
are subject to large annual fluctuations. It will therefore have a net de-
pressive effect on international trade and increase our inflation rate.
Given the very restrictive nature of this program, we should make
it absolutely clear to the industry, as well as in public presentations,
that this is a balancing item to the liberalizing effects of the MTN. Our
position should be that this program is acceptable only in the context of
balancing MTN costs and benefits. If the MTN should fail, we do not
want to be saddled with this program. Moreover, we would not want
to be on record with this program as the first in a series of very restric-
tive worldwide trade actions that might be taken if the MTN should
collapse.
In short, this program should only be implemented in the context
of a signed, sealed, and delivered MTN. If it is presented to the industry
in this light, it might also have a chance of making them real allies in the
CVD and MTN ratification fights.
197.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, February 6, 1979
SUBJECT
MTN (U)
Introduction. You asked about the importance of the MTN to the
U.S., France and others. This is a key question in the wake of the mes-
sage that I brought back from my last meeting with French Trade Min-
ister Deniau: that Giscard would veto the MTN argument if it were not
altered in ways more favorable to France.2 (C)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 90, Economics/International: 1979. Confidential. Sent
for action. Both Carter and Brzezinski initialed at the top of the page.
2 Owen met with Deniau, as well as other U.S. and French officials, in Paris on Jan-
uary 23. A memorandum of conversation of the meeting is in the Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects File, Henry Owen, Box 22, Memcons:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Positive Effect. The MTN reduction in trade barriers will help over
the longer term to create jobs and reduce inflation in the industrial
countries, and to hasten economic growth in the developing world.
This effect will be blunted, at least in the short term, by the fact that (1)
the MTN trade in barrier reductions will be smaller than some had
hoped; (2) these reductions will be offset, to some extent, by conces-
sions that we will probably have to make to certain U.S. industries (e.g.,
textiles), to get their support. (C)
Negative Effect. But there is more to it than this. British World War
II infantry manuals advised troops that the best way to avoid mortar
fire was by going forward, and somewhat the same principle applies in
trade. It is difficult to mobilize anti-protectionist forces to resist the
myriad of protectionist proposals that pop up every year in major
trading nations. (C)
These forces can be mobilized, however, in support of efforts to
achieve a wide-ranging trade agreement. Which is why major new
trade negotiations are periodically undertaken to push back the fron-
tiers of protectionism, or at least arrest their advance. These negotia-
tions thus acquire a symbolic importance out of all proportion to their
immediate economic effect. Their outcome shapes the climate for trade
policy decisions across the board. (C)
If MTN negotiations fail, a large number of protectionist bills will
almost certainly be introduced in the Congress; we are told that about
twenty five are waiting to be thrown into the hopper within days, if
MTN collapses. In the ensuing environment such bills would be hard to
defeat. European and Japanese retaliation would surely follow. (C)
A few countries, including the United States and France, might
gain for a short time by imposing trade barriers. But the spread of pro-
tectionism would quickly convert this modest gain into a major loss—
by fueling inflation and curtailing economic activity. The statisticians
say that a 10% increase in import prices could cause nearly a 5% de-
crease in world trade in two years, and that this would cause real eco-
nomic growth in the OECD countries to fall by 0.6 percent. (C)
This slow growth would lower the profitability of US firms, and
hence reduce their ability to make the innovative investments needed
to increase productivity. This reduction would make the United States
less competitive and less able to adapt to the changes taking place in
the world economy, much as the UK is now. (C)
We would be particularly hard hit by the developing countries’ di-
minished capacity to buy our goods in the face of rising trade barriers.
With less export earnings, these countries’ ability to buy US farm and
industrial products would decline; they now absorb about 40 percent of
our exports (25% if you don’t count the OPEC countries). (C)

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
It is hard to see how an economic setback of this magnitude could
occur without political repercussions. Resentment and recrimination
would drive the US, Europe, and Japan apart. Antagonism between the
West and the Third World would sharpen. The Soviet Union would be
tempted to exploit resulting disarray, and East/West relations might
worsen as a result. (C)
France. The French probably see some of the more immediate MTN
implications described above. That is why they want an MTN agree-
ment. But they also want to be sure that this agreement does not cause
them too much domestic political pain, and they threaten to veto the
negotiations in bargaining to this end.3 (C)
We don’t know how much this threat is a bluff, because we don’t
know how clearly they see the wider consequences of failure. To make
sure that they do, we need to make evident, without threat or pressure,
our view as to the heavy costs that they would have to bear if they were
to cause the negotiations to fail. (C)
To this end, if you approve, I will send the attached letter (which
has been cleared by State, STR, and Treasury) to French Trade Minister
Deniau.4 For us to remain silent in the face of the threatening message
that the French have sent would, I believe, be taken as a sign of
weakness—thus compounding the risk that the MTN will fail, more by
French miscalculation than deliberate intent. Since the French message
comes from Giscard, the answer should explicity reflect your views.
But since the message was delivered by Deniau, we should not escalate
this exchange above the Ministerial level.5 (C)
3 In the margin beneath this paragraph, Carter wrote: “It still seems to me that other
nations who are more heavily dependent on exports would be hurt worse than U.S.—but
we appear to be the supplicant. J.”
4 Not attached.
5 Carter checked the option to approve sending the letter and initialed “J.” Tele-
gram 37790 to Paris, February 13, transmitted Owen’s letter for delivery to Deniau. In the
letter, which is dated February 9, Owen related Carter’s views on the economic and polit-
ical implications of a failure of the MTN and his desire for a quick conclusion of the
U.S.–EC MTN negotiations. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
198.
Briefing Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary
of State for Economic and Business Affairs (Hormats) to the
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Cooper)1
Washington, February 8, 1979
SUBJECT
Dollar Substitution and SDRs; IMG Meeting on February 9
The February 9 IMG meeting will discuss an IMF staff paper which
put forward three ideas on how a substitution account could be struc-
tured.2 The Fund’s Executive Board is scheduled to discuss the paper
on February 12, and the USED will look to the IMG discussion to frame
his reaction. A copy of the Fund staff paper and a memo from USED
Sam Cross are attached.3 This memo reviews some of the general issues
involved in a dollar substitution account and comments on the three
specific ideas presented in the IMF staff paper.
Background
Arguments for a substitution account are generally based on two
premises: (1) the substitution of dollars for SDRs would give greater
stability to the monetary system by permitting diversification of re-
serves and thus reducing the vulnerability of major currencies to
sudden demand shifts; and (2) a substitution account would advance
the role of the SDR as the primary international reserve, a goal en-
dorsed in the amended IMF Articles of Agreement.4
The first premise relates to claims that dollar weakness and sys-
temic instability are directly connected to “excessive” dollars held
overseas. One way to soak up “excess” dollars, the IMF staff concludes,
would be a new account which would allow the substitution of the SDR
for dollar holdings.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Under Secretary for Economic Af-
fairs, 1978–1980 Files Pertaining to International Monetary Affairs, OECD, Documents,
Official Use. Drafted by John Lefgren (EB/IFD/OMA) and cleared by Michael Ely and
William Milam, Director and Deputy Director of the Office of Monetary Affairs (EB/
2 No record of the meeting was found.
4 The program of international monetary reform adopted by the IMF Interim Com-
mittee in January 1976 resulted in amendments being made to the IMF Articles of Agree-
Documents 128 and 129.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
The second is the envisioned role of the SDR as the primary inter-
national reserve. Marginal allocations of SDRs to existing international
liquidity will not move the SDR to the center of the international mone-
tary system. In addition, increases in international liquidity should not
be dependent on the deficits of reserve currency countries. It is argued
that the creation of international liquidity should be delegated to an in-
ternational body, the IMF, which would have power to regulate the cre-
ation of reserve assets. One goal of the substitution account would be
the transformation of the current dollar-centered system.
The issues underlying USG discussion of a substitution account
are, of course, our fundamental objective in the international monetary
system and how it should be strengthened over the long run. Positions
on the concept of the dollar substitution will reflect views on those
basic questions.
Problems of a Substitution Account
The idea of a substitution account merits considerably more exam-
ination. However, current proposals for a substitution account, in-
cluding the ideas discussed in the IMF paper, have failed to deal with
three fundamental problems:
—Active dollar balances are in the private sector. Most overseas dollar
assets are held by international banks and multi-national corporations,
and these institutions are more prone to move out of dollars during a
period of dollar weakness than are foreign central banks. Indeed, the
central banks have become the depository of unwanted dollars from
the private sector. A substitution account for official dollar holdings
would not necessarily lessen the volatility of dollar assets in private
capital markets. Even with a significant substitution of official dollar
holdings, there is no assurance that exchange rates will tend to be more
stable.5
—Despite the recent improvement, there remains some doubt as to
whether the SDR is a preferred reserve asset. The IMF has allocated 9.3 bil-
lion SDRs to member countries. A quick review of the distribution of
these SDRs as of November 1978 suggests that many countries do not
wish to hold SDRs. About three-fourths of the IMF members have re-
duced their SDR holdings. This implies that the SDR has been used as a
5 In a February 8 memorandum to Cooper, his Special Assistant, Peter Clark, sug-
gested that “if one supports a SA” on the basis of its potential contribution to stability in
the foreign exchange market, “then one should have evidence that central bank (as op-
posed to private sector) shifts from dollars to other currencies have contributed to ex-
change market instability. If this could be established, it would then be necessary to show
that a SA would in fact reduce destabilizing portfolio shifts by central banks and mone-
tary authorities.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Under Secretary for Economic
Affairs, 1978–1980 Files Pertaining to International Monetary Affairs, OECD, Documents,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
means of settlement before most alternative reserve assets. In most
cases, it appears that central banks have used SDRs before dollar re-
serves. Given this lack of enthusiasm for SDR holdings, there is a legiti-
mate question of how anxious central banks are to substitute their
dollar reserves for SDRs. They already have the option at time of settle-
ment, and few central banks have exercised it.6
—Dollar substitution will likely mean increased Federal interest costs.
The U.S. Government is a net debtor and foreign central banks hold a
third of the total Federal debt as foreign exchange reserves. Any substi-
tution scheme which attempts to replace dollar reserves with SDRs will
probably mean that the U.S. will have to assume the cost of bearing ex-
change risk and possibly higher dollar interest payments.7
Specific IMF Proposals
The ideas presented by the IMF staff appear, on first glance, to
promise only marginal benefits to the international monetary system
and could be costly for the U.S.8
The IMF staff outlined three possible forms of substitution
accounts:
A. SDR denominated claims issued by the United States.
Under this proposal, foreign dollar holders (presumably official,
but this might, in certain circumstances, be broadened to include pri-
vate) could deposit their dollars in an IMF account in exchange for SDR
obligations issued by the U.S.
mented on the notion that a substitution account would bolster the SDR’s role in the in-
ternational monetary system: “Assuming that this is a desirable, it is not clear that a SA
by itself will achieve this objective. As Hormats’ memo points out, it appears that the SDR
is not the preferred asset in central bank portfolios. Mandating substitution or allowing
SDR–dollar conversion is unlikely to raise the status of the SDR if its main features, e.g.
rate of return, make it unattractive. ”
garding the idea that a substitution account “should (probably) not involve increased
costs for the U.S.”: “If the U.S. provides some kind of exchange rate guarantee by taking
on an SDR-denominated liability, then clearly the interest rate we pay on this liability
should reflect this. The Hormats memo (top of p. 3) is not clear on this point, since it im-
plies that the U.S. might have to bear exchange risk and pay a higher dollar interest rate.
Such a combination would clearly be unacceptable.”
that a substitution account “must be considered in a wider context of the future evolution
of the international monetary system,” involving consideration of issues including
“a) the role of reserve currencies as such, b) the natural tendency for central banks to di-
versify their portfolio of reserve assets out of dollars into appreciating currencies over the
long run and c) the extent to which central banks should be permitted to behave as pri-
vate portfolio managers and the extent to which their behavior should be constrained in
order to achieve benefits for the entire system.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
It appears that new SDR-denominated obligations (bonds) would
be nothing other than illiquid assets which would have to be liquidated
for other assets at the time of settlement—hardly an international asset
used as a medium of exchange between central banks. Such a proce-
dure would not necessarily enhance the reserve role of the SDR. It
would only enhance the SDR as a unit of account in determining the
obligations a debtor (the U.S.) has to its creditors (former holders of
dollars).
If private dollar holders were allowed to use the IMF account to
obtain SDR-denominated securities, there might be a reduction in the
size of the dollar overhang and possibly more exchange rate stability.
In 1974–75, Chase Manhattan Bank offered SDR denominated cer-
tificates of deposits (CDs) to provide international creditors with pro-
tection from further dollar decline. The SDR denominated CDs did not
prove popular because of the low rate of return on the SDR CDs which
Chase felt necessary to offer in order to cover its exchange risk. This ex-
perience suggests that the USG may have to pay an interest premium to
induce foreign dollar holders to exchange their dollar assets for SDR
obligations.
B. Allocation of SDRs by the IMF.
This proposal is to establish an account which would receive dollar
deposits from member countries in proportion to their quotas and in
exchange for a new SDR allocation. The new SDR allocation would be
equal to the “desired” amount of dollars to be absorbed. Furthermore,
the U.S. could sell its SDR allocation for unwanted dollars. The dollars
exchanged for the newly created SDRs would be kept by the IMF in
non-transferable long-term claims against the United States.
This proposal is essentially the mechanism presented last year by
the IMF. The approach presupposes that most IMF countries are
anxious to exchange their dollar holdings for new SDRs. This may not
be the case unless SDRs are no longer regarded as inferior assets.
C. SDR Denominated Claims Issued Through an Account Administered
by the IMF.
This proposal would establish an account which would accept an
unspecified amount of dollars in exchange for SDR denominated
claims on a voluntary basis. The Fund-held dollar assets would, over
the long-run, have to equal or exceed the value of SDR claims to cover
the Fund’s exchange risk. This implies that the interest earned on USG
securities purchased with the dollars deposited in the account would
be higher over time than the interest paid to the holders of SDR de-
nominated claims. This approach would provide a safe haven for “ex-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
cessive” dollar reserves, but it, too, raises the question of whether cen-
tral bank officials will consider these SDR claims as preferred assets.9
9 In March 1979, de Larosie`re submitted a more detailed version of this proposal to
the Interim Committee, one in which the “account would convert its assets into longer-
term dollar-denominated claims on the U.S. Treasury, which would pay a suitably
long-term interest rate on them. Interest would be paid to depositors at the official SDR
interest rate (which at the time was maintained below the market rate). The intention was
that the account’s exchange risk would be covered by the difference between the
long-term U.S. bond rate and the official SDR interest rate.” The Interim Committee, in
turn, indicated its “broad support” for active consideration of such an account.
(Boughton, Silent Revolution, p. 939)
199.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1
Washington, February 8, 1979
SUBJECT
The Textile Program in the MTN
Enclosed is the final text of the Administration Textile Program
which we will discuss again this morning.2 Its acceptance on our part
will give us no less than the support of the textile industry and quali-
fied support of the key unions as we seek first the extension of the au-
thority to waive countervailing duties, and second, approval of the
MTN agreements. Support of this bloc will make both tasks signifi-
cantly easier; their opposition would be fatal. The benefits of having
them in a position of support and cooperation will extend beyond these
immediate legislative objectives, I am certain.
This industry, employing almost two and a half million people,
more than half of them women, and a large portion minorities, has been
provided with special programs of various kinds going back to the
liberate = Haggling.”
2 Attached but not printed is a February 7 paper entitled “Administration Textile
Program—Pursuant to the President’s Statement of November 11, 1978.” Carter met with
Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No memorandum of conversa-
tion was found.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
Roosevelt Administration, and the present type of import-control pro-
gram has existed for almost twenty years.
Currently the industry is most concerned about rapid surges in
specific products from other nations which can cause rapid loss of jobs
and production. Their proposal is to allow trade to grow, but not in
such disruptive ways—and that is the principal thrust of this paper.
As I explain in an attached outline of how this paper developed,3 it
began after the industry had secured an overwhelming vote in the
Congress to take textiles out of our MTN tariff negotiations, which leg-
islation you vetoed on November 11, 1978. Your veto message (which I
also enclose)4 was the starting point for this program.
Several agencies have expressed a distrust of this industry and its
associated unions, fearing that once a program such as this has your ap-
proval they will renege on their promises to help us in the Congress.
They recommend that failure of the MTN for any reason should imme-
diately terminate the program we have set out upon. I do not believe
this is realistic, but I do agree that we should think about how to handle
certain elements of the textile trade should the MTN not be approved. I
feel certain that a number of agencies would want to review where we
stand in that event.
As a whole, the document we have drafted addresses a number of
the industry’s problems in a coherent way, giving them a degree of cer-
tainty for annual planning purposes. This, as you know, is crucial to
good business operations. Most of what is in here is already in place or
is on the way even without this paper. There are, however, several con-
cepts enunciated which represent the first statement of these policy
directions:
(1) A global evaluation of imports. This is a promise that when we
look at potential quantitative restrictions for a supplier we will con-
sider the total volume of imports of the category of goods in question
from all sources. This recognizes that a sharp increase from one source
which would not cause us to respond if it were the only such increase,
would in fact cause action to be taken if it occurred on top of substantial
and disruptive levels of imports from multiple sources.
(2) An evaluation of the growth of imports from our three principal sup-
pliers (Hong Kong, Korea and Taiwan) in the context of the growth of the do-
mestic market. Currently growth accorded these major suppliers is de-
termined without explicitly requiring a review of the condition of the
U.S. market, often giving imports a disproportionate share of the
3 Attached but not printed is an undated paper entitled “Chronology of the Admin-
istration’s Textile Program.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
market growth. In the next three years we would have an annual re-
view of this relationship and take it into account in our negotiations.
(3) Avoidance of surges which now can occur when a country substan-
tially underships its quota and then moves to full quota the next year. To
avoid some very significant surges, we would under normal circum-
stances, limit a country to an increase of half of its unfilled portion in
that product, but recovering fully in a relatively short period. This is
one of the key points of providing some certainty for business
planning.
The remainder of the significant elements of program fall within
policies already in effect, and in some instances includes promises
which have already been fulfilled.
200.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1
Washington, February 12, 1979
RE
Administration Textile Program
Pursuant to the instructions you gave Cooper, Eizenstat and me
with respect to textiles,2 this will advise as follows:
1. We have clearly established that Finley and Chaikin will not
only support the MTN as being good for their people and lobby for it,
but Chaikin advises he will, if necessary, not only contradict Meany but
so testify.
2. Detailed discussions with respect to ambiguities are in the
process of being completed. Notes in the respective files clearly reflect
the intentions of the parties. There are certain areas where specificity is
impossible and in these instances, we are making a record that clearly
indicates that where differences of opinion exist they will not be
charged to bad faith or failure to live up to commitments.
3. Any necessary language changes will be made.
4. Congressional support is assured.
at the top of the page.
2 Not further identified.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
Is it your desire that when Eizenstat, Cooper and I are satisfied that
your concerns have been met, that I should conclude the negotiations
or do you desire I bring it back to your desk for a final sign-off?
Option 1. When Cooper, Eizenstat and Strauss are satisfied, con-
clude the negotiations (Eizenstat recommends)3
Option 2. When Cooper, Eizenstat and Strauss are satisfied, return
to my desk for final acceptance or rejection
3 Carter indicated his approval of this option and initialed “J.” On February 15,
Carter administration officials reached an agreement with textile industry repre-
sentatives on a new textile import program. (“U.S. in Pact On Textile Protection,” The
201.
Memorandum From Guy F. Erb of the National Security
Council Staff to the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen)1
Washington, February 24, 1979
SUBJECT
Selective Safeguards and Conditional Most-Favored-Nation Treatment: TPC
Tuesday’s TPC meeting will take up two very important trade
policy issues: conditional application of most-favored-nation (MFN)
treatment and selective import safeguards.2 TPC decisions on these
issues could affect the direction of U.S. trade policy for a generation.
Conditional MFN
For the last several decades the United States and other non-
Communist countries have generally applied both trade benefits and
trade restrictions on a non-discriminatory basis, an exception being
voluntary export restraint agreements. The heart of the General Agree-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 108, North-South Policy: 1979. Confidential. On Feb-
ruary 24, Erb sent a copy of the memorandum to Brzezinski; in his cover memorandum,
he noted his recommendation that Owen “and the NSC staff oppose a ‘conditional’
most-favored-nation policy as well as selective safeguards. In my view, a US decision to
adopt either of these policies would require Presidential approval.” Brzezinski under-
lined the phrase “either of these policies” and wrote “I agree” below it. (Ibid.)
2 No memorandum of conversation of this meeting was found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
ment on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) is its first Article, which establishes
the most-favored-nation principle (unconditional MFN in today’s
jargon). Unconditional MFN is also embodied in numerous treaties of
Friendship, Commerce, and Navigation that the United States has
signed.
Despite the weight of tradition and GATT practice, as a negotiating
tactic in the MTN the United States and other developed countries have
suggested that the rights and benefits agreed to in the trade codes, e.g.,
on subsidies and countervailing duties, will be extended only to coun-
tries that become parties to the codes. This tactic was intended to en-
courage LDC participation in the codes; there is also a feeling in the
Government and in some trade policy circles that only those countries
that accept a code’s obligations should benefit from it.
Trade policy officials in the U.S. Government have postponed as
long as possible the day when a choice will have to be made between
maintaining the tactical position and reaffirming or rejecting uncondi-
tional MFN. That day may now be upon us.
The problem arises most clearly in the case of the subsidy code and
to a somewhat lesser extent in the Government procurement code.
Among LDCs, only Brazil has indicated its willingness to sign the sub-
sidies code and may even decide to put off its adherence until after
UNCTAD V.3 We may well have to present the code to the Congress
without assurances of LDC support.
Those in favor of conditional MFN4 argue that:
—U.S. acceptance of an injury test in the subsidy code depends on
other countries’ acceptance of greater discipline on subsidies. Giving
LDCs a free ride on the injury test upsets this balance. It would be diffi-
cult to defend to Congress and could undermine chances for approval
of the subsidy code and the MTN package.
—The principle that trade negotiations must result in “reciprocal
and mutually advantageous arrangements” is as important to the
GATT as the MFN principle.
—Without the leverage of conditional application of the injury test,
LDCs will have no incentive to accept the rules on subsidies or to par-
ticipate in the administration of evolution of the subsidy code.
4 On February 26, Bergsten sent Cooper a Treasury Department memorandum enti-
tled “Unconditional MFN and the Codes.” According to Bergsten, both Blumenthal and
Solomon felt “very strongly that we must go conditional on the subsidy code, and we
would want to discuss it at very high levels if you were to support any other course of
action.” (Memorandum from Bergsten to Cooper, February 26; National Archives, RG 59,
Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the Under Secretary of State for Economic Af-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
Those against conditional MFN argue that:
—MTN results that are not applied on a most-favored-nation basis
will increase, not reduce, the contentiousness in our bilateral trade rela-
tions. Discrimination in U.S. law and actions against countries such as
Mexico or Korea will be a serious and continuing foreign-policy
problem for us.
—Conditional MFN weakens the GATT. It is a clear violation of
GATT Article I. Imposition of countervailing duties without an injury
test could give rise to claims against us under GATT Article XXIII.5
—Countries cannot avoid GATT commitments simply by deciding
that the provisions of a code shall apply only between the parties to it.
—If adopted, conditional MFN would become a difficult issue at
UNCTAD V and a long-term problem for North/South relations. It
would reinforce the LDCs that lean away from the GATT toward
UNCTAD.
I recommend that you argue against conditional MFN at the TPC
meeting. If it proves impossible to avoid some compromise with propo-
nents of conditional MFN, two options may be considered by the TPC:
Option 1. Apply the injury test on an MFN basis for three years or
another limited period. This would permit major LDCs to negotiate
their terms of accession as provided for in the codes on subsidies and,
perhaps, Government procurement. If key LDCs had acceded to the
code by the end of three years, unconditional MFN would be applied to
all other LDCs. If key LDCs had still not joined the code at the end of
the three years, the U.S. approach should be reexamined.
This option would be easier to present to Congress if some key
LDCs such as Brazil, Mexico, Korea, or India would join from the
outset. The need for a transition period may be accepted by Congress.
Most LDCs have not been involved in the negotiations on the subsidies
code and the U.S. itself needs time to phase in the injury test on out-
standing countervailing duty cases.
Option 2. Apply the injury test only to code signatories until such
time as all of a selected group of key contries had signed the code, after
which the MFN rule would apply.
I strongly recommend Option 1 if it proves necessary to compromise.
Selective Import Safeguards
The European Community advocates a safeguards code that
would allow a country to apply import restrictions selectively to those
countries whose exports were causing severe problems. The United
5 Article I of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade deals with “General Most-
Favored-Nation Treatment.” Article XXIII deals with “Nullification or Impairment.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
States has resisted this approach, although Bob Strauss has told the Eu-
ropeans that, at the end of the day, we could accept some carefully de-
fined selectivity, provided that the LDCs accepted it as well.
There are now indications that the United Kingdom—hitherto one
of the strongest proponents of selectivity—could accept an MTN agree-
ment that left the selectivity issue open. France has also proved suscep-
tible to LDC pressure against selectivity and French officials have not
lately pressed U.S. negotiators to accept the EC approach. In short, our
decision to let the EC take the heat from the developing countries
seems to be working. A standoff between the EC and the developing
countries and a postponement of this issue would meet our objectives
and probably temper LDC criticism of the MTN at UNCTAD V. We
therefore should not now take any action that would diminish the pros-
pects for an EC decision to temporize on selectivity.
Al McDonald has long been willing to strike a deal with the Euro-
peans on selectivity, which he and Howard Samuel6 regard as a selling
point for the MTN on Capitol Hill. Moreover, GATT Director-General
Long has just released a draft text on selectivity.7 Long’s encourage-
ment of negotiations on selectivity might lead Al McDonald to argue
that we should now line up with the developing countries.
I recommend that we continue to stand back from the EC–LDC ne-
gotiations. Furthermore, we should not agree to Long’s suggestion to
broaden the negotiations on selectivity since his approach could well
lead to confrontation between the United States and the developing
countries.
Final Considerations
A TPC decision to accept conditional MFN or selective safeguards
would make it considerably more difficult than it already is for the
President to inform Lopez Portillo that we have taken adequate ac-
count of LDC interests in the MTN. The TPC’s decision could well in-
fluence Mexico’s approach to the GATT, an issue of overriding impor-
tance for our relations with that country.
Acceptance of conditional MFN or selective safeguards would
amount to a reversal of long-standing U.S. trade policies. In a system
that requires the President to decide whether or not to restrict imports
of clothespins, we can legitimately argue that decisions of this magni-
tude also require Presidential review. If the TPC seems likely to en-
6 Howard Samuel was Deputy Under Secretary of Labor for International Affairs
from 1977 until 1979.
promise on the selectivity issue; telegram 2951 from Geneva, February 21, transmitted his
D790081–0400, respectively)

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
dorse either conditional MFN or selective safeguards, I strongly recom-
mend that you request that a decision memo go to the President.
202.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, February 27, 1979
SUBJECT
Summit Themes for 1979 and 1980 (U)
1. 1979. Charlie Schultze and I believe that the main theme of the
Tokyo Summit should be structural change. Bonn focused on the
short-term macro-economic policy, partly because that was the best
framework in which to press for the German stimulus we wanted.
What we need from Japan is not a specific short-term action but meas-
ures—opening the Japanese market more to imports, and shifting to re-
liance on domestic demand rather than exports for Japanese growth—
which will take several years to accomplish. A Summit that focused on
long-term structural change would provide a framework for seeking
these Japanese measures. It would also provide a framework for ex-
amining energy and North-South problems which, by their nature, re-
quire long-term solutions. I will propose this theme to the March
meeting of the Summit Preparatory Group in Tokyo, and report back to
Summit should be to conclude an agreement regarding international
ownership and management of certain key elements of the nuclear fuel
cycle: reprocessing, enrichment, spent fuel shortage, and plutonium
storage. Gerry believes that negotiations, in and out of INFCE, may
have progressed far enough to make this feasible. Such an international
approach to nuclear energy would both advance non-proliferation and
meet nuclear energy legitimate needs; it would be a historic move,
comparable to the 1950 agreement between France and Germany to
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
zinski initialed at the top of the page.
2 In the margin adjacent to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “Not a very attractive
theme. Is it too obviously pointed at Japan?”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
create a European Coal and Steel community. Pat Caddell tells me that
there is enough domestic interest in proliferation to make such an
agreement politically rewarding, as well as substantively useful. Very
serious obstacles exist, which may prevent us from getting the agree-
ment, but we will try to gear our actions between now and then to this
3 Carter wrote “ok” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
203.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, March 1, 1979
SUBJECT
US Economic Policy Toward Japan (U)
You asked that I work out with interested US officials an economic
strategy regarding Japan. This memo reports the results. Mike Blumen-
thal, Bob Strauss, Tony Solomon, Dick Cooper, Jules Katz, Dick Hol-
brooke’s staff, Fred Bergsten, and others have been involved in these
discussions. I have tried to take account of helpful views that we have
received from Mike Mansfield2—and also from Pat Caddell, who has
recently returned from Japan. (U)
1. The Problem. Because of Japan’s moderate growth policy and,
more importantly, because of the various Japanese domestic practices
that inhibit access to the Japanese market, Japan’s current account
surplus is substantial. Recent CIA estimates suggest that the surplus
may be declining more rapidly than we had expected, partly because of
the effects of yen appreciation—which have not yet been fully felt. Our
economic experts who recently visited Japan estimate that the surplus
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Good memo. J.” The memorandum was sent to
Brzezinski for forwarding to Carter under cover of a February 27 note from Owen, who
noted that he had checked the memorandum with Platt. (Ibid.)
series of letters on U.S.-Japanese economic relations; the letters are in the Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects File, Henry Owen, Box 22, Japan

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
will be significantly smaller this year than in the past two years. They
also estimate, however, that it may increase after 1979 and remain large
for several years. (C)
This large Japanese surplus has adverse effects on the world
economy. Together with restrictions on US business entry into Japan, it
has generated demands on the Hill for anti-Japanese protectionist legis-
lation, which only intense personal efforts by Bob Strauss have held in
check and which will prevail later this year in the absence of changes in
Japanese policy. Majority Leader Byrd, Senator Bentsen, Congressman
Rhodes, and other influential Congressional leaders are deeply, bit-
terly, and increasingly concerned with this issue. These US pressures
for change in Japanese policy have generated deep resentment in
Japan; passage of anti-Japanese legislation would dramatically com-
pound the damage. If we cannot soon devise a cooperative US-
Japanese approach to this problem, it could severely damage the wider
US-Japanese political and security relationship. (C)
2. Japanese Attitudes. The Japanese feel that they are doing every-
thing possible to reduce their surplus—both in shifting from an export-
led to a domestic-led economic expansion and in reducing import bar-
riers. Some progress has been achieved: Administrative steps have
been taken by Japan to increase imports, and MTN and textiles agree-
ments have been negotiated. (C)
The Japanese are reluctant to accelerate these remedial policies:
Their budget deficit is already large and they feel that there would be
political difficulties in increasing it further; their business community
resists larger imports of manufacturers; and they are chary of trade pol-
icies that might lead to later balance of payments deficits. (C)
But the Japanese are also anxious to avoid a confrontation with the
US. They now understand that Congressional reactions to Japanese
policies could place MTN in jeopardy and cause anti-Japanese-
protectionist legislation to pass. And they are anxious to avoid further
yen appreciation, which might result from a continuing large current
accounts surplus. (C)
3. Short-Term. The task now is to translate the resulting Japanese
desire for compromise into specific understandings. Our immediate
need is to persuade Japan to take certain MTN-related actions—notably
opening government monopolies to outside bidding, and phasing tariff
cuts so as to “front load” these cuts in the early years. (C)
If these decisions are taken quickly, they will have a beneficial ef-
fect on the U.S. private industry advisory reports that must be com-
pleted and made public when we submit MTN implementing legisla-
tion to the Congress in April. The Japanese understand this, and
relevant negotiations between them and us are underway. (C)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
4. Medium-Term. Reducing the Japanese surplus will require not
only specific early decisions, such as noted above, but longer term
changes in Japanese policies regarding domestic demand and access to
the Japanese market. If persuasive assurances that these changes are
going to be made can be secured at the Summit, this will enhance our
chances of passing MTN and defeating anti-Japanese protectionist leg-
islation, both of which may be coming up for a vote in late summer. (C)
In part, these assurances require specific Japanese actions, e.g.,
commitments to submit a supplemental expansionist budget to the Diet
in September, and revision in present Japanese import procedures. In
part, they may require a long-range agreement between the US and
Japan about the trade and economic goals that both countries will seek
to achieve in the next five years. The specific actions would be an ear-
nest of good intent; the long term agreement would make clear both
that basic changes are needed and that these changes will take several
years to complete. (C)
If the Japanese decide to move in these directions, corresponding
US commitments (e.g., to promote exports, improve productivity, and
reduce oil consumption) could be used by the Japanese Government in
presenting its decisions to the Japanese public as part of a balanced
package. US actions in other fields might also help to create an environ-
ment in which we would be more likely to get the concessions we want
from Japan:
—Japan is interested in an Alaskan oil swap, and this is being
studied by DOE. (C)
—Gerard Smith believes that we might be able to meet Japanese
nuclear concerns by cooperating with Japan and Australia to build a
jointly owned and operated enrichment plant in Australia; he will ex-
amine this possibility. (C)
—A US-Japanese program of technical aid to Asian countries is a
favorite idea of Ohira; we are considering whether our proposed new
Institute for Technological Cooperation3 could be used to this end. (C)
—A US-Japanese grains agreement might be popular in both coun-
tries, and Agriculture proposes to discuss this at a technical level with
the Japanese.4 (C)
4.
Timing.
Needed
Japanese
actions
were
discussed
with
Ambassador-at-Large Yasukawa, when he visited Washington re-
cently.5 Further discussions will take place during Mike Blumenthal’s
3 See Document 311.
4 Carter wrote “good” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
5 Memoranda of conversation of the February 1979 meetings between U.S. officials
and Takeshi Yasukawa, Ohira’s personal representative, are in the Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects File, Henry Owen, Box 22, Japan Bi-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
visit to Japan.6 When Dick Cooper and I go to Tokyo for the meeting of
the Summit Preparatory Group in March, we will try to agree with the
Japanese on how different economic issues might be distributed among
your upcoming bilateral and Summit meetings with Ohira, so that
something of use to us emerges from each of these meetings. (C)
In the present state of Congressional opinion, high-level meetings
that only resulted in an exchange of views would be a setback.
Meetings that achieved or clearly foreshadowed concrete economic
agreements would be helpful in both countries, and could also be the
occasion for reaffirming the central political and security importance of
the US Japanese relations.7 (C)
I will submit a further progress report to you when I return from
tional Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File,
February 24. A memorandum of conversation of Blumenthal’s March 5 meeting with
Ohira is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects
on his trip to Carter in a March 5 memorandum. (Carter Library, Records of the Office of
March 6 to discuss the trip. The portion of the March 5 memorandum on Blumenthal’s
stay in China and the March 6 memorandum of conversation are printed in Foreign Rela-
7 Carter wrote “True” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
204.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, March 6, 1979
SUBJECT
Your Telephone Conversation with Schmidt: The MTN and Turkey2 (U)
1. MTN. Ministers of the European Community nations considered
the MTN yesterday in a meeting of the European Council in Brussels.3
The Commission indicated that it intended to initial an agreement with
the US in early April; formal European Council approval would come
in late summer after the US Congress has acted (and after the French
have gotten through their June elections).4 Early April would be the
latest that initialing could take place, if MTN implementing legislation
is to be approved by our Congress this year. Germany, Denmark, and
Belgium were strongly supportive; Britain, the Netherlands, and Lux-
embourg agreed, subject to resolution of some specific questions; but
France—with some support from Italy and Ireland—did not give a
green light to the Community’s negotiators to initial the MTN. The
French indicated that they still have difficulties on the balance of tariff
cuts and agriculture; the issue of tariff cut phasing has been resolved.
Jenkins said that the Commission would try to get a better deal from
the US, but that there would not be major changes, and they would ask
the April Council of Ministers meeting to approve their initialing. (C)
Next week the Community’s Heads of State will consider the MTN
at the request of the French. Ambassador Hartman suggests that you
now write Giscard to stress the importance of concluding the MTN ac-
cord now. We will submit a letter to you later this afternoon. During
your phone conversation with Schmidt, you might ask Schmidt to
weigh in with Giscard at the European Heads of Government meeting
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
at the top of the page: “Henry. J.”
Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No memorandum of conversa-
tion was found.
meeting, noted that “EC Foreign Ministers took no decisions on MTN package at their
March 5 Council in Brussels, but Council President, Franc¸ois-Poncet, concluded from the
discussions that the Nine would have to take a ‘definitive position’ at the April 3 Foreign
Ministers Council.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790103–
0162)
1979.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
(as his staff are recommending to him), and also ask if he believes a
letter from you to Giscard would now be useful.5 (C)
We also believe that a message from you to the leaders of Italy, Ire-
land, the UK, and the Netherlands would help move those countries
toward acceptance of the MTN package.6 If you approve, we will ask
our Ambassadors in these countries to make clear your commitment to
the MTN and your hope that they will support the results of these ne-
gotiations, in terms similar to those that you approved for Henry
Owen’s message to French Trade Minister Deniau.7 We will also ask
our Ambassador to the European Community to congratulate Roy
Jenkins on the results achieved so far, and to encourage him to exert his
leadership to gain member states’ approval of the MTN.8 (C)
[Omitted here is discussion of aid to Turkey.]
5 Carter wrote “No—I’m not writing him again” in the margin adjacent to this para-
graph. On January 6, Carter handwrote a note to Giscard that reads: “I want to reempha-
size to you the importance we attach to an early & successful conclusion of the Tokyo
round of trade talks. Further delay will make it even more difficult for me to obtain Con-
gressional approval this year. Please do what you can to help.” (Carter Library, Plains
6 Carter wrote “ok” in the margin adjacent to this sentence. No such messages were
found.
footnote 5, Document 197.
8 Carter did not indicate his approval or disapproval of these recommendations,
and no such instructions were found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
205.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, March 27, 1979
SUBJECT
Summit Preparatory Group Meeting in Tokyo2 (U)
There was a general consensus that the three main Summit topics
should be energy, macro-economic policy, and North-South relations.
Papers on these and other issues will now be prepared. Under each
heading, we will be looking for concrete decisions that the heads of
government could take in addressing both immediate and longer-term
problems. (C)
1. Energy. An international working group under Japanese leader-
ship will consider: measures to restrain consumption (the British and
others said that under this heading they will want the US to report
what it is doing to fulfill our Bonn commitment); a large-scale and coor-
dinated increase in investment to produce alternative forms of energy,
e.g., coal liquidation and gasification; a major international research
and development effort concerning renewable energy sources; and a
program of increased and more effective aid to help LDCs increase
their energy output.3 (C)
2. Macro-Economic. An international working group under Charlie
Schultze’s leadership will examine both short-term and medium eco-
nomic prospects for the Summit countries. Discussions in Tokyo fo-
cused on:
—Asking Germany and Japan to maintain presently projected
rates of growth (4% for Germany and 6% for Japan). The repre-
sentatives of other European countries (particularly France) believe
that their countries have benefited substantially from the 1% additional
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects
ington: 5/79 [I]. Confidential. Sent for action. Carter and Brzezinski both initialed at the
top of the page.
Owen and Hormats provided a more detailed report on the meeting to Cooper, Solomon,
Gramley, CEA senior staff economist Val Koromzay, and NSC Staff member James
Cochrane. (Memorandum of conversation, March 28; ibid.) Owen, Schultze, Cooper, Sol-
omon, Hormats, Koromzay, and Cochrane held a meeting on March 15 to discuss the U.S.
approach to the Summit Preparatory Group meeting. (Memorandum for the record,
March 15; ibid.)
3 Carter wrote “& solar” at the end of this paragraph. He also wrote “good” in the
margin adjacent to the paragraph.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
expansion of the German economy agreed at Bonn; they want that
growth to continue.
—Asking the US and other countries with large external deficits to
increase investment in order to improve productivity.
—Asking Japan, and to a lesser extent Germany, to undertake
structural changes in their economies that would reduce their struc-
tural surpluses. (European representatives warned that if Japan has not
made marked progress in improving its economic policies by Summit
time, their heads of government will focus heavily on the need for such
improvement.) (C)
3. North-South. The British will lead this working group, which will
examine such questions as how to:
a. encourage greater capital transfers to developing countries—
particularly by international institutions (World Bank and IMF) and
private investors;
b. mount an expanded international effort, led by the World Bank,
to help LDCs increase food output;
c. launch an international effort by our new Institute for Techno-
logical Cooperation and like institutions and programs in other
Summit countries to carry out effective research and development on
programs of particular concern to LDCs. (C)
Besides these three major issues, we talked about Summit consid-
eration of international efforts to meet such threats to the quality of life
as trade in toxic substances and the rapid depletion of natural resources
(desertification, deforestation, etc.). The US will do papers on these
It was agreed the heads of government would probably want to
discuss East-West economic issues and such problem countries as
Turkey at their pre-Summit dinner. (C)
The group agreed to recommend to the heads of government that
time) the announcement (Tab A)5 that the Summit will be held June 28
and 29. You will recall that it was previously agreed to defer the deci-
sion on Summit timing until this first preparatory group meeting. (C)
RECOMMENDATION
That you approve our issuing the attached announcement (Tab A)
through the White House Press Office.6 (U)
4 March 29.
5 Attached but not printed.
6 Carter indicated his approval of the recommendation. For the text of the an-
nouncement of the Tokyo G–7 Summit, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United
States: Jimmy Carter, 1979, Book I, p. 550.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
206.
Memorandum From Nicholas Platt of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, April 3, 1979
SUBJECT
The Japanese—What Have They Done for Us Lately?
At the staff meeting March 29 you asked whether the apparently
endless series of high-level consultations with the Japanese have pro-
duced any tangible results. The answer is that they have, although the
Japanese response has at each stage been too late and too little to make
much political impact. When you mark where we were when we began
intensive efforts to solve the trade problem 18 months ago and where
we are now, the substantive progress becomes more measurable.
What Have the Japanese Done?
American pressure during the series of meetings since September
1977 has been focused on encouraging the Japanese to reduce their
massive current account surplus and open their markets wider to im-
ports of foreign manufactures. In response, the Japanese have:
—Adopted stimulative budgets resulting in a growth rate of about
major industrialized democracy.
—Allowed the yen to appreciate 25 percent during 1978.
—Voluntarily limited exports to the U.S. of cars, ships, TV’s, tex-
tiles, and steel.
—Allowed imported cars easier pollution standards than applied
to their own.
—Reduced industrial tariffs on items of particular importance to
us like computers and color film.
—Made major long-term concessions on the MTN, including in-
dustrial tariff cuts averaging 44 percent.
—Made major increases in key agricultural quotas like beef, citrus,
and leather.
—Purchased emergency imports of uranium enrichment services
and other commodities worth an estimated $3 billion.
—Increased the volume of manufactured imports at a rate of 10
percent a year.
—Reversed the trend in the current account surplus. If current pro-
jections prove out, the current account surplus for fiscal 1979 (April 1–
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
A stamped notation reads: “ZB has seen.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
last year.
The frictions and pressures attending the embarrassing size of the
Japanese surplus have encouraged the Japanese to be more cooperative
on a wide variety of other issues. During the 18 months in question, for
example, the Japanese have:
—Taken the initiative to increase their contribution to United
States military base costs in Japan from roughly $500 million to $700
million a year. Some of this reflects yen appreciation, but most is in the
form of increased payments for military housing, labor, and adminis-
trative costs.
—Placed orders to purchase and coproduce over the next several
strengthening air defenses and anti-submarine warfare capability and
improving interoperability with U.S. forces.
—Responded to our requests for contributions to politically re-
lated aid programs, such as those for Egypt.
—Become, after us, the second largest donor to the UN High Com-
missioner for Refugees.
—Cooperated in working out joint energy R&D projects.
—Undertaken half the costs of the Fulbright program.
What More Do We Want?
A lot. We are still pressing the Japanese for measures to open their
markets wider and further reduce their general account surplus. We
want them to:
—Abolish agricultural quotas altogether.
—Import more manufactures from us.
—Simplify import procedures.
—Permit government procurement of American equipment, par-
ticularly computers and telecommunications gear.
—Provide improved reciprocal access for American banks and
insurance companies.
—Speed up tariff cuts.
—Encourage direct investment in the United States.
—Contribute more to U.S. base costs in Japan and to refugee
programs.
—Increase aid to Egypt and Turkey.
—Effect structural changes in their economy to ensure that the
trends begun through current policies will last.
We will continue to push for these actions as long as our econ-
omies are out of balance, and some beyond that.
What Do They Want?
The Japanese want us to:
—Keep our markets open to their products.
—Maintain the strength of the dollar.
—Curb our voracious oil appetite.
—Control inflation.
—Above all, leave them alone on economic issues.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Why Are We Doing It This Way?
The current approach features steady, coordinated pressure
through constant consultation involving blunt talk in private and a
minimum of public bluster. This approach reflects the growth of the re-
lationship, and Japan’s increase of relative power within the relation-
ship; the proven long-term nature of the problem; and our heightened
understanding of the way decisions are made in Japan.
Even this steady pressure method has its political costs. Our con-
stant coordinated stress on the economic imbalance has the Japanese
wondering whether we care about anything else, particularly the Mu-
tual Security Treaty, upon which our strategic position in Asia is based.
It has caused some Japanese to question the value of the relationship,
and the fitness of the U.S. as an ally, and to call for a search for alterna-
tives, not only in the economic but the security field as well. Most Japa-
nese officials feel otherwise; they recognize that the economic issues
have to be resolved in order to protect the strategic and political ben-
efits of the connection with the U.S.
On balance, therefore, the steady approach seems the best middle
course between apathy and excessive pressure. We believe it will work.
What Is Next?
The series of consultations beginning with Foreign Minister So-
noda’s visit this week and including Prime Minister Ohira’s visit in
May and President Carter’s visit to Japan in June represent a critical
juncture in our relationship. The way both sides handle the meetings
will determine whether we can cooperate to achieve progress or face a
sour, deteriorating relation. Our best chance of success lies in contin-
uing the steady pressure approach stressing in private the things we
care about, but keeping public rhetoric cool. We want to prove that the
economic issues are vital, that progress is being made, and that several
years will be required to achieve success—while demonstrating the
benefits of the political and strategic relationship. We must give the
Japanese the time of day, spending adequate time to discuss the issues
and avoiding comparisons with the number and length of meetings
with the Chinese, the Soviets, or the Europeans. By the time we are fin-
ished with this round, we will not have accomplished everything we
want, but, as in the past, we will be measurably ahead of where we are
today.
Henry Owen concurs.2
2 Owen initialed his concurrence. At the bottom of the page, Inderfurth wrote: “ZB,
I think the President should see this memo (updated) prior to his May 2 meeting with
Ohira. Rick.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
207.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 9, 1979
SUBJECT
Foreign Economic Policy Goals
Our object for the next 18 months in foreign economic policy
should be to finish what we have begun:
1. Coordination of economic policy:
a. Keeping German and Japanese economic growth at present 4%
and 6% goals, respectively, so as to help avert a world recession.
b. Pressing Japan to base its economic growth more on domestic
demand, so as to reduce its current accounts surplus.
2. Trade:
a. Completing MTN.
b. Reducing Japanese barriers to imports of manufactured goods.
3. North-South:
a. Helping LDCs produce more energy (continuing IBRD program,
improving bilateral aid programs, and agreeing at Summit on how to
concert these bilateral programs).
b. Getting the aid bill through Congress.
c. Completing Common Fund negotiations.
d. Setting up Institute for Scientific and Technological Coopera-
tion, as proposed by President, and making it the centerpiece for in-
creased international cooperation in technological aid to LDCs.
4. Energy: International agreements on:
a. Reduction of dependence on OPEC.2
b. Increased production and use of coal.
c. Increased efforts to develop new technologies.
5. Nuclear Energy: 1980 Summit agreement on multilateral owner-
ship and management of reprocessing, enrichment, waste manage-
ment, and plutonium storage.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Brzezinski wrote at the top of the page: “great! ZB.”
2 Brzezinski wrote “how?” in the margin adjacent to this sentence.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
6. International Monetary Policy: Continuing negotiations on substi-
tution account (i.e., giving SDRs a larger role to play, thus reducing
somewhat the role of the dollar as a reserve currency).
208.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, April 11, 1979
SUBJECT
US-Japanese Economic Relations (U)
This memorandum reports meetings I had in Tokyo with the
Prime Minister and cabinet ministers, and subsequent discussions with
the Japanese Foreign Minister and others in Washington,2 to prepare
for your May meeting with Ohira. Here is the scenario we talked about:
1. Trade. Bob Strauss would go to Tokyo before3 the Ohira visit to:
a. conclude negotiations with Japan about government procure-
ment and tariff staging (the two outstanding MTN issues);
b. get Japanese agreement to other specific actions in the trade field
(e.g., improving import procedures), which would be an earnest of
good intent. (C)
Bob’s visit will be contingent on a clear indication that the Japanese
are prepared to make serious concessions. (C)
2. Longer-Term Agreement. Against this background of progress,
you and Ohira would, if you approve, conclude an agreement with
these elements during his visit:
a. Ohira would state Japan’s intent to reduce its external surplus by
increasing its imports of manufactures and by shifting to greater reli-
ance on domestic demand in sustaining its growth. Ohira’s statement
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
the page: “ok. J.” Brzezinski also initialed at the top of the page. The memorandum was
sent to Brzezinski for forwarding to Carter under cover of an April 11 note from Owen,
who reported that Platt had seen the memorandum. (Ibid.)
2 A memorandum of conversation of Owen’s March 19 meeting with Japanese Min-
istry of Finance officials is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
April 6–10 for meetings preparatory to Ohira’s visit in May.
3 Carter underlined the word “before.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
would be balanced by a statement of the US intent to reduce its account
deficit by following appropriate economic policies. Both statements
would be included in the communique to be issued after Ohira’s visit.
b. The two countries would agree on regular economic follow-up
discussions. These discussions would focus on quantitative trends in
Japan’s current accounts and imports of manufactures. We have made
clear to the Japanese that they will face damaging US counter-action if
these trends do not march in the right direction, i.e., if the trend goals
foreshadowed by the declaration are not fulfilled. (C)
c. A US-Japanese Wise Men’s Group, made up of distinguished
private citizens on each side, would be set up to advise you and the
Prime Minister about long-term economic trends and problems in the
US-Japanese relation. Mike Mansfield believes that advice from such a
group would make it easier for the Japanese to accept the kinds of
structural changes we want. (C)
3. Other Agreements would also be concluded during the Ohira
visit, in order to meet Japanese concerns—regarding US-Japanese agri-
cultural trade, energy research and development, and cooperation in
providing technical aid to Asian LDCs. (C)
State, Treasury, and STR have participated in developing this sce-
nario, which tracks the memo on US economic strategy toward Japan
that I sent you, after discussion with these agencies, some time back.4
The agreement with Japan described in paragraph 2 follows the pro-
posal that Mike Blumenthal made to you when he returned recently
from Japan.5 (C)
Underlying this scenario is a belief that the Japanese want to get
their current surplus down to manageable proportions, and are pre-
pared gradually to open up their market to foreign manufacturers. But
powerful domestic obstacles are involved; and it will be a matter of
years, at best, before the process is completed. So we need to create a
framework within which this process can work itself out, and to show
continuing progress in the meantime. That is the purpose of the pro-
posals described above. (C)
On the basis of talks on the Hill, I believe that these actions would
defuse Congressional protectionist pressures. Senator Bentsen and
Congressman Jones,6 two members of Congress much interested in
4 Apparently a reference to Document 203.
thal’s proposal is contained in the March 5 memorandum to Carter in which he reported
on his recent trip to China and Japan. Carter approved the further exploration of the pro-
posal on the copy of Blumenthal’s memorandum in the Carter Library, Records of the Of-
6 Representative James R. Jones (D–Oklahoma) was Chairman of the House Ways
and Means Committee task force on Japanese commercial practices.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Japan, have both indicated they would view this outcome as substan-
tial progress. (C)
Success hinges on the Japanese making sufficiently forthcoming
proposals to warrant Bob Strauss going to Tokyo on trade and to war-
rant our submitting a draft US-Japanese economic communique to you
for approval. The Foreign Minister and his party have gone back to
Tokyo to consider these matters further. Although they made opti-
mistic noises as they left, significant differences between us and them
remain. We will hear from them shortly; I will let you know as soon as
209.
Editorial Note
On April 4, 1979, the European Communities (EC) Council of Min-
isters agreed that EC representatives at the Geneva multilateral trade
negotiations could participate in the initialing of the final agreements,
scheduled for April 11, pending the resolution of certain Italian reser-
vations. (Telegram 6391 from USEC Brussels, April 4; National Ar-
Italy did not prevent the EC from initialing the agreements.) On April
12, the Trade Negotiations Committee, established in September 1973
to oversee the Tokyo Round of trade talks, declared an end to the nego-
tiations (except those on safeguards, which were to continue) and
opened the agreements for signing. (Telegram 6424 from Geneva, April
0893) The Head of the U.S. Delegation to the Multilateral Trade Negoti-
ations, Alonzo McDonald, reported that the United States initialed the
agreements on April 12 and “within the first two hours we were joined
by some 20 additional countries, covering most of the developed
world.” McDonald noted that the United States had concluded bilateral
trade deals “with 41 different countries including 19 LDCs. This group
represents the overwhelming majority of world trade and therefore as-
sures solid support for full implementation of the agreements.” (Tele-
Foreign Policy File, D790168–1023)
The agreements that emerged from the Tokyo Round covered both
tariff reductions and efforts to curb the use of non-tariff barriers. In the
realm of tariffs, the United States concluded agreements with the EC,
Japan, Canada, and a number of other developed and less developed
countries. In the realm of non-tariff barriers, an increasingly widely

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
used means of protectionism after three decades of tariff cuts negoti-
ated under the aegis of the 1947 General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade, the Tokyo Round resulted in a series of “codes.” These codes,
adherence to which was voluntary, governed the use of subsidies and
countervailing duties, standards and regulations, customs valuation
techniques, government procurement, and the licensing of imports.
Agreements were also reached on trade in civil aircraft, meat, and dairy
products. (“Multilateral Trade Negotiations,” Department of State Bul-
President Jimmy Carter welcomed the Tokyo Round agreements,
asserting that they would “increase the opportunities of all nations,
rich and poor, to exchange their goods under equitable conditions.
Through such fair and open trade, we strengthen peace and trust in the
world and make more efficient use of the world’s human and material
resources.” Carter continued: “The agreements steer us away from de-
structive protectionism and into a path of greater export opportunities,
with the prospects of new jobs, improved productivity, and increased
industrial and agricultural production. The new opportunities that are
thus developed will be realized through vigorous efforts by gov-
ernment, industry, and agriculture to promote exports.” For the text of
Carter’s remarks, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States:
210.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, April 23, 1979
SUBJECT
US Economic Policy—The View from Abroad (U)
1. I’m struck by the difference between the way US anti-inflation
policy is seen abroad and at home. This difference suggests how the
Administration could posture itself to greater advantage domestically
on the issue. (C)
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
page: “cc Jody. C.” Brzezinski also initialed the memorandum. Hutcheson forwarded a
copy of the memorandum to Powell under cover of a May 2 note. (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
2. Most officials of industrial countries I met at the recent Tokyo
Summit Preparatory conference seem to believe that if we stick with
our tight fiscal and monetary policies, this will eventually bring US in-
flation under control, as comparable policies did in Germany and Japan
in the 1970s. Since tight fiscal and monetary policies take time to bite,
the officials I talked to were not all that excited about how effective our
guidelines are in the next few months. (C)
3. Coming back to the States, I find the US media by contrast, fo-
cusing largely on day-to-day developments regarding the guidelines,
as though these—rather than underlying fiscal and monetary pol-
icies—were the heart of our anti-inflation policy. Since the guidelines
aren’t yet producing results, this leads to charges in the media that our
anti-inflation effort has “failed”. (C)
4. Of these two views, that of the foreign observers is a good deal
closer to the truth. It would be to our advantage to get that view into
the US public domain: You and senior officials should find occasion to
point to the strength of the dollar on foreign exchange markets as evi-
dence that other countries believe present US fiscal and monetary pol-
icies will eventually bring inflation under control. If we can get the US
media and public to take this view seriously, short-term zigs and zags
in prices and wage settlements will be less likely to obscure the basic
fact that we are on the right track. People will see that our fiscal and
monetary policies are well on the way to producing the demand re-
straint which, to judge from the experience of income policies in other
countries, will produce an economic environment in which the guide-
lines are likely to be observed. (C)

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
211.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, April 25, 1979
SUBJECT
Attitudes of US Businessmen Toward Tokyo Summit (U)
Last Friday2 I had a session with six top business leaders assem-
bled by the Chamber of Commerce to provide suggestions about the
upcoming Summit. You might be interested in their main concerns:
1. Japan. They argued strongly for action to reduce Japan’s current
account surplus and to open Japan’s market more widely to our ex-
ports. Don Kendall3 suggested that the US, as Japan’s biggest trading
partner, should tell Japan that its current account surplus had to be
down to zero by a date certain, and that the US would apply import re-
strictions if this goal was not achieved. I told them of our plans for
using the Ohira visit4 to reach an agreement about Japanese medium-
term economic policy, and this seemed to mollify them somewhat. (C)
2. Energy. Several spoke of the need for Summit agreement on
energy—to reduce consumption and increase production, to try to
work out a common pricing strategy among Summit countries, and
to spur energy R&D. They commended your decontrol decision as
3. Macro-Economic Policy. Several wanted a Summit call for adop-
tion of tax and other policies by the Summit countries to encourage pri-
vate investment. (C)
4. Follow-Up. James Wolfensohn (Salomon Brothers) observed that
“the President should bring home the Tokyo Economic Summit mes-
sage about energy and macro-economic policy, explain this message to
the American people, and show that he is keying his domestic eco-
nomic policies to these decisions.” Lee Morgan (Caterpillar Tractor)
said that this kind of Tokyo Summit follow-up would produce a favor-
able impact on world currency markets and on business confidence. (C)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
Sent for information.
2 April 20.
3 Donald Kendall was President and Chief Executive Officer of PepsiCo, Inc.
5 On April 5, Carter announced his decision to begin the phased decontrol of oil
prices in June. For the text of his announcement, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
212.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Breakfast with Prime Minister Ohira
PARTICIPANTS
GOJ:
Prime Minister Masayoshi Ohira
Foreign Minister Sunao Sunoda
Ambassador Fumihiko Togo
Deputy Chief Cabinet Secretary Koichi Kato
Government Representative for External Economic Affairs Takeshi Yasukawa
Deputy Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs Masuo Takashima
Deputy Vice Minister (MITI) Toshikazu Hashimoto
Deputy Vice Minister for Finance Takehiro Sagami
Director General, Economic Affairs Bureau, Agriculture Ministry Yoshio
Imamura
Director General, Economic Affairs Bureau, Foreign Affairs Reishi Teshima
Deputy Director General, Coordination Bureau, Economic Planning Agency
Seichiro Tanaka
Executive Assistant to the Prime Minister, Yasuyoshi Sato
Executive Assistant to the Foreign Minister, Yukio Sato
USG:
Secretary Blumenthal
Chairman, Board of Governors, Federal Reserve System, G. William Miller
Secretary of Agriculture Bob Bergland
Secretary of Commerce Juanita Kreps
Secretary of Energy James Schlesinger
Special Representative for Trade Negotiations Robert Strauss
Ambassador Mansfield
Under Secretary of State Richard Cooper
Under Secretary Solomon
Ambassador Owen
Notetakers:
Richard W. Fisher
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Erland Heginbotham
NSC Staff Member Jim Cochrane
Prime Minister Ohira
Good morning. Let me say just a few words to start. I feel indeed
honored that all of you could attend this breakfast. First, I am very
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects
Assistant Richard W. Fisher who signed on the last page. The meeting took place at Blair
Owen, Kreps, Solomon, Platt, Cooper, Weil, Mansfield, and other STR, Department of
State, and NSC Staff officials met to discuss strategy for Ohira’s visit; a memorandum of

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
happy to be able to report to you that I had a truly friendly, informal
meeting with President Carter.2 Thanks to the truly personal effort of
the President it was a success.
Through the meeting with President Carter, we were able to reach
a meeting of minds as to how best to manage U.S.–Japan relations. This
I find personally gratifying, and gratifying to the Japanese people. It is
my firm determination to do my utmost to work toward improved rela-
tions. I ask for your understanding of this effort. We have some
pending issues remaining. But a direction and framework has been
achieved for solving these; we would like to solidify this direction and
framework so that we can pave the way for improved relations.
I look forward to taking advantage of so many influential eco-
nomic leaders, to hear very candid and frank advice as to what Japan
should do, etc. We have with us some representatives of our more col-
orful Ministries—you may have heard of the conservative nature of the
Finance Ministry, the notoriety of the MITI, the obstinacy of the Foreign
Ministry. (laughter and applause)
Secretary Blumenthal
We all appreciate the opportunity to exchange with you views on
the economic side of the relationship, now and in the future. With your
permission, I would like to provide a brief overview and then call on
my colleagues, particularly Ambassador Strauss, Ambassador Owen
and Mr. Cooper.
We tend to think of the economic relations and problems between
us in terms of immediate short-term problems and longer-term
problems. The shorter-term problems must, of course, be solved be-
tween us in order to assure a stable relationship. We are encouraged
that your discussions with President Carter will help set in motion a
framework for agreement.
On the immediate problems, we have the issue of the MTN. Am-
bassador Strauss will no doubt deal with this issue in his remarks. Sec-
ondly, there is the problem of the need for continued progress toward
Japan’s eliminating its large current account surplus, not only to assist
international monetary stability but also to demonstrate to the E.C. as
conversation is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special
2 Memoranda of conversation of Carter’s May 2 morning and afternoon meetings
with Ohira are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Sub-
a.m. until 12:25 p.m., Carter and Ohira discussed U.S.-Japanese bilateral economic rela-
discussed Carter’s forthcoming visit to Japan and the Tokyo G–7 Summit, among other
issues. For the joint communique´ issued on May 2, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
well as to us, the progress made by Japan toward playing a full role in
the world economy and world markets.
On the current account, we are gratified by the progress that has
been made. But we note:
1) that the progress has been assisted by emergency imports. We
look for a further reduction of the current account without this kind of
short-term measure;
2) the rapid decline in the value of the yen relative to the dollar.
The progress we have made to improve the international financial situ-
ation might be threatened by too rapid a depreciation of the yen. And
the progress made on the current account might be put at risk.
While we, of course, do not wish to peg or manage the yen/dollar
rate, we do collaborate with the Japanese authorities and we do hope
that with your encouragement, the current situation will not place us in
a difficult posture next year.
The other remaining issues are:
a) the Summit, and in that context, energy matters. Mr. Owen will
comment on this.
b) providing assistance to the developing countries. Mr. Cooper
will elaborate.
In this area, I was interested to listen to your remarks to the Presi-
dent yesterday that Japan is assuming a heightened role in the world.3
We hope that you will take an increasing share of the World Bank ef-
fort, and of other programs such as IDA. We hope that Japan will be
able to take at least 15% of the IDA VI replenishment.
These matters are the bridges to the longer term; if we succeed
here, we can better assume longer term success. The opportunity to re-
view progress for structural changes in your country and longer run
changes in the U.S. at the Sub-Cabinet level, as well as in the “Wise
Men’s Group”,4 is a welcome one.
We think that the longer term problems include:
1) providing for continued stability in the current account
situation;
2) the longer term restructuring of the Japanese economy;
3) playing a greater role in the providing of assistance to the devel-
oping countries.
3 Apparently a reference to Ohira’s remarks to Carter during their meeting on the
morning of May 2. See footnote 2 above.
4 In the May 2 joint communique´, Carter and Ohira announced their decision to es-
tablish a Wise Men’s Group, composed of “distinguished persons drawn from private
life” who would offer their “recommendations concerning actions that the group con-
siders would help to maintain a healthy bilateral economic relationship between the
United States and Japan.” See Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy
Carter, 1979, Book I, p. 766.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
That is the best way to counter protectionist tendencies in our two
countries as well as elsewhere. We feel that progress on these fronts is
necessary to counter rising protectionism and prevent the undoing of
the progress that has been made between us and all nations.
Ambassador Strauss
I will be brief and candid. In this protectionist climate there has
been one strong, clear force that has enabled us to resist strong protec-
tionist action. And that force has been President Carter.
His dedication and determination that U.S.–Japan economic rela-
tions will continue to succeed has caused President Carter many polit-
ical scars, because the American people feel that the Administration
has not been responsive enough. This is the climate we face today.
In your distinguished career you have been many things, in-
cluding a politician. So you understand what I mean. The President has
come under attack because of his insistence to counter protectionism in
the Congress and across the country.
This is why I have told Ambassador Togo and Minister Ushiba that
the time for negotiation has passed. We have now a common problem
which we must solve together.
We have jointly made tremendous progress in working together in
the MTN. We have a few items remaining.5 But the greatest disservice I
could do to President Carter and to you and to the people of Japan is to
let you leave here without conveying the importance of solving these
remaining items. If we can deal with the procurement issue and the
issue of reciprocity, we will succeed in moving forward dramatically.
It is my personal judgment that we can conclude these items by the
Summit. If we fail, the press will escalate the issue in the following few
weeks, and I feel that we will be faced with protectionist legislation
shortly after the Summit on a broad as well as a product-by-product
basis.
Within the past twenty-four hours, Ambassador Owen and I have
reviewed this with the President and he is in accord with our views. We
have so much to gain. And so much to lose.
nese “rejected a U.S. proposal to reopen the stalled trade negotiations between Japan and
the United States on the outstanding bilateral trade issues, especially government pro-
curement,” describing the proposal as “essentially a ‘framework for agreement’, i.e. an
agreement to principles to guide negotiation of the actual agreement.” Talks would con-
tinue, but the details of the U.S.-Japanese agreement would not be negotiated until after

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Ambassador Owen
Mr. Prime Minister, I would like to say a word of appreciation for
Mr. Miyazaki6 who helped us draft the communique, as well as Mr.
Owada who has been of great assistance in our progress on the pro-
curement issue.
I turn now to the Summit. First, I’ll deal with energy. The recent
energy pre-Summit group dealt with two issues:
1) whether the Summit countries could go beyond the IEA pledges
and seek further restraint beyond 1980;
2) increase production of alternative forms of energy. We dis-
cussed increased cooperation in research and development. Second, we
discussed a proposal of Mr. Solomon’s to create an international corpo-
ration to finance efforts beyond research;
3) to create a Coal Advisory Board which would advise gov-
ernments in efforts to develop a world coal system.
On macro-economic policy. While you were meeting with the
President, a group chaired by Charlie Schultze was meeting in
London.7 They are focusing their efforts on:
1) short term policies, particularly growth and inflation. There the
focus is on inflation in the U.S. and growth in Germany and Japan.
2) deepseated structural problems such as investment problems in
the U.S. and productivity in all developed countries.
The third and final subject is North/South relations.
1) increased cooperation among Summit nations and developing
nations in research and development for economic progress;
2) to help LDC’s develop alternative energy sources
3) in regard to food, we will seek:
a) to conclude successful negotiations for an international
wheat reserve agreement supported by a concurrent buildup of
national stocks;
b) emphasis on fulfilling obligations under the food aid
convention;
c) use of IBRD consortium to expand R&D in world
production;
d) attention to how we can expand the flow of development-
financing resources to offset the increased reflow of repayments
from earlier assistance.
6 Japanese Deputy Foreign Minister for Economic Affairs Hiromichi Miyazaki.
7 Telegram 116432 to Tokyo, Bonn, London, Ottawa, Rome, Paris, and Brussels,
overview paper for the Tokyo Summit.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D790169–1907)

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
In all three of these areas, energy, macro-economics and food, I
think we will be able to come up with specific details of the kind you
spoke with the President about yesterday.8
Under Secretary Cooper
I would like to start out by discussing the developing countries.
Two things:
1) we must keep our markets open;
2) we must keep up our flows of foreign aid.
Japanese foreign aid has increased dramatically in the past few
years. Last year the GOJ made a commitment to double its foreign aid
and is well on its way to doing that. America has also increased its aid,
but not as dramatically. We all know the problems of increasing aid in a
democratic society. This makes the Japanese effort all the more
important.
The GOJ also made a commitment to untied aid. But we have yet to
see the orders flowing to foreign countries from such action. We look
forward to seeing indications that more GOJ aid money is being spent
in Europe, the U.S. and other countries.
Secretary Blumenthal invited me to speak on other economic
issues. Let me draw your attention to the issue of civil aviation. Fares
across the Pacific are about the highest in the world. That works to the
disadvantage of your citizens and ours. We recognize the problems
you’ve had in opening Narita airport and in keeping it open.9 We can
make a small step, however, if the GOJ will agree to fare decreases
across the Pacific. In return we’re ready to improve routing of Japanese
airlines coming into the U.S.
Prime Minister Ohira
I wish to thank the four speakers for the concise and constructive
summary of the cross section of U.S.–Japan relations. We would like to
study the record on how to best deal with these problems. There are
two points to note:
1) The question of the issue Mr. Strauss has referred to. I agree that
we have passed the point of negotiation. We must solve these
problems. I will be going to the Congress today and I feel like a novice
8 Apparently a reference to Ohira’s remarks to Carter during their meeting on the
afternoon of May 2. See footnote 2 above.
miles outside of Tokyo. The airport was vigorously opposed by local and leftist groups.
(Henry Scott-Stokes, “New Tokyo Airport Finally Opens With 13,000 Policemen on

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
in yoga who has to sit on a mat of pointed needles! But, this will be a
good chance for me and my party to experience this firsthand.
2) The question of the value of the yen as referred to by Secretary
Blumenthal. Last year we lived through seemingly interminable uncer-
tainty. We then achieved a period of relative calm. Now we are faced
with a record weakening of the value of the yen. I feel that we are re-
quired to spend great effort in resolving this problem in coming
months. This cannot be achieved without instilling confidence in the
world economy. This should be addressed at the upcoming Summit.
And again it is important for the monetary authorities to continue to co-
operate. I am asking Secretary Blumenthal and the others here to help
us cooperate.
213.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 3, 1979
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #95
1. Opinion: Dollar Pricing of Oil
Several months ago in the midst of the dollar crisis, Michael Blu-
menthal observed at an SCC Meeting that the United States was
bearing a large and unfair burden as a consequence of the fact that oil is
priced in dollars. This severely depresses the exchange rate for dollars,
and the result is that Germany and Japan are paying less for oil today in real
terms than they were before the 1973 price increases. They are becoming
“cheap energy” countries which gives them a strong competitive edge
in other areas of industry and international trade, aggravating the
problem of trade balances and putting further pressure on the dollar.
Nonetheless, at the time, Mike was against even studying pro-
posals to convert oil pricing to a “basket of currencies,” for fear that this
would show lack of confidence in the dollar and lead to an even heavier
speculation. Now that we are past the crisis, I think we should face this
issue squarely.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Sensitive. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
I believe it is very unwise to continue to accept a substantive eco-
nomic disadvantage just to keep up appearances. Great Britain drove
its economy into the ground in a futile effort to maintain the prestige of
sterling as a reserve currency. Now that the dollar has stabilized, I plan
to direct (unless you object) an analysis, on a close-hold basis, of the
possibility of the United States taking the initiative to propose the
“basket of currencies” approach to pricing oil. If this approach proves
to have merit, you may want to explore it at the Economic Summit.2
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the dollar pricing of oil.]
2 Carter wrote “ok” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
214.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, May 22, 1979
SUBJECT
Economic Summit
A two-day meeting of the Summit Preparatory Group on Friday
and Saturday2 produced the following, which is being reported to each
of the heads of government:
I. Procedure
1. The first day of the Summit will be devoted to energy and
macro-economic policy. The second day will be spent on North-South
relations and reviewing the communique, which will be shorter than
usual (about two pages). (C)
each morning and afternoon meeting, each head of government will
meet briefly with his representatives to instruct them as to how he
wants the issues discussed in that meeting treated in the communique.
The heads of governments’ press conference on the second day will be
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
Sent for information. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Henry. J.” Brzezinski also ini-
tialed at the top of the page.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
the Saturday afternoon meeting will end no later than 3:30 p.m. to
allow time for reproducing the communique.4 Given the amount of
time usually required for the heads of government to review the com-
munique, this means that the Summit will be virtually a one-day
meeting. (C)
3. The other heads of government want very much to meet infor-
mally before the first meeting, since two or three of them (Ohira,
Thatcher, and perhaps Clark of Canada) will be new. They wanted a
dinner the night before, but I think we have persuaded them to go for
an 8 a.m. breakfast just before the Summit instead. (C)
4. We agreed that the following might be discussed at the two
lunches, rather than at the regular meetings: political and economic re-
lations with China, aid for Egypt (as per Schmidt’s request to you),5 and
aid for Turkey, if it hasn’t been cleared up by then. Frank Press tells me
you would like internationalization of automobile research discussed
at a lunch; I think it would fit better under the regular agenda heading
of energy.6 (C)
II. Substance
1. Energy. All agreed that the Summit’s success will hinge on
whether the heads of government come up with specific actions to ad-
dress the energy problem. This means:
a. Demand Restraint: We discussed whether the heads of gov-
ernment should extend the 1979 International Energy Agency 5% re-
duction7 into 1980, with each country specifying the means that it
would employ to this end. There was general agreement that most
countries would need to do more than they are now doing, if the 5%
goal is to be achieved.8 (C)
b. Increased Production: We agreed the Summit should call for in-
creased use and production of coal, and should ask IEA to establish an
international coal advisory board that would recommend to gov-
ernments the specific steps that they should take to achieve this in-
crease. Schmidt wants the Summit to underline the usefulness of nu-
4 Owen’s reference to a “Saturday afternoon meeting” appears to be an error. Given
apparently intended to refer to the Friday afternoon meeting.
5 Not further identified.
6 Carter drew an arrow pointing toward the phrase “would fit better under the reg-
ular agenda heading of energy” and wrote “ok” in the adjacent margin.
8 Carter wrote “I agree” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
clear power and to support his call for an International Atomic Energy
Agency study9 of nuclear safety. We talked of the need for increased in-
vestment in the development of alternative energy resources; all felt
that agreement on specific actions to this end is crucial to success of the
Summit. This hinges on our being able to submit specific US ideas so
that the Summit Preparatory Group can prepare a range of options for
the heads of government to review.10 It’s sad others don’t have ideas,
but it’s a fact. (C)
2. Macro-Economic. Having gone as far as they can in containing
inflation through restraining demand, it was agreed that the Summit
countries should emphasize longer-term structural policies to increase
production at Tokyo—e.g., tax incentives, deregulation, and reducing
the size of the public sector. Charlie Schultze argued persuasively that
this should be the new front in our battle on inflation. Thatcher, Barre,
and Schmidt will like this.11 (C)
3. North-South. We discussed, as you and Ohira did, the need for
Summit agreement on steps to help LDCs increase their food and en-
ergy output. To this end, we focussed on increased cooperation with
LDCs in research and development, which has the advantage of being
both useful and cheap.12 (C)
4. Conclusion. This Summit will differ from its two predecessors, in
that it will focus largely on a single set of issues: energy and macro-
economics. If we can give substantive content to this approach, the
Tokyo Summit could be helpful in dramatizing the fact that we have
clear programs for dealing with these problems. But this requires
Summit agreement on new and common initiatives, rather than bar-
gaining about commitment to familiar and contrasting national actions,
as at Bonn. This kind of Summit is harder to prepare and more uncer-
tain of success. But it is inherent in the situation: We face a new chal-
lenge, as a result of interacting energy and inflation threats, and this
type of Summit is needed to deal with them.13 (C)
9 Carter underlined the phrase “International Atomic Energy Agency study” and
wrote “We have the INFCE ongoing” in the adjacent margin.
10 Carter drew an arrow pointing toward this sentence and the previous one and
wrote “ok” in the adjacent margin. Owen subsequently gained Carter’s approval of a U.S.
proposal for an International Energy Technology Group; see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976,
11 Carter wrote “Important” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
12 Carter drew an arrow pointing toward the final sentence of this paragraph and
wrote “Maximum staff work. Try to minimize Summit time” in the adjacent margin.
13 Carter wrote “How to deal with OPEC abuse in the most concerted and effective
manner is a vital issue” below this paragraph.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
215.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, May 30, 1979
SUBJECT
Japan (U)
1. Prime Minister Ohira sent an aide to Washington last week to
negotiate with Bob Strauss about the items on which you asked Ohira
for agreement before your trip to Japan. In a week of hard bargaining,
agreement was reached as follows:
a. Japan agreed to conclude a telephone and telecommunications
government procurement agreement based on “mutual reciprocity” by
December 30, 1980. Japan also agreed to make some concessions on
tariff staging, to work out new import standards and testing proce-
dures based on reciprocity, and to try to increase coal purchases. All
this will be announced when Bob visits Tokyo next week, if Ohira is
able between now and then to form a Japanese consensus around the
concessions that his emissary made here on his behalf.2 (Otherwise, it
will be announced later, but still before you arrive in Japan.) To avoid
complicating Ohira’s task, we agreed to say nothing about all this in the
meantime. (C)
b. Japan also agreed to negotiate a more generous arrangement on
cigars and cigarettes, and this intention will be announced just before
you leave for Tokyo. (C)
2. This outcome confirms my view that Ohira intends to fulfill the
pledges that he made during his visit. I believe we will find that this
also extends to the pledges he made on medium-term economic policy,
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
warding to Carter under cover of a May 30 note from Owen. Brzezinski wrote “DR to-
morrow” on Owen’s note. (Ibid.) An attached note, dated May 31, indicates that Owen’s
memorandum to Carter was included in Carter’s Daily Report. (Ibid.)
2 On June 2, Strauss and Ushiba initialed a joint statement on U.S.-Japanese eco-
nomic relations; a copy of the initialed statement is in the National Archives, RG 364,
June 6 memorandum to Carter, Strauss asserted that “the important underlying theme
for these understandings is reciprocity—the insistence on a real two-way street with
Japan. The Japanese recognize that this is the key principle necessary for a positive and
lasting trading relationship between our two nations. We agreed with the Japanese to
work toward reciprocity in government procurement and standards, to accelerate Japa-
nese tariff reductions, and to encourage Japanese imports of tobacco products and U.S.
coal.” (Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential File, Box

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
although this will take a good deal longer. His visit looks more and
more like a turning point in US-Japanese economic relations.3 (C)
hope that the U.S.-Japanese agreement would “relieve much of the short-term trade ten-
sion between our two countries, thus allowing you to concentrate more fully on other and
more fundamental issues during the upcoming Summit Conference.”
216.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1
Washington, June 5, 1979
SUBJECT
Implementation of the Tokyo Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations
Within two weeks we expect to submit for your approval and
transmittal to Congress the international agreements and domestic im-
plementing legislation which together comprise the final results of the
Tokyo Round. Barring unforeseen difficulties, in keeping with my pre-
vious advice to you, I believe the package—the most comprehensive
trade legislation any President has submitted to any Congress—will be
approved by the House and Senate, under the procedures set forth in
the Trade Act of 1974, before the August recess. However, we still
cannot be certain. The legislation has completed mark-up in both
Houses and a unique “pre-conference” by House Ways and Means and
Senate Finance Committees which concluded without any major loss
on issues.
This package is the culmination of almost five years of negotiations
with our trading partners by this Office in cooperation with other
agencies of the Executive Branch and in close consultation with our pri-
vate sector advisors and with the Congress. The major elements of the
package are as follows:
—international codes of conduct on nontariff barriers including
subsidies and countervailing measures; anti-dumping; product stand-
1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Material, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, National
cation marking.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
ards; customs valuation; licensing; trade in civil aircraft; and gov-
ernment procurement;
—renovation of the international trading framework to improve
the rules for resolving international trade disputes and to make the
trading system more responsive to the needs of developing countries;
—a series of agreements designed to improve the international
rules for trade in agricultural products;
—a revamping of our domestic laws and procedures governing
unfair foreign trade practices, particularly subsidies and antidumping,
and new procedures for handling complaints by private parties against
foreign practices which violate code obligations.
In addition, we have agreed with our major trading partners to re-
duce tariffs on industrial products by an average of about 30 percent, to
be phased in over the next eight years, beginning in January, 1980.
As this process has evolved, several important issues have arisen
which deserve your attention:
Material Injury: In the negotiation of the Code on Subsidies and
Countervailing Measures, our trading partners sought, and we agreed
to recommend to the Congress, the inclusion of a “material” injury test
in the U.S. countervailing duty statute. In recent weeks, concern has
been expressed in some foreign capitals that the requirement that “ma-
terial” injury be demonstrated before countervailing duties are im-
posed would not be included in our implementing legislation.2 I am
pleased to report that a “material” injury test which implements our in-
ternational obligations will be included in the legislation.
Limiting Benefits of the Subsidies Code to Countries Accepting Its Obli-
gations: A related issue of far-reaching significance is the conditional
application of the Code on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures.
Under the subsidy code, signatory governments will assume new obli-
gations with respect to the use of subsidies. At the same time, the
United States will commit itself not to apply countervailing duties
against foreign subsidies, unless it can be shown that a U.S. industry
has been injured or threatened with material injury. Under Trade
Policy Committee guidance, we have recommended to the Congress
that the benefit of an injury test in our countervailing duty law should
be accorded only to countries that accept the obligations of the sub-
sidies code, not to all countries.
2 For example, in the April 17 Evening Report to Carter, Christopher wrote:
“Speaking for the EC President, French Ambassador de Laboulaye, accompanied by EC
Ambassador Spaak, called on me today to stress the importance the EC places on the US
adopting legislation which will faithfully translate the MTN agreements in US domestic
law. He dwelt especially on the standard the US will adopt for determining injury in
countervailing duty and dumping cases. The EC feels strongly that US law should use
precisely the same formulation—‘material injury’—as appears in the MTN agreements
negotiated in Geneva.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
The threat of a stringent application of the current U.S. counter-
vailing duty statute (without an injury test) is our only means of per-
suading a number of countries, particularly advanced developing
countries, to accept the obligations of the code. It is difficult to maintain
a consensus for open trade if such countries continue to refuse to accept
international discipline over their export subsidy practices. Also, in my
judgment, we could not obtain congressional approval of the new sub-
sidy code if a large number of countries were excluded from the disci-
pline of the code (giving them a “free ride”).
Although there are persuasive reasons for discriminating among
countries with regard to the use of the injury standard in the U.S. coun-
tervailing duty law, this step represents a departure from traditional
U.S. trade policy. The U.S. has in the past extended the benefits of trade
concessions on an unconditional “most-favored-nation” basis (i.e.
without regard to reciprocity). This may involve controversy, espe-
cially from developing countries.
Your advisors have carefully reviewed the pros and cons of this
issue, and they see no alternative but to deny the benefit of the injury
standard to countries not assuming code obligations. At the same time,
we expect to be flexible in working out transitional arrangements for
developing countries who need time to phase out their current export
subsidy practices.
The policy argument for this approach is compelling, and your ad-
visers believe that in most cases this decision is legally defensible in the
GATT. In those instances in which this decision would violate the pro-
visions of bilateral agreements, specific legislative exceptions to this
rule will be provided.
Reorganization of the Executive Branch for the Conduct of Trade Policy:
As we have discussed before, there is a strong consensus on Capitol
Hill that the trade policy functions of the Executive Branch are in need
of reorganization. The agreement we have reached with the Hill is that
the Administration will submit its recommendations to Congress by
July 10, 1979, without prejudging what form those recommendations
will take. We are working with OMB and other agencies to prepare the
Administration’s recommendations.3
3 The Carter administration announced a plan to reorganize the making of trade
policy on July 19. (Clyde H. Farnsworth, “Carter Asks For Trade Revamping,” The New
to Congress. For Carter’s message to Congress, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
217.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 8, 1979
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #100
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a shift from dollar to SDR
oil pricing.]
A Shift from Dollar to SDR Oil Pricing
In response to your request, we have considered, and discussed
with other agencies, whether the U.S. should favor use of SDRs, instead
of dollars, to pay for crude oil.2 The argument for making the change is
twofold: that Germany and Japan have come out ahead since 1973 as
buyers of oil at prices denominated in depreciated dollars, making
them “cheap energy” countries; and that use of dollars places an undue
burden on the U.S.
State, Treasury, CEA and Henry Owen believe that dollar pricing
should be maintained for two reasons:
1. An announcement that dollars were no longer being used as the
unit of account in paying for oil would trigger selling of dollars on the
foreign exchange markets. So we would suffer.
2. It is hard to see any offsetting gain, since OPEC would probably
raise prices in SDR terms, as necessary to recover revenue losses, if the
SDR appreciated relative to the dollar.
Thus, while conversion from dollar to SDR oil pricing probably
would not have much effect on the course of oil prices, it could have se-
rious dangers for the dollar’s position in exchange markets.
As to the burden on the U.S.: Whatever the pros and cons of get-
ting the U.S. dollar out of its role as a global reserve currency, using
SDRs, instead of dollars, to buy oil would not accomplish this change:
The total amounts paid for oil each year pale into insignificance com-
pared to the amounts of dollars sloshing around the world as a reserve
currency.
In any event, the question is probably moot, since U.S. encourage-
ment of a shift would not persuade OPEC countries to make the shift
while the dollar is as strong as it now is.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Zbig. C.”
2 See Document 213.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a shift from dollar to SDR
oil pricing.]
218.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1
Washington, June 8, 1979
SUBJECT
Decision on Extension of Specialty Steel Import Relief
This memorandum discusses options regarding the duration of an
extension of specialty steel import relief. As I noted in my May 18 mem-
orandum on specialty steel,2 all agencies had agreed to recommend that
you extend import relief for six months in the form of progressively
larger bimonthly quotas.
During the past several weeks, Congressional interest in this case
has intensified. To date, 34 Senators and 54 members of the House have
written either you or me; they almost unanimously favor a substantial
extension of import relief. If we were to respond to these strong Con-
gressional concerns, which were evident in your meeting with the Con-
gressional Steel Caucus on June 7,3 relief would have to be extended at
least 1½–2 years.
There is not a good economic case for extending relief that long
and I would not recommend that you do so. However, you may want
to consider an eight month extension of relief as well as a six-month ex-
tension. Attachment 1 outlines my recommendations on quota levels
for an eight month extension of relief.4
I personally recommend that you extend import relief for eight
months rather than six months. This longer relief period is more re-
sponsive to Congressional concerns but because of the phase down of
indicates that Strauss signed the original.
2 Not found.
3 On June 7, Carter met with the Congressional steel caucus in the Cabinet Room
No memorandum of conversation was found.
4 Attachment 1, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Bimonthly
Quota Levels, By Product Category, for Eight-Month Extension of Relief.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
the restrictiveness of the quotas in each successive two-month period,
would have little real effect. It would also allow a greater proportion of
the build-up in foreign specialty steel inventories now in bonded U.S.
warehouses to be imported while the quotas were still in effect thus re-
ducing the likelihood of large surges in imports upon expiration of
relief.
There are also several options with regard to the country structure
of the quotas. Currently, Japan, the EC countries collectively, Sweden,
and Canada generally have separate country quotas in each of five spe-
cialty steel product categories. Imports from other countries are gener-
ally subject to first-come, first-serve “basket” quotas. The existence of
these basket quotas and of quotas for the EC countries collectively in-
stead of individually has created a substantial build-up of imported
steel from these countries in bonded U.S. warehouses.
In two categories (stainless steel bar and alloy tool steel), the stocks
in warehouses are so large in relation to the EC and other country
basket quotas that even very substantial increases in these quotas
would not be sufficient to clear the warehouses. In order to ensure that
these stocks are entered during, not after, the relief period, I recom-
mend that you proclaim global quotas for the bar and alloy tool steel
categories. For the remaining three product categories, I recommend
that we maintain the current country breakdowns since the inventory
problems are not as severe in these categories.
Attached to this memorandum are two alternative draft proclama-
tions—one for a six-month extension and the other for an eight-month
extension—for your signature if you decide to extend relief.5 Since the
current relief program expires on Wednesday,6 it is critical that you de-
cide no later than next Tuesday morning so that importers and ex-
porters will have at least one day’s notice.7
5 Not attached.
6 June 13.
quotas for an additional 8 months. For the text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
219.
Memorandum From the Deputy Special Representative for
Trade Negotiations (McDonald) to the Special
Representative for Trade Negotiations (Strauss)1
Washington, June 18, 1979
SUBJECT
Congressional Tally on MTN
Our Congressional Liaison Group successfully completed its
second full tour of House Members and the first tour of Senate
Members at the end of last week. These contacts have been aimed at in-
forming every Member of Congress of the implementing bill and its
unique procedures for Congressional consideration, while at the same
time trying to record what each Member’s attitude was toward the
MTN.
At the time of the introduction of the MTN legislation this week,2
we have a solid majority with us in both Houses, and we seem to be
gaining ground steadily with each new series of contacts. Definitive op-
position is still light and seemingly unorganized, and our efforts are
aimed to keep it that way. As you know, we have enjoyed full support
of Frank Moore’s unit for this effort and excellent cooperation from the
interagency CL team organized as part of the White House Task Force
and led by Michael Rowny.
HOUSE SUMMARY
(A) Numerical Tally: In the House we have now 105 positively with
us and 154 leaning for the MTN, giving us a total favorable tally of 259
Members, or approximately 60 percent of the House. This is up from
218 at the completion of our first round of contacts some two weeks
ago. The total gain came in the positive support column.
At the same time, we still have 145 in the middle ground categories
of “No Information” or “Neutral.” As for opposition, only five House
Members are listed as definitively opposed to the MTN, and 17 cur-
rently are leaning against us.
A third tour of contacts by the Congressional Liaison Group will
start later this week immediately following the introduction of the leg-
marking. Copies were sent to Moore, Wexler, Wolff, and the Assistant STRs.
2 On June 19, Carter sent the MTN agreements, as well as legislation implementing
the agreements, to Congress for approval. For Carter’s transmittal message, see Public

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
islation. We will make sure the Members have copies of the legislation,
an editorial support list of periodicals that is overwhelmingly favor-
able, and an endorsement list of organizations that should provide the
uncommitted with considerable political cover. We intend to follow up
the third tour with a final, fourth round crammed into the three or four
days just before the House vote is scheduled.
(B) Tally by Committee: At the completion of the first tour, we had
two very weak committees in terms of response (Aging, and Interstate
and Foreign Commerce) and one leaning negative (the Small Business
Committee). In our second tour, the Interstate and Foreign Commerce
Committee came over solidly to us, but we still have to do more work
with the Small Business group. To remove some of their questions, we
are preparing draft letters from you to each of these committee
members reiterating the special steps we have taken to eliminate small
business from the government procurement code provisions.3 This
should give us a further boost with that group who may not be thor-
oughly informed yet or who have lingering doubts from the earlier dis-
cussions and exaggerated newspaper reports.
(C) Tally by Geographical Area: Both the southeast and the northeast
seem to have improved somewhat in the latest tally. The midwest
lingers somewhat behind now and requires our closest attention. By
state, Pennsylvania is our most difficult one, followed by Illinois, In-
diana and Michigan. Special efforts by Administration CL officers and
our outreach groups are being made particularly aimed at these four
states. Pennsylvania may remain a problem to the end, but we should
clearly have the other three thoroughly with us.
(D) Tally by Issues: Steel and textiles are still the only two issues that
repeatedly come up. Now that the specialty steel decision has been
handed down and the unilateral action taken on textiles with China,4
we should be in position to swing over a number of House Members
from these caucuses to the positive side. On the second tour, we had 37
House Members still expressing MTN reservations because of steel
concerns and 14 on textiles. Letters indicating industry endorsements
will be circulated to each of these individuals.5
SENATE SITUATION
The first tour of contacts on the Senate side produced a better re-
sult than we had expected. Based strictly on the hearings and personal
3 The draft letters were not found.
4 On May 31, the United States introduced quotas on Chinese textile imports.
(Clyde H. Farnsworth, “U.S. Imposes Quotas on Chinese Textiles,” The New York Times,
5 The letters were not found.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
contacts that have taken place so far, the Senatorial group definitely
supporting the MTN numbers 18, with 39 other Senators leaning favor-
ably. This gives us a total of 57 out of initial count of only 81 that were
directly contacted. This means more than a two-thirds majority, while
some 14 Senators are neutral among the 81 we have already seen.
Opposition is extremely slim, with only one opposed (Melcher
from Montana, largely complaining about not getting a better deal still
on beef and the EC not renouncing the CAP). Two Senators are leaning
against (Cohen of Maine because of the general economic malaise and
poor economic outlook for his state, and DeConcini of Arizona, for no
stated reason). On the next Senate tour, we will be seeing each of these
three individuals plus the 14 neutrals as well as those not yet recorded
on the first round.
SUPPLEMENTARY CONTACT EFFORTS
In addition to the Administration task force team of Congressional
liaison officers, we are supplementing our effort on a systematic basis
with a combined private sector team. Representatives from ECAT,
NAM, the Chamber of Commerce and the League of Women Voters are
all pursuing detailed plans to recruit Congressional support for the
agreements. They are being further supplemented on a more special-
ized basis by a variety of supporting organizations both from business
and agriculture.
Finally, all Members of Congress should be hearing regularly from
positive-minded constituents from the time the legislation is intro-
duced this week until the actual votes are taken. The outreach activities
(covered in a brief separate memorandum)6 are moving ahead well and
should directly contribute to our last minute support.
In sum, I believe that the Administration’s present position on the
MTN is more favorable at the moment the President sends the legisla-
tion forward than for any piece of general trade legislation in U.S. his-
tory. Even so, we are not relaxing our efforts. We will continue to press
the issue home both to maintain the support base we have, and to gain
more momentum by voting time.
6 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
220.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of the Treasury for
Monetary Affairs (Solomon) to Secretary of the Treasury
Blumenthal1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
The Cost of the MTN: A Short List of “Sweeteners”
In order to liberalize trade in the MTN, we have had to restrict
trade in certain sectors. These “sweeteners” were the political price
paid by STR and the Administration to gain the support, or at least the
non-opposition, of certain industries when the MTN package goes to a
vote in Congress.
We break these down into two groups. The first are those paid di-
rectly in order to secure agreement to specific elements of the MTN
package. An example would be the tax deferral given the spirits in-
dustry as part of the negotiation over wine gallon. The second group
are those actions which, although not directly related to the MTN, were
required to appease protectionist pressures which might have had a
spillover effect. An example would be the shoe OMAs. The second are
designated (*) below.
We have attached a table prepared by the Office of Trade Research
in March, which estimates the costs to the United States of import re-
strictions by sector.2 It finds that the expense to consumers of import
protection was about $80 billion in 1978. A large part of this total repre-
sented transfers to U.S. producers, leaving an efficiency loss to the U.S.
economy of about $8 billion.
*1) Summer 1977: OMAs were imposed on shoes imported from
Korea and Taiwan, and on color TVs from Japan. The latter was ex-
tended also to Korea and Taiwan in 1979. The principal cost to U.S. con-
sumers is the long-run dynamic cost of discouraging investment
abroad in low-cost production destined for the U.S. market.
2) February, 1978: The Trigger Price Mechanism took effect. Treas-
cent. Without the TPM, we would have been under intense pressure to
copy. Drafted on June 19 by E. Barber (ITT) and reviewed by Ray (ITT), Hufbauer (IT),
and Bergsten. The memorandum was forwarded to Blumenthal under cover of a June 19
memorandum from Solomon. (Ibid.)
2 Attached but not printed is an undated table entitled “Costs to the United States in
1978 of Import Restrictions on US Imports.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
exempt steel altogether from the MTN. In addition, the quotas on spe-
cialty steel originally imposed in 1976 will run for another eight
months.
3) January 1979: The textile white paper announced that bilateral
agreements reached under the MFA will be tightened to eliminate
surges, and that future textile trade will be more closely monitored. The
cost estimates in the attachment are based on existing quota and tariff
restrictions, assuming estimated price differentials of 27% in textiles
and 36% in apparel. If monitoring results in further restrictions, costs
will of course increase.
4) ASP: On rubber footwear, we converted American Selling Price
to AVE levels of protection, but offered no cuts in the resulting tariffs
(which run as high as 48%). In chemicals, we excepted a number of
basic chemical products from tariff cuts in order to satisfy industry
fears of potential import competition.
5) Agriculture: No across-the-board tariff formula was applied.
Liberalization was applied only on items specifically requested, and
paid for, by our trading partners.
6) Meat: Indications are that Congress will defeat the Administra-
tion’s efforts to raise our minimum annual beef import quota from 1.2
billion pounds to 1.3 billion. As a result, beef imports probably will
next ten years.
*7) Sugar quotas: A bill pending in the House would raise the U.S.
tional wisdom has it that every 1 cent increase results in an additional
$500 million cost to consumers. The Administration is supporting the
growers because Senator Church is holding ISA ratification hostage,
but consumer groups are resisting.
8) Wine Gallon: The 15-day deferral of tax payments by the do-
mestic industry will result in lost revenue to the Treasury, but probably
not in a cost to consumers.
9) Tariff Exceptions: Textiles, leather goods, consumer electronics,
and other sectors benefitted from numerous tariff exceptions which
will result in higher prices to consumers, though these are not now
quantifiable.
screws, CB radios, high-carbon ferrochrome, etc. received additional
impetus from the need to head off pressures on the MTN agreements.
11) Extended Tariff Authority: Political pressure to exclude entire
industries by name (textiles, steel mill products, chemicals, footwear)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
from this authority led to a decision to drop the whole proposal. We
now have less flexibility to negotiate future trade liberalization.
221.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, June 22, 1979
SUBJECT
Tokyo Summit (U)
This memorandum reviews the US position on Summit issues, in
light of recent events—including discussions with the Summit Prepara-
tory Group,2 German Economics Minister Lambsdorff, and French
leaders (Giscard, Barre, and Francois-Poncet) in Paris last week,3 as
well as the EC heads of government meeting, which ended today.4 (U)
[Omitted here is discussion of energy.]
II. Macro-Economic Policy
1. Short-Term. Giscard wants the communique to register the
Summit governments’ intent to offset the contractionary effects of
higher oil prices through their domestic macroeconomic policies. There
are differences of view as to how work can be done to this end. All
agree that the effects of oil price increases cannot be passed through in
the form of wage increases without disastrous effects, and that this
should be made clear in the communique. The unresolved question is
whether Germany and Japan will continue to maintain high growth
rates, or cut back to fight inflation. Both are clearly leaning in the latter
direction. We should join the other Summit countries in urging these
two countries to continue to maintain the rates of growth in domestic
demand to which they committed themselves at Bonn. This is in our in-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
fidential. Sent for information.
3 The discussions with Lambsdorff, Giscard, Barre, and Franc¸ois-Poncet were not
further identified and no other record of them was found.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
terest from the standpoint of increasing US exports and strengthening
the dollar. If the opportunity arises, you may want to make this point in
bilateral talks with Schmidt and Ohira. German and Japanese policies
will be reviewed bilaterally in the OECD assessment of member coun-
tries’ macro-economic responses to higher oil prices this fall. (C)
2. Medium-Term. All agree this Summit should place more em-
phasis on medium-term policies to increase investment and produc-
tivity. This means such steps as deregulation, tax incentives for new in-
vestment, less protection and subsidy, and reducing the size of the
public sector. The only question is how clearly this view should be
stated, and how specifically these policies should be described. It
would be helpful to the US—since we will want to move in this direc-
tion anyway—to have the Summit speak forcefully to this issue.
Thatcher and Clark will likely take the same view. As on most issues,
the Japanese will favor generalities.
III. North-South
All agree that the Summit should emphasize aid to developing
countries for production of energy and food, and should stress tech-
nical assistance. Again, the need is for specificity: otherwise, the whole
thing will be dismissed by the developing countries as a farce. Further-
more, only a clear call for specific action will produce that action. We
do not want the Summit, in its preoccupation with energy, to become—
or to be seen to have become—an ingrown rich man’s club. The other
countries agree but would, for the most part, be content with bland
generalities. (C)
1. Energy. The key points to make here are:5
a. The Summit should call on the World Bank and other multilat-
eral banks to expand their programs to aid hydrocarbon exploration in
LDCs, and on the Summit countries to improve their national programs
to the same end. The French have proposed a joint mechanism (pre-
sumably managed by the World Bank) to guarantee developing coun-
tries and oil companies against the risks of fruitless exploration; the
Summit could ask the World Bank to study this idea, which is too
vague to be acted on. (C)
b. The Summit countries should agree to give high priority, in their
aid budgets, to renewable energy development in LDCs and should
call on the World Bank to coordinate increased bilateral aid for this pur-
5 Documentation on the Tokyo G–7 Summit preparations on the issue of energy
and oil pricing is printed in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXVII, Energy Crisis,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
c. The French want the Summit to call on the OPEC countries to
participate vigorously in these programs of energy aid to LDCs. This
makes sense. (C)
2. Food. In line with Sol Linowitz’ Hunger Commission report to
you:6
a. Reserves. The Summit should call on LDCs to strengthen their
food storage capacity, so that they can maintain larger food reserves,
and should urge increased bilateral and multilateral aid to them for this
purpose. You might urge governments expeditiously to establish the
basis for a successful resumption of the negotiations for an interna-
tional wheat reserve. (This means European willingness to agree to
larger stocks.) (C)
b. Production. The Summit should call on LDCs to develop national
food production strategies, and pledge increased bilateral and multi-
lateral aid to help LDCs carry out these strategies. (C)
c. Research. The Summit should call for increased bilateral and mul-
tilateral aid for agricultural research in LDCs. This is one of the main
prerequisites to increased food output; it is underfunded. The most ef-
fective instrument for supporting this research is the World Bank’s
Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research; its re-
sources should be doubled. (C)
d. Food Aid. The Summit should call for more food aid to LDCs. To
this end, it should suggest negotiating a new Food Aid Convention,
and fulfilling the aid targets in the present one.7 (C)
3. Technical Assistance. The Summit should call for increased effort
in this field and for coordination between national programs—such as
our proposed new Institute for Scientific and Technological Coopera-
tion and the comparable Canadian institution. (C)
The heads of government don’t need to spend a great deal of time
on these North-South issues. If they will agree that the communique
should be specific, the Summit Preparatory Group can do the rest. The
Bonn communique called for a new World Bank program of lending for
oil exploration in LDCs, which has proved exceedingly useful. This is
6 Sol Linowitz, Chairman of the Presidential Commission on World Hunger, sent
Carter a report entitled “Recommendations Concerning Hunger for the President’s Use
at the Tokyo Summit” under cover of a June 8 letter. (Letter from Linowitz to Mondale,
June 15; Carter Library, Donated Material, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, National Secu-
Documentation on the report is in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and
Humanitarian Affairs.
7 Under the Food Aid Convention, first negotiated in 1967, donor nations promised
to provide LDCs with specified amounts of food assistance.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
the sort of thing Summits can accomplish in the North-South field if
they resist the temptation to settle for soothing generalities. The steps
proposed above cost little. (C)
IV. Other
1. Trade. Nothing new here. All agree on the need to say something
forceful about implementing MTN. (C)
2. Monetary. No need to spend much time on this issue unless the
fall in the dollar continues, in which case Mike Blumenthal will have
specific recommendations as to what you might say about this at
[Omitted here is discussion of Central America, Indochina, aid to
Egypt, aid to Turkey, hijacking, Iran, Cuba, Pakistan, and China.]
VII. Next Year
The question of the next Summit may come up. Italy, which will
have the EC Presidency in the first half of next year, proposes to hold it
in Venice (on an island for security’s sake). I told my Italian colleague
that May might be better than June, given the approach of our Presi-
dential election. He intimated that they will invite you to a state visit to
Italy just before or after the Summit. Dick Gardner says that the secu-
rity problem is manageable, and cites two papal funerals and one papal
coronation to prove his point.
There are rumors that Giscard may ask: Why have an annual
Summit? I doubt he will, unless the Tokyo Summit is a bust. But in case
he does: the Japanese would be mortified by the implication of failure
inherent in the Tokyo Summit’s being the last such meeting for a while;
and the Italians would be even more mortified—particularly after Gua-
deloupe8—if there were no 1980 Summit.
You might mention that peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be
discussed at the Summit next year, in the wake of INFCE (which ends
in February). You might stress the need for an international approach
to this issue, and say that Gerard Smith will be visiting their gov-
ernments to talk about this approach shortly. (You may recall that you
wrote “OK” on a memo I sent you a while back, proposing that this be a
main theme of the 1980 Summit.9 Gerry and I are working on specific
proposals for early submission to you.)
9 Apparently a reference to Document 202, in which Owen sought Carter’s ap-
proval for themes for the Tokyo G–7 Summit.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
VIII. Bilateral Talks Regarding the Summit
A. Ohira
Your Monday10 meeting with Ohira is an opportunity to impress
strongly on him the need for the Tokyo Summit to agree on bold and
specific steps regarding energy. (C)
Japanese officials below Ohira are reluctant to accept specific oil-
import targets—and count on the known reluctance of Schmidt and the
UK to accept such targets to ensure that their views prevail. The Trade
Ministry, which is responsible for energy, wants Summit energy agree-
ments that will look good, but that will not limit Japan’s freedom of ac-
You need to make clear to Ohira that your definition of a suc-
cessful Summit is one that involves specific commitments on both the
supply and demand side. These will be painful, but essential. You
count on him to exert his influence, as he did so successfully in helping
to resolve US-Japan economic issues earlier this year, to ensure a suc-
cessful outcome. (C)
You might also stress your desire to see the Summit come up
with specific commitments in the North-South field—particularly re-
garding aid to LDCs to help them increase their food and energy
production. (C)
B. Thatcher
Mrs. Thatcher said to the media, after the recent EC heads of gov-
ernment meeting, that “the current supply crisis is not as bad as it is
sometimes made out to be . . . It is a marginal problem, which is re-
flected in the spot market.” (C)
You may want to share with her our view that the imbalance be-
tween oil supply and demand, even though it is only 1.5 million barrels
a day, has extremely serious implications for the US and other OECD
economies. If the Tokyo Summit does not agree on effective joint ac-
tion, the pressures for competitive national responses will mount. We
should not let the fact that small amounts of oil are involved blind us to
the very high political and economic stakes, or to the fact that this
Summit presents an opportunity for a common response which, if
missed, may be hard to recapture. Half-measures will not meet the
June 28.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
IX. Communique
I attach a draft communique circulated by the Japanese after the
last meeting of the Preparatory Group. It is not agreed, and I want to
make it more specific. But since other heads of government may have
seen it, you may wish to glance at it. (Tab A)11 (C)
X. Other Briefing Materials
Summit issues are described more fully in Book I; luncheon discus-
sion issues are treated in Book II. This memo covers the ground suffi-
ciently so that I believe you need only review these other briefing mate-
rials for background reading, as time permits. (U)
11 Attached but not printed is the June 18 “Draft Communique´ for Tokyo Summit.”
222.
Minutes of the Tokyo Economic Summit Meeting1
Tokyo, June 28, 1979
Tokyo Summit
First Session2
OHIRA: Now that the press has left let’s get to business. I extend
greetings to all of you. I know many of you have come from afar. I am
happy to welcome the new members of our group—Mrs. Thatcher and
Prime Minister Clark. I am also a new member, and I hope I am wel-
come too.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects,
printed are a cover page and a list of participants. According to the list, the following
people participated in the Summit: Clark, MacDonald, and Crosbie; Giscard, Franc¸ois-
Poncet, Monory, Giraud; Schmidt, Genscher, Matthoefer, and Lambsdorff; Andreotti,
Forlani, and Pandolifi; Ohira, Sonoda, Kaneko, and Esaki; Thatcher, Lord Carrington,
and Howe; Carter, Vance, Blumenthal, and Schlesinger; and Jenkins. The list notes that
Hormats drafted the minutes. The list of participants and the sections of the minutes of all
four sessions concerning energy are printed in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXVII,
in the Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 4, Summit
2 The first session of the Summit took place in the Conference Room at the Akasaka
President’s Daily Diary)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Here in Japan we are in the process of conserving energy; we often
open our shirt necks because of the heat. In this room, we may permit
ourselves to take our jackets off and work in shirt sleeves, with your
concurrence.
As Chancellor Schmidt said in the Bonn Summit, we are members
of a mountain climbing party; we were just getting out of difficult eco-
nomic troughs. But just as we were getting to the peaks, we encoun-
tered difficulties—a landslide in the form of the oil crisis. The circum-
stances today are reminiscent of Rambouillet, or in fact more serious
than at Rambouillet. But I believe we are wiser today, because we have
gained wisdom from past experience. We should be fully utilizing it,
and must cooperate, to get out of our predicament.
We face an immediate problem. We need to take fundamental
long-range policy decisions, and we need to carry them out.
Before the agenda begins officially, I should note one thing. There
was in Tokyo on 26 June a meeting of Trade Union leaders. Their repre-
sentatives sent a statement to me; that is now before each of you. The
Trade Union representatives asked that the statement be included in
next year’s agenda, if we meet next year.
A few household points: First, the meeting, as in the past will be
formed of the following: A President or Prime Minister plus a Foreign
Minister and a Finance Minister. I hope that the Foreign Ministers can
stay for continuity’s sake, although the Finance Ministers can be substi-
tuted for by another Economic Minister. Second, there will be simulta-
neous translation into English, French, German, Italian and Japanese.
For technical reasons Japanese is translated into the other languages via
English. Third, before you there is a button which you should push to
be recognized. And there is a button for your personal representatives,
who are in the other room.
As to the Agenda, I would ask that each head of state or gov-
ernment make five minutes of comments to form the guidelines for the
Summit discussion. Then we would take up the specific Agenda. Sub-
jects will be macroeconomic issues, energy, LDCs, trade, monetary
issues, and finally the Communique. While we are talking, the personal
representatives may be expected to start work on energy. Who would
like to lead off?
CARTER: The eyes of the world are on this Summit for a number
of major reasons—the first and most important being energy. On this
subject I hope that we can be bold, substantive, specific and hopefully
united when we come to the final Communique. I prefer that we indi-
cate targets based on specific figures. We should commit ourselves to
meet these targets on a short-range basis and commit to attempt to
reach long-term targets, even though there may be somewhat more un-
certainty. In addition, we have to address the spot market, measures to

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
limit stocking of oil in times of tight supply, and cooperation in a multi-
lateral approach to new sources of coal, shale, tar sands, synthetics and
solar. We should pledge to meet our goals and to be sure that we do so
cooperatively and collectively. We should have the maximum consul-
tation and dialogue with OPEC. This has been lacking so far and has
caused grievous consequences. We should pledge to keep our oil im-
ports down and follow with strict conservation of total oil consumption
and increased efforts to come up with alternate supplies of energy.
On North/South issues we should address problems of food re-
search, storage, supplies and stable reserves. Individually and through
the World Bank we should help LDCs increase energy production, and
share energy technology with the LDCs.
I hope that the monetary system will be stabilized, and the IMF
should maintain its basic purposes. I understand the problems of each
nation in reaching a consensus on these issues. I am pleased with the re-
sults of the MTN and hope that Congress will approve them by August.
We should express our commitment to conclusion of agreements.
The refugee issue is being addressed by our Foreign Ministers and
there should be a report submitted for final inclusion in the Commu-
nique.3 We need a strong statement on refugees and strong support for
LDCs.
ANDREOTTI: This meeting should be mainly on energy. It should
provide an external image which conveys the political character of the
meeting. It should clarify what happened in Bonn and what was de-
cided there. It should note the difficulties arising from events since
Bonn. It should play a guiding role in shaping future events, bearing in
mind certain differences among our countries. For instance, on energy,
Canada is self sufficient, and Italy and Japan are in very large debtor
positions. It should stress the interdependence among the problems of
all countries. Our position vis-a-vis OPEC will be all the stronger if we
take into account our requirements as well as those of the LDCs, which
will be most harmed by OPEC prices if they are constantly raised.
On alternate energy sources, and nuclear energy, we are all faced
by serious psychological problems exploited by those who oppose it. If
we put in the Communique something on nuclear energy that is posi-
tive it will help our individual national programs. Perhaps from Japan
can come words to inspire us on the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
OHIRA: Regarding the point on peaceful nuclear energy, I feel that
the most reliable, realistic alternative to oil is nuclear energy. We have
3 On June 28, the seven nations at the Summit issued a special statement on the tens
of thousands of refugees then fleeing Indochina. For the text, see Public Papers of the Presi-
dents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1979, Book II, p. 1188.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
adopted a course leading to more nuclear energy, and we expect the
most of nuclear energy as an oil alternative. With the U.S., Canada and
France we have developed and are moving forward on technical coop-
eration arrangements. Safety is of cardinal importance. We should be
thorough in insuring safety. We should especially emphasize the posi-
tive need to go ahead with peaceful nuclear energy. Our efforts are be-
hind schedule. We have much catching-up to do on the peaceful pur-
suit of nuclear energy. On nuclear energy, I hope for the further
understanding and support of the other countries here.
GISCARD: The Summit is an Economic Summit. Countries are in-
vited here because of the role they play in solving the economic
problems of the globe. In the past the press has speculated on the utility
of these sorts of meetings and it has become somewhat critical. The
Bonn Summit was useful and the follow-up to Bonn was positive. I am
sure it is the hope of all that the Tokyo Summit will also be useful.
The main economic problem is the energy problem: oil supplies,
and the securing of these supplies in the short, medium and long term.
We must show that we have proposals on these time scales. Europe has
prepared for the Tokyo Summit in the European Community. We have
taken decisions and published a text.4 But our Declaration only makes
sense if it goes hand in hand with decisions of our major partners. We
hope these decisions will emerge in Tokyo. Our meeting will only be
successful if we agree on quantified, specific targets to reduce imports
immediately and lastingly. If not this will be a disappointing meeting.
Also we must address prices on the spot market. Our experts
should draw up recommendations and we should take concrete actions
on the basis of these recommendations.
Regarding alternate sources, the main ones are nuclear energy and
coal. Other alternatives are not yet available. On coal and nuclear en-
ergy, we should express a determination to speed up production. We
are all clearly concerned about safety, but this should not be a priori
condition to further new energy development, because if it is it will
delay energy development.
We should be factual and credible in our statements on LDCs. En-
ergy has hit hard the non-oil LDCs. This is not our responsibility and
was not caused by us. The cost to our economies of the oil problem
means it is more difficult for us to give more aid. We should have no
fine statements but simply say we are prepared to do what is in our
power to do, but that we cannot compensate for the effects of steep
prices.
4 Reference is to the published conclusions of the EC Council meeting in Strasbourg
June 21–22.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
It is important for the world economy, and for financial stability to
arrive at agreement here. France will play an active part in seeking so-
lutions. We will defend our national interest, but will take an overall
view of the problem. If we cannot take an overall view of the problem,
we cannot avoid the effect of our situation on national economies.
SCHMIDT: This is one of a sequence of economic summits. Like
Valery, I stress their economic nature. They have on the whole been be-
nevolent for the development of the world economic structure and
process. This is so not because we accomplished great changes, or re-
forms or improvements but because we avoided great catastrophe
which might have occurred as a result of the events in 1973–74. We
were successful in avoiding a lapse into beggar-thy-neighbor policies
of the 1930’s. We should not belittle the success of our meetings. It is not
necessary to have new dramatic schemes every year. They do help us to
avoid temptations for bad policy due to bad domestic pressure, in-
cluding from Parliament.
The Summits also give advice which is useful in particular fields.
The last Summit gave advice, for example, in the area of trade policy.
We lived up to the goal set in that field. We can be satisfied if Parlia-
ments ratify, or agree to, what governments have done. In the field of
nuclear fuel supply, there is no reason for disappointment since Bonn.
And there is no reason for complaints with respect to the growth
targets and follow-up to the advice to Japan and Germany at Bonn to
get economies going faster than before. I can report that we have lived
up to our obligation.
In two fields we have not completely lived up to the Bonn Summit.
First on the international fight against inflation and for monetary sta-
bility. Only initial success has been achieved. Second is the energy
crunch.
Let me be more specific, in Bonn we took action under pressure.
You asked Germany to increase deficit spending to get quicker growth.
We said we would take measures of up to 1% of GNP. We took these
within 8 weeks of the Summit. This produced results which we and
you, reluctantly on our side, sought. We will achieve 4% growth in
1979. At the same time these heated up the money supply. Public bor-
rowing was up to 3.7% of GNP. This is large compared to the U.S. or
France. It will create price difficulties for the FRG. These are the unde-
sirable consequences of the measures we took under your pressure. We
have not overcome these difficulties and will see them in the next wage
round. We will also see difficulties in the capital and credit market be-
cause of the large public borrowing. The long-term rate has gone up
2½% in the last 12 months. I mention this because we should consider
how we have lived up to the pledges made 12 months ago.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
On energy, we should identify how much we have done following
up Bonn and determine whether we can do more. I don’t like under-
standings that are not fulfilled, so we should avoid these here. I favor,
as Valery and Jimmy said, necessary decisions to be taken in the energy
field. I hope they will be taken. The FRG will be as cooperative as we
can. We should not take decisions which only pretend to be decisions.
We should not have gimmicks which are dismantled by public opinion
or by OPEC. The OPEC meeting adjourned to see if we are seriously
going to do something, or just engage in rhetoric.5 Also, they find it dif-
ficult to agree among themselves. There are OPEC governments who
want to be moderate, who understand the impact of oil prices on the
world and see them doing more harm to the LDCs than to us. They see
that they have the possibility of destroying the international division of
labor, monetary markets and so on. But it is not only selfishness that
leads some OPEC countries to ask for higher oil prices. There is reason
to believe that only a great rise in oil prices will enforce conservation
and alternative production.
All of us want to reduce demand for imported oil. All of us want to
do so by conservation of energy and by substituting for oil in specific
ways—different ways being open to different countries. The FRG has
reduced oil imports consistently since 1973. We have let the price mech-
anism work, and have no subsidies on petroleum or distillates. From
1973–1978, we have less energy demand as a percentage of economic
growth than in 1973 or before. In 1979, we will import only a little more
than in 1973 or in 1972. There have been major pressures to reduce oil
imports over the last five years. There has been a mixture of letting the
price mechanism work, and incentives to conserve, such as using gov-
ernment money for conservation. We have also subsidized the use of
coal. Our coal is 700–800 feet deep. It takes eight to ten years to build a
new pit and start production. The subsidy for one ton of coal is double
the pay to a mine worker to mine it. But this leads to a reduction in im-
ports of oil. We have reduced oil use in the generation of electricity.
Only 9 percent of our electricity is generated by oil.
The situation of our countries differs. Some of us by artificial
means have kept domestic prices of oil and distillate lower than they
might be. Some are fighting environmentalists who are fighting the use
of coal. Some are fighting the environmentalists who object to pipelines
and new refineries, including crackers. The FRG is fighting the environ-
at the end of the meeting announced an increase in the price of crude oil. (“Text of Com-
munique´ on Oil at End of Ministerial Meeting in Geneva,” The New York Times, June 29,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
mentalists on coal and the expansion of nuclear plants. We should tell
our personal representatives to provide a paper which includes all
those devices needed for overcoming opposition and a thoughtful,
clear message on the enlargement of nuclear production. It would also
be helpful to have something on coal. This would help Jimmy Carter as
well as us in the FRG. It would help to include in the communique lan-
guage needed at home to deal with the opposition to the substitutes for
oil and with the environmentalists.
I agree with Valery Giscard that it is important to show to the sup-
pliers in OPEC that we are taking this matter seriously and have a
sincere approach to reducing oil demand. Then, when OPEC meets, we
can build on this impression and strengthen the hands of the mod-
erates. We should not leave the OPEC moderates out in the cold. We
will have credibility only if we have medium range and long-term pol-
icies. For the rest of the century oil prices will have to go up because oil
reserves are gradually being used up. Also, there can be political events
like Iran,6 and these can increasingly lead to crunches. Coal and nuclear
energy must be expanded. Also, we should use shale, tar sands and
North Sea oil. Lots of money will be needed for pure and applied re-
search for renewable energy, which should come on stream by the
middle 90’s and by the end of the century enable us to use solar, geo-
thermal and nuclear energy more.
I foresee a situation in the next century when we may not wish to
use hydrocarbons any more. I can envisage that in one or two decades
scientists will say we are heating up the outer atmosphere of the globe,
when it will not be tolerable for nations to do this—when there will be
too much heat and too little water, as in the Sahel. There may be a time
when we have enough bio-mass, coal and petroleum but will be told
that we should not use it. We should back up our studies by looking
ahead one or two decades into the next century.
If we cannot avoid egotistic national policies, there could be a
monetary crisis, high unemployment, and starvation and hunger in the
LDCs.
With respect to short term energy goals and measures, I dislike
what we were given in the draft communique—with the energy section
blank. We should stress that our aides should give us a draft commu-
nique especially on energy, and especially on targets which we can
flight of the Shah from Iran and the establishment in April of an Islamic Republic under
the Ayatollah Khomeini, precipitated a second energy crisis due to decreased oil
production.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
measure in terms of time, goals, periods of reference and how to group
nations, individually or together. Our aides should list the different at-
titudes and attempt to get agreement in these fields. These should not
be issues of national or individual prestige. Obviously, we will have to
express the interests of our countries and should not hide the interests
behind verbal compromise. National interests are often hidden by eco-
nomic or academic reasoning.
THATCHER: It is impossible to discuss economic prospects
without discussing energy prospects. We are one-half of the way
through 1979, but the prospects for the world economy deteriorate
month to month. We started the year with less exaggerated payments
imbalances, and the prospect of currency stability. The oil situation
seemed to be under control. Now the difference is oil, and this has also
affected inflation. This sharp oil price increase has happened for the
second time within a decade. It is a long and short term problem. All
our ideas of growth must be revised. We cannot grow as much in the
future as we had hoped. Also, the situation is worse for the LDCs—
high prices, slow exports and we are less able to help them because of
oil. This also means more instability.
The fact of our meeting means we can get guidelines and leader-
ship to surmount difficulties. We must face these matters realistically,
making clear what can and cannot be done. If we only have a commu-
nique with pious platitudes, the world will see that we have failed. We
need positive declarations in the energy area in three spheres. We must
deal with the immediate situation, but also come up with solutions
which continue year after year, not just talk about long term. Nuclear
power takes a long time to develop. We will not have power from the
sun or tides before the end of the century.
On energy, we must let the price mechanism work in full. But we
should not rely on this totally. We should also have tax incentives for
insulation and for shifting to other sources. The UK gets 70 percent of
its electricity from coal production and 15 percent from oil. We need
more nuclear and must convince countries that nuclear is safe.
On inflation, we have had a reduction since 1974, but we will have
more if we should accelerate inflation as a result of oil price increases.
We should fight inflation or we will have increased unemployment. We
should also not accelerate the impact of oil price increases with infla-
tionary policies. The oil price increase means loss of incomes for the
moment. We can’t get around this in the short term. On growth, we
should not be too pessimistic. We need increased efficiency in industry,
the consumer sector and agriculture. We should see the need for adjust-
ment and respond to change. The UK has not always responded ade-
quately to change but unless we do we can’t get growth.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
If we are to achieve a balance of supply and demand in oil we must
make OPEC understand that oil price increases jeopardize the Western
world. We should look to increased nuclear production for the future.
We produce oil but have the same interest in saving energy as others
because we depend on the world economy. We should be realistic and
not cloak measures in soft phrases. This would give the world greater
confidence than by hiding what we mean.
JENKINS: We had a successful conclusion of the MTN in April and
now we need full implementation. Our concerted growth strategy was
fulfilled, and as a result there has been more rapid growth in countries
other than the U.S. On the monetary side, the stabilization measures of
the United States on November 1 and the EMS have been helpful.
The least progress has been on North/South relations, but in the
EC we have renewed the Lome Agreement7 with 57 LDCs (Schmidt: ½
of all LDCs).
But all this has been overshadowed by what has happened in en-
ergy. Energy should be the Summit theme. In the short term, imme-
diate prospects will be damaged by developments over the past six
months in the oil field. It will increase inflation, which is already going
up in our countries. The balance of payments costs will be $20 billion
per year in the OECD as a whole, and it will lead to a cut in our growth
prospects. One question is how far we add to these unpleasant but sur-
vivable problems. The oil market will balance itself over a period. But if
we do not have effective restraints and substitutes, this will be an ex-
pensive way of doing it.
The long-term trends in oil prices are going up, and we can’t avoid
oil price increases. But we should address the speed with which oil
price increases take place. If they take place suddenly there will be a
rapid transfer of resources away from us without an increase in de-
mand by OPEC. Although we save energy through a high level of re-
cession, the Schultze paper8 indicates that the cost of saving a barrel of
oil through recession is $300 per barrel. The danger is that the market
will stabilize only at very high prices, and there may in fact be an ap-
parent glut on the oil market as a result. We need to change our life-
styles and produce alternative supplies. Effective voluntary restraints
are an investment in our prosperity.
CLARK: It is important that the understandings we reach be se-
rious. They will help only if we are clear on the impact of our commit-
ments to individual countries. We should set goals that can be
achieved. If not, there will be skepticism about the process.
8 Not further identified.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
We must also be cognizant about the impact on international and
domestic opinion. We should try to insure that our people will support
us on unpopular policies by indicating the importance of such policies
to our futures. We need to change attitudes toward conservation. We
are a high energy using country. We need to look at the alternatives
very carefully. For instance, acidic rain results from the burning of coal.
A number of alternatives have environmental consequences.
The Summit should take account of different circumstances in our
countries. We anticipate a shortfall in domestic production of crude
and conventional sources of energy because of our declining well pro-
duction over the next five years. But we will have significant produc-
tion of non-traditional fuels after 1985. Also, there are major regional
differences in Canada. There is wealth where there is energy but there
is less wealth in energy importing areas. This limits the use of price in
influencing
demand.
Our
priority
national
goal
in
energy
is
self-sufficiency by 1990 through substituting for oil, natural gas and
other sources. This effort can be helped by the Tokyo Summit
communique.
OHIRA: We coped with the oil situation last year, but we were
naive on the Middle East. On long-term energy development, our em-
phasis was inadequate. We should be firm in coping with OPEC price
increases and should seriously pursue long-term research in energy.
The impact of energy on our economic structure should be pointed
out. But the big question is have we achieved results. Since the first oil
price increase we have diminished the impact on payments imbalances
and cooled off inflation, but unemployment and inflation are still with
us. In improving productivity, we must make a major effort at positive
adjustment—structural adjustment.
With respect to Japan we are undertaking fundamental changes in
our lifestyle. Our trends are toward qualitative improvements with af-
fluence. Since I took office I have tried to produce qualitative improve-
ments in daily life bringing the country to the city and the benefits of
the city to the country. I am also interested in discussing the circum-
stances of city life. We must take a look at our lifestyles in responding
to the energy problem. We must also pay attention to relations with the
developing countries and look at the global community.
[This section of the discussion concluded at 11:10, and a coffee
OHIRA: Let us now turn to macro-economic issues. In our com-
ments this morning we touched on the relationship between macro-
economic issues and energy. Who would like to begin?
9 Brackets in the original.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
THATCHER: In my judgment not enough attention has been given
to the need to fight inflation. Even before the oil situation inflation was
up in our countries. The oil price increase made inflation all the more
important. In the past people have expected the standard of living to go
up, and equated this with higher wages. The politicians took the words
of Keynes10 on deficit financing, but did not recognize the point about
the need for surpluses in good times. Strict control of money supply is
needed to control inflation. Inflation is cheating the savings of older
people. It transfers the savings of the elderly to working people. The
problem has been underway for 30 years and it won’t go away.
OHIRA: The problem of inflation is important. Inflation and slow
growth are two sides of the same coin. Unemployment is also urgent.
The problem is acute. I share Mrs. Thatcher’s views.
SCHMIDT: I concur with Mrs. Thatcher. There are temptations in
society to make up for oil price increases and the rise in the cost of
living by increases in nominal incomes. This does not work. I would
like to see this idea in the text of the Communique. I think we should
stress the last section on page 5 in the Communique “attempt to coop-
erate . . .”. We are not in a Keynesian situation today. He is not appli-
cable today.
GISCARD: Keynes addressed the situation of the 30’s with genius.
If he were here he would update his analysis. He might suggest valu-
able amendments to the Communique. With respect to the Commu-
nique we should not aim at pursuing deflationary policies in our coun-
tries in order to combat inflation. We should restructure our policy to
contain inflation. In France investment has not been a growth factor in
the last three years; consumers and trade have led. In the present situa-
tion you need increased investment to increase growth. This en-
courages savings in industry and encourages production. High infla-
tion and high unemployment are not satisfactory.
Our economic growth rate is not tied to rates of oil consumption.
There was a fixed relationship between growth and oil consumption.
We have broken that tie. We now attain growth with alternate energy
sources. We must invest in alternate energy resources. This will help on
growth as well.
ANDREOTTI: We need positive results from the Summit. Last
year we succeeded in part. Countries with greater economic possibil-
ities increased their growth rates and this helped other countries to
grow. Italy will maintain its undertaking of 4% growth.
viser to the U.K. Government. Among his many accomplishments, he conceptualized a
new approach to macroeconomics that focused on the role of government in increasing
aggregate demand.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Today the oil problem and fear of inflation may lead to slower
rates of growth in some countries. As a result we could find countries
with high rates of unemployment in difficult positions. It is important
to fight inflation but we should lay down a coordinated policy, as noted
by Giscard. We should not have a deflationary policy, but a coordi-
nated system directed to the struggle against unemployment, and this
should be set out with more emphasis in the Communique. If we do not
it will have political repercussions on public opinion in different coun-
tries. We should not extinguish the hopes of the Bonn Summit.
JENKINS: The oil price increase had two countervailing effects. It
increased the cost/pull impact on inflation, and it led to a decline in de-
mand. These are difficult to reconcile. We need to come up with a bal-
ance between the two to avoid both inflationary and deflationary ef-
fects. We might for instance consider separate price indices, with one in
which the effect of energy price increases are not included. We could
isolate energy costs in dealing with wage indexation in certain
countries.
CARTER: As a result of Bonn I directed oil price decontrol. It
started on the first of June.11 Domestic oil prices as a result have been
increased more rapidly than in other countries because of the price in-
crease in our oil, and OPEC increases. I agree that statistics would look
better if we took Roy Jenkins’ idea, but our people won’t permit our
trying to prevent energy costs from being incorporated in wage de-
mands. We have focussed on energy with some degree of success. We
figure has been .37%. We have had a less than 50% increase in oil use as
compared to GNP.
We also need to get at the roots of inflation. We have deregulated
the airline industry12 and we are moving on transportation. We have
modified our tax structure to encourage new investment and improve
depreciation allowances. I am concerned about productivity improve-
ment. More effort here is needed.
As a result of the MTN we reduced protection at home and have
encouraged increased R&D in the government and have called for pri-
vate industry to do the same.
Close cooperation among us is important. The issue is how to deal
with energy. Premature media exposure of our views might reduce our
11 For Carter’s June 1 statement on the decontrol of domestic oil prices, see Public
For his signing remarks, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
flexibility and our ability to accommodate one another at this Summit. I
still think we should emphasize specificity even if it means that each
country spells out specifically what it can do and we are but all locked
into the same formula.
U.S. oil production is declining. Our oil wells are old and we have
to use a great deal of tertiary recovery. Over the last 15 years we have
had a 6% annual reduction in domestic oil production.
In our Communique we should be specific and substantive, be-
cause the world is looking to us to do something specific on energy.
There is no substitute for this. I look forward to getting drafts from our
personal representatives. I’ll go the second mile to accommodate my
needs to yours. I must go home with the proof that others are sacri-
ficing in order to get the American people to do the same. We should
not have recriminations about performance based on lack of informa-
tion on the circumstances in each country. It is easier politically to deal
with energy if a country is almost entirely a consumer. It is more diffi-
cult if the country is sharply divided among producer and consumer
regions. I was struck here by Joe Clark’s point. Canada, like the US, is
not a homogeneous region. Some regions depend on imports and
others on exports. We should understand the circumstances of one an-
other. This meeting will be an abject failure if we do not accommodate
present divergencies of views about energy.
OHIRA: Two or three countries alone can’t do the job. We expect
the United States to curb inflation, but inflation is serious in other coun-
tries as well. Therefore we must minimize inflation in all of our coun-
tries. All of us need a maximum effort to curb inflation. In FY ’78
Japan’s domestic demand will grow at 8.5%. Our current account
surplus will be $12 to $14 billion, although since March we have had a
current account deficit. In the last three months we have had a $700 mil-
lion deficit. Therefore in terms of GNP growth we could not reach the
Bonn target although our growth served the purpose of the Bonn
target.
The second oil crisis is tragic. In April and May we have had a 20%
increase in the wholesale price index in annual terms. Clearly inflation
is an important agenda item. It is important to remedy the supply side.
Each should take major steps. We are now out of the period of post-war
technology and we are at the end of a certain pool of technological re-
sources. We need more R&D and greater technical efforts.
OHIRA: Our session is about over. Each country can now brief the
press as it sees fit.
SCHMIDT: Why don’t we do as we did last time and let you brief
the press, Mr. Prime Minister.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
[Omitted here are the minutes of the second, third, and fourth ses-
sions of the Tokyo Summit.]
dent’s Daily Diary) For the remarks to reporters by the Summit participants on June 29 at
the conclusion of the sessions and the Declaration issued at the end of the Summit, see
Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1979, Book II, pp.
223.
Memorandum From the Deputy Special Representative for
Trade Negotiations (McDonald) to the Special
Representative for Trade Negotiations (Strauss)1
Washington, July 6, 1979
SUBJECT
MTN Outreach
This memorandum gives you a brief status report on our MTN
outreach activities as we approach the vote by the House next week. As
I mentioned earlier, we have encountered more apathy than aggressive
activity over the last three weeks as many of our supporters became
convinced that the agreements will now pass with little difficulty. To
partially counter this attitude, we have made a last push over the
past 10 days and have pledges from a solid core of organizations to
communicate their support to Members of Congress next Monday and
Tuesday.2
Below are the three main aspects of our outreach activities which
have been handled in close collaboration with Anne Wexler’s office and
supported fully by the White House Task Force all along. These sum-
marize the group of organizations supporting the MTN, MTN speech
activities and MTN editorial support from the media.
Wexler and Moore.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
ORGANIZATION SUPPORT
We have obtained written, published endorsements from at least
38 different trade and business associations, 25 major U.S. corporations
and 16 agricultural organizations (lists attached).3
A large number of others have also indicated support to us in more
general terms. With the listed group we have seen specific announce-
ments or communications directly to their membership or to Members
of Congress concerning the agreements. Special follow-up activities on
the Hill have also been scheduled prior to the vote by a number of these
groups including the U.S. Council of the ICC, the Farm Bureau, the air-
craft manufacturers and the Business Roundtable.
Our staff is in regular discussion with the supporting groups who
also stand ready to be of any assistance to us as needed if unexpected
trouble looms in the days ahead. It is a superb group of organizations,
exactly the ones we hope will not only be useful in this particular effort
but provide a good support base for the effective implementation of the
Tokyo Round results and the pursuit of an aggressive trade policy by
the Administration.
We have 12 other organizations that have indicated that they plan
to issue endorsements during the coming days, but we have not re-
ceived them yet. That list is also attached for your information.4
SPEAKING ACTIVITIES
Although we followed a very selective outreach program as part of
our MTN approval strategy, the task force has maintained a roster of
some 80 Administration speakers on the MTN and provided them with
relevant materials either for complete speeches or for appropriate in-
serts. Special efforts were particularly made to focus on geographic
areas of initial concern, such as New England and the Middle West.
Our Speakers Bureau estimates that we have now had more than
400 speaking engagements on the MTN since February 1, with more
than 200 of these being handled directly by the Office of the Special
Trade Representative, the majority of these by you, Alan and myself.
EDITORIAL SUPPORT
We have also carried out an extensive series of personal briefings
for editorial boards around the country in connection with speaking
trips. As an illustration, I have met personally with some 20 editorial
boards of major newspapers covering every region except your South-
west. These visits were usually followed by favorable editorials.
3 Attached but not printed is an undated list entitled “MTN Supporters.”
4 Attached but not printed is an undated list entitled “Anticipated Endorsements.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
We enjoy at the moment major press support from about 70 of the
top 100 newspapers in the country that have taken positive editorial
positions recently. Only three newspapers have been identified with
negative editorials and those were somewhat marginal pieces with a
mixture of both positive and negative comments (the Boston Globe, the
Little Rock Gazette and the Pensacola Journal).
As we move toward the MTN vote, we have already in print the
overwhelming support of the nation’s press. Summaries of these favor-
able editorials have been distributed by our Congressional Liaison
Group to Members of Congress on this last round of calls.
We are ready for the vote.5
5 The House of Representatives passed the trade bill on July 11, while the Senate ap-
proved it on July 23. (Clyde H. Farnsworth, “Bill to Liberalize Trade Clears House, 395 to
law on July 26. For his remarks on signing the bill, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the
224.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Cooper) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, July 19, 1979
Foreign Economic Policy Implications of the Cabinet Changes
The foreign exchange markets have been under very great pres-
sure since Monday.2 Despite large-scale intervention, coordinated
mainly with Germany, the dollar has depreciated against all major cur-
rencies. This reaction is attributed to the President’s speeches not being
sufficiently dramatic on energy.3 Then on Tuesday “the Cabinet fell”.4
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot
2 July 16.
3 On July 10, Carter declared the existence of a nationwide energy shortage and im-
posed emergency restrictions on building temperatures; five days later, he addressed the
nation on the energy crisis and laid out his administration’s new energy policy. The fol-
lowing day, July 16, he discussed the energy crisis in a speech before the National Associ-
ation of Counties in Kansas City, Missouri. For the text of Carter’s July 10 proclamation,
his July 10 message to Congress on the building temperature restrictions, his July 15 na-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
There is a widespread misinterpretation of the oral resignations in
other countries, where the public wrongly associates it with the fall of a
government under a parliamentary system. But there is a general im-
pression of disarray even among those who understand our system of
government.
On specific individuals: apart from you and Harold Brown, the
only Cabinet member of great importance to foreign policy is Mike. As
you know he had a rocky start (he was charged in 1977 with trying to
“talk down the dollar”), but since then he has built a very strong and
deserved reputation abroad as being solid, substantive and a useful
check on some of the more radical ideas that arise in various parts of
the Administration. I do not doubt that his resignation will be taken
badly (except perhaps by the Russians, who were not highly enamored
of him). Tony Solomon’s reputation is limited largely to official and fi-
nancial circles, but his departure would also be lamented. He is
strongly attached to Mike, but he is willing to stay on under a new boss
if that is necessary to smooth the transition.5
Juanita Kreps and Jim Schlesinger are both widely known and re-
spected abroad but I do not believe that there would be strong foreign
reactions either to their retention or to their departure. Abroad, as at
home, Schlesinger gets blamed for an inadequate energy policy, so his
departure might be a visual plus for the Carter Administration in for-
eign eyes; but that of course is merely cosmetics.6
tional address, and his July 16 remarks in Kansas City, see Public Papers of the Presidents of
4 On July 17, Powell gave the following statement to the press: “The President had a
serious and lengthy discussion with his Cabinet and senior White House staff today
about the priorities of his Administration. He reviewed with them the progress of the
past few years and the problems which remain. All members of the senior staff and Cab-
inet have offered their resignations during this period of evaluation. The President will
review these offers of resignation carefully and expeditiously.” (Terence Smith, “Carter
Offered Resignations by Cabinet and Senior Staff; Some Going in Days, Aides Say,” The
5 On July 19, Powell announced Blumenthal’s resignation and Carter’s nomination
of G. William Miller as his replacement; see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United
that the Cabinet shuffle “did not imply any foreign policy shift. This was particularly true
in the financial field where Bill Miller would continue implementing the policies which
Mike Blumenthal had tried to carry out.” He also noted Carter’s “firm commitment
toward meaningful long-range energy program.” Schmidt replied “that he did not expect
any major changes in U.S. policy” and asserted his “full faith in Bill Miller,” stressing that
“Miller’s rapid confirmation was particularly important for the international monetary
situation.” (Memorandum of conversation, July 24; Carter Library, National Security Af-
fairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 14, Germany
and 1818.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
225.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Cooper) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, August 7, 1979
World Economic Outlook
Economic events threaten a repetition of the high inflation rates
and declines in output the industrial countries experienced in 1974–75.
Largely because of higher-than-expected oil price rises this year (so far
nearly 60 percent from the end of 1978), forecasts both by the USG and
international organizations have been considerably revised in the last
month. They indicate substantially greater inflation and unemploy-
ment, lower growth rates in real output, and a significant worsening in
the balance-of-payments positions of both developed and less-
developed countries. Faced with this bleaker picture of the world
economy over the next eighteen months, we and other major industrial
countries should adopt policies that attenuate, rather than exacerbate,
our economic difficulties. While current projections do not indicate a
world-wide recession next year, strong defensive policies in each major
country could generate such an outcome. We can expect both increased
protectionist pressures and increased calls by developing countries for
financial help.
The Outlook in Figures
In the past week the Administration has revised the economic fore-
tion (GNP deflator) over the same periods is now expected to be about
one percentage point higher than originally forecast: 11 percent in 1979
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot
by Cooper and Peter Clark.
2 On July 12, the White House announced that the economy was on the brink of re-
cession. (Edward Cowan, “Recession Starting, White House Says, Revising Forecasts,”
administration officials had amended this forecast and were now predicting a more se-
vere economic downturn. (Edward Cowan, “Economic Forecast Made Bleaker In a Confi-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
Except for the United Kingdom, other developed countries are not
currently expected to be in recession next year. (The projected decline
marily to the Thatcher administration’s policy of cutting government
spending.) Nevertheless, the OECD now forecasts that its members will
previously projected. Over the same period, consumer prices in OECD
countries are expected to rise by 10 percent, 1 percentage point more
than anticipated. The IMF paints a similar picture; it now forecasts a
growth rate of 2 percent for industrial countries in 1980 (unpublished
figure and confidential, not for attribution), which is one percentage
point below their previous estimate. Private forecasts for Europe are
considerably more pessimistic even than these figures imply.
The prospects for LDCs are more difficult to quantify, but the
sketchy evidence we have suggests that the growth rate of non-oil ex-
percent this year, most of the reduction being attributable to the oil
price rise. The growth rate will be even lower next year if as a result of
the slowdown in the OECD countries both the volumes and the prices
of their raw materials exports fall.
The current account impact of the oil price rise, both directly and
indirectly through its domestic contractionary and inflationary effects,
will also be severe. Assuming no further rise in oil prices beyond July 1,
the Treasury estimates that the combined current account of OECD
members will shift from a surplus of $8 billion in 1978 to a deficit of
roughly $20 billion this year, with a reduction in the deficit to $13 bil-
lion in 1980 as OPEC countries spend more of their oil revenues.
Non-OPEC LDCs are also hard hit, with their current account deficit
a further increase in their deficit to $36 billion in 1980. On the other
side, the OPEC surplus, which was close to zero last year, is forecast to
balloon to $42 billion this year and a slightly smaller figure, $38 billion,
in 1980. Further oil price increases will raise these surpluses.
Policy Implications
This deterioration in the global economic outlook will create a
number of policy problems:
First, the “re-cycling” problem, i.e., the question of financing the
enlarged payments deficits of OECD and less-developed countries. In
the aggregate, the outlook is fairly bright. Although private banks have
increased the proportion of their loans going to countries with pay-
ments deficits, their capital has increased and they have gained consid-
erable experience since 1974 in how to re-cycle funds from OPEC coun-
tries to those in need of balance-of-payments financing. Moreover,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
official financing facilities have also been enlarged; the Witteveen Fa-
cility, for example, has increased the IMF’s ability to cope with the ad-
ditional financing needs of its members, and the recently agreed liber-
alization of the Compensatory Financing Facility will make such
financing more readily available. In addition, the foreign exchange re-
serves of less-developed countries have risen to such an extent that
many of them can dip into these assets to finance larger deficits.
Nevertheless, while the aggregate financing problem appears
manageable, there are bound to be specific cases of countries with se-
vere balance-of-payments and financing problems. We can expect
many more appeals for debt rescheduling and emergency financial
support in the next 18 months than we have had in the last year and a
half.
Second, the higher unemployment in both the U.S. and other major
countries is likely to lead to increased calls for protection. In 1980
various groups will also undoubtedly introduce electoral consider-
ations in pressing for protectionist actions. It will of course be vitally
important that such pressures be resisted, not only in terms of our own
well being, but also in terms of the severely adverse international reper-
cussions. It will be necessary to watch carefully the evolution of the
trade reorganization and the implementation of the MTN with a view
to restraining these protectionist pressures.
Third, while it appears that the distribution of payments imbal-
ances among the main industrial countries will be improved next year,
there is the distinct possibility that increased uncertainty about eco-
nomic prospects and policies may generate renewed exchange market
instability. The Treasury is forecasting a small U.S. surplus next year,
and Germany and Japan are likely to have drastically reduced sur-
pluses, possibly even deficits. Such a situation should be favorable for
the dollar. Nevertheless, the uncertain outlook and uncertainty as to
what policies governments may adopt can well lead to increased ex-
change rate volatility.
The President will soon be considering action to deal with this de-
teriorating economic situation. To mitigate the adverse effects of this
situation, both for the U.S. and for the world economy, it would be
helpful if our economic policy could be directed toward moderating
the decline in output. A moderately expansionist policy would atten-
uate our unemployment-protectionist problems, and would help main-
tain growth rates in other countries. Perhaps even more important is
the need for increased oil conservation. Oil conservation is necessary to
permit a desirable rate of growth of output without putting upward
pressure on the price of oil.
These policy recommendations also apply to other major coun-
tries. It is especially important that Germany and Japan should be

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
urged not to overreact to the inflationary impact of the oil price in-
crease. They have already significantly increased their interest rates
this year, forcing other countries (including us) to do likewise. Further
restrictive policies in both countries could severely curb their growth
rates. If this should occur, we could well end up in the situation we all
want to avoid, a repeat of 1974–75.
226.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs (Bergsten) to Secretary of the
Treasury Miller1
Washington, August 29, 1979
SUBJECT
Supplemental Points for EPG—Solomon Speech on International Monetary
System, Substitution Account
1. Speech elaborates view on long-term evolution of monetary
system in context of increasingly interdependent world.2 Two basic
elements:
—Adjustment. We support a strong IMF surveillance role in pro-
moting smoothly-functioning balance of payments adjustment process,
involving stronger policy coordination.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 56, Office of the Under Secretary of the Treasury
dential. Drafted by Widman. Printed from a copy bearing Bergsten’s stamped initials.
The memorandum was forwarded to Solomon under cover of a September 5 note from an
unidentified Treasury official, who wrote: “After the press coverage of your Alpbach
speech, some of which indicated that this represented a shift in U.S. policy, Stu Eizenstat
apparently raised questions about the speech at an EPG meeting last week. Miler appar-
ently indicated that this did not represent a shift in U.S. policy, but he subsequently asked
for supplemental briefing on the issue in case it came up again.” (Ibid.)
2 According to IMF historian Boughton, Solomon’s August 27 speech in Alpbach,
Austria, constituted the “definitive statement of U.S. support for establishing a substitu-
tion account.” (Boughton, Silent Revolution, p. 940) Boughton indicates that a copy of the
Solomon sent Miller a more detailed paper on the substitution account under cover of a

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—Liquidity. We should work toward enhancing the role of SDR in
system, reducing system’s reliance on dollar and averting a move to an
unstable multiple currency system.
2. Substitution account represents one possible step in liquidity
area. Could, over time, contribute to several improvements:
—Provide off-market, non-disruptive means of diversification out
of dollars.
—Reduce system’s overwhelming reliance on dollars, and thus
our exposure to exchange market pressures from shifts in foreign dollar
balances.
—Ultimately, development of SDR as main reserve asset, whose
creation would be subject to conscious international decision.
3. Reports of “shift” in U.S. position on substitution account over-
stated. Current discussions have been going on for nearly a year, with
consistent U.S. support.
4. Speech does, however, for first time, a) elaborate broad systemic
framework in which we view the substitution account possibility, and
b) set out certain basic principles that would have to be incorporated to
make such an account acceptable to the U.S. (permanence, wide partici-
pation, mutually acceptable financial characteristics, support develop-
ment of SDR, sharing of any costs).
5. U.S. has an interest in seeing such an account established—on
certain conditions—but must not appear as demandeur, or we will not
be able to negotiate acceptable conditions. The principles we have set
out will ultimately determine the detailed financial conditions.
6. This general approach, and basic principles, have been dis-
cussed extensively and agreed in the IMG.3
7. Key decisions to be taken at Belgrade on whether this approach
and these principles will be broadly acceptable.4 If so, subsequent de-
tailed work by IMF Executive Board. If not, U.S. will at least have
shown positive, constructive attitude, leadership role in monetary
negotiations.
the substitution account, during which Solomon explained his support for the initiative.
Files Pertaining to International Monetary Affairs, OECD, Documents, External Re-
4 The Interim Committee met in Belgrade on October 1. At the conclusion of the
meeting, the Committee announced its agreement that the creation of a substitution ac-
count should be given “priority attention.” (“Substitution Fund Set By I.M.F.,” The New

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
227.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Miller to
President Carter1
Washington, September 26, 1979
The dollar came under very great pressure today and we had to
spend almost half a billion dollars. In my view, only much more effec-
tive cooperation from the German monetary authorities will enable us
to stabilize the market.2
I would like to have my discussions in Hamburg with the Germans
this Saturday3 reinforced by a telephone call from you to Chancellor
Schmidt along the lines of the attached talking points.4
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency
the top of the page: “done. J.” At the bottom of the page, Miller wrote: “I’ll do my best to
gain agreement at the Hamburg session. Bill.”
2 During a September 21 telephone conversation, Schmidt told Carter “that the cur-
rent unrest in the currency markets gives a great deal of pain to financial managers.”
Noting the “good cooperation” enjoyed by West German and American officials,
Schmidt said that “the Federal Republic stands ready to continue to loan Deutsche Marks
so the U.S. can buy dollars and maintain a steadier exchange relationship in the market.”
(Memorandum of conversation, September 21; Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
3 On Saturday, September 29, Miller and Volcker met with Schmidt, Emminger, and
Matthoefer in Hamburg for a discussion of international economic issues. According to
the joint communique´ issued at the end of the meeting, they discussed recent oil price
hikes, U.S. and West German domestic economic policies, and international monetary re-
lations. They also reaffirmed “their resolve to combat unwarranted as well as erratic
movements in the foreign exchange markets,” both “promptly and in close cooperation.”
Policy File, [no film number]) The New York Times published a report on the meeting on
September 30. (John Vinocur, “2 Countries Agree to Bolster Dollar,” The New York Times,
4 Attached but not printed is a set of talking points dated September 26. The first
point noted the forthcoming meeting of U.S. and West German officials in Hamburg,
while the second suggested concern that the foreign exchange market “situation appears
to be deteriorating rapidly.” The third point asserted the belief that “a very serious
problem is developing” that would “require forceful cooperation between the U.S. and
p.m. Immediately thereafter, he placed a telephone call to Miller, with whom he spoke
Diary) No memorandum of conversation of either telephone conversation was found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
228.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
OECD–Summit Relations
PARTICIPANTS
OECD Secretary General Emile van Lennep
Stephen Marris, Economic Adviser to Secretary General van Lennep
Tom Alexander, Special Assistant to Secretary General van Lennep
Ambassador Herbert Salzman, U.S. Representative to the OECD
Ambassador Henry Owen, Special Representative to the President for Economic
Summits
Robert M. Beaudry, Director, EUR/RPE
Ambassador Owen said he was particularly sensitive to the con-
cerns expressed by the smaller industrialized countries that they were
excluded from the Summit process and that he wished to talk to Secre-
tary General van Lennep to see if they cannot minimize the problem.
Owen said he would arrange in the preparation for the Summit and at
the Summit itself to take account of the interests and sensitivities of the
smaller countries. He suggested that van Lennep could help by orga-
which he would be prepared to brief the other members and discuss
the outcome of the Summit with them.
Van Lennep expressed his appreciation for Owen’s attitude noting
that the U.S. has always had an open approach to summitry unlike
some of the other Summit countries. He suggested that Owen might
wish to broaden the scope of his proposed scope and concentrate on the
OECD as an institution rather than aiming to satisfy specific small
countries. Van Lennep believes it would be helpful if the Summit com-
munique could refer to the OECD since he was anxious that the soli-
darity and cohesion of the OECD not be damaged by the impression
that the organization had two classes of members. Owen indicated that
he would let Ambassador Salzman know in advance of the substance of
issues being prepared for the Summit. In this connection he noted that
the IEA would make a major contribution to the Summit. The OECD is,
thereby, directly involved in Summit preparations. Owen noted that
the IETG would submit its report at the end of March. Van Lennep said
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects,
cleared by Owen. The meeting took place in Owen’s office.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
that the OECD Ministerial has not yet been set but consideration was
being given to the first days of June.3
Turning to the other traditional Summit topics, Owen suggested
that trade matters would probably not take up too much time. Mone-
tary reform would probably be limited to some discussion of the substi-
tution account and North/South issues (food and energy) would re-
ceive minimum attention. The traditional section on macro-economic
policy presents a problem. Owen said that once we attempt to go be-
yond generalities it becomes extremely difficult to know which way to
go. He asked van Lennep and Marris if they had any ideas. Marris said
he is not certain that any of the various OECD activities would be suffi-
ciently ripe to be worthy of inclusion at this level. It was suggested that
van Lennep might issue a progress report on Marris’ efforts which
could inform governments and thus contribute to the preparations of
the Summit. Van Lennep said it was essential that such effort be kept
within the OECD.
229.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, December 18, 1979
SUBJECT
Upcoming Decisions (U)
Decisions you make in your next few weeks will have a significant
effect on the international economic scene between now and the Venice
1. Energy. In the wake of the December 10 IEA Ministerial meeting
we have a fair chance to bring the world oil price escalator under con-
trol—by continuously adjusting the industrial countries’ oil import
ceilings to changing oil availabilities.2 Other IEA governments will
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
File, Box 160. Confidential. Sent for information.
2 The IEA Governing Board met in Paris on December 10. For more information on
ument 251.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
need a lot of convincing, however, before they agree to the import cuts
needed to put this system into effect. They are unpersuaded that cuts
are necessary; and they believe that it will be politically difficult to con-
vince their people that they should use less oil, so long as US gasoline
consumption continues to be relatively unrestrained by taxes compa-
rable to those in most other industrial countries. (C)
A clear statement soon that you were prepared to impose a petro-
leum import fee if US imports and consumption do not decline by ap-
propriate amounts would strengthen our influence in pressing for im-
port cuts in the IEA negotiations. Making the scale and timing of the US
fee dependent, in some degree, on the outcome of these negotiations
would further enhance the likelihood of a favorable outcome. (C)
If we can make the system set up at the December 10 IEA meeting
work, we will both reduce pressure on oil prices and encourage the
moderate OPEC countries to follow sensible production policies.
This would be a notable success for US policy in the first half of 1980.
It might set the stage for a major effort at and after the Venice Sum-
mit to seek a long-term agreement with the more moderate OPEC
countries. (C)
2. The Dollar. The dollar’s strength between now and Venice will
depend partly on how foreign countries see US energy and anti-
inflation policies. Energy is treated above. Their view of our anti-
inflation policies will hinge, in some measure, on your FY 1981 budget.
In Paris last week, the question I was asked repeatedly was whether
you would hold to tight fiscal policies in an election year. Skepticism on
this point increases pressure on the dollar. (C)
Many Europeans believe that we have repeatedly under-estimated
the strength of the US economy and that current US inflation is due
(reserving a decision about stimulus until we can see whether it is actu-
ally needed later in the spring) would be a clear and welcome signal to
them that you still consider inflation the main threat and mean to act
accordingly. (C)
This would help the dollar in a crucial period: Our negotiating po-
sition at the Venice Summit, in giving a push to the substitution ac-
count and in debating the international monetary reform that Giscard
intends to propose, will be stronger if the dollar is in good shape. If we
can get agreement on the kind of substitution account we favor, this
will be a major step toward a more effective international monetary
system—one that will reduce the continuing pressure on the dollar that
has been a major source of political tension and economic instability in
the industrial world. (C)
3. War on Hunger. Your urging, at the Tokyo Summit, that coun-
tries increase aid for LDC food production has borne some fruit. Ger-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
many and Japan are increasing their aid substantially, despite virtually
static budgets. Italy has pledged to double its aid, and to give first pri-
ority to increasing food production. Member countries have recently
agreed to double the resources of the World Bank’s Consultative Group
on International Agricultural Research (from $100 million to $200 mil-
lion annually). (C)
Against this background, the Venice Summit could be the occasion
for a major push to eliminate hunger by the year 2000, as proposed by
your Hunger Commission.3 Whether we can seize this occasion will de-
pend partly on decisions you will soon make about FY 1981 Develop-
ment Assistance and PL–480. If our program for next year does not pro-
vide for substantial food aid and a modest increase in aid for food
production, we will not be taken seriously by our allies when we ask
them to step up the war on hunger. (C)
If our allies do take the proposal seriously, it is possible that agree-
ment might be reached on setting up an international consortium,
perhaps under IBRD auspices, to mount a coordinated program of
worldwide assistance for increased food output. This would not only
help millions of poor people; it would also reduce the likelihood of
higher global food prices, and hence future US inflation. (C)
4. Conclusion. We have some chance in the next few months of
registering economic successes on the international economic front—in
energy, monetary affairs, and the war on hunger. The decisions that
you soon make—on an import fee, FY 1981 fiscal policy, and aid for
food production in LDCs—will have some bearing on the outcome. (C)
3 The Presidential Commission on World Hunger released its preliminary report on
December 10. (Seth S. King, “U.S. Panel Asks Doubling of Aid to Food-Short Lands,” The
the Commission’s preliminary report are printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II,
Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Document 263.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
230.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, January 18, 1980
SUBJECT
Reduction of Disincentives to US Exports (U)
The study of export disincentives pursuant to your September
1978 export policy decision2 has now been underway for a year. This
memorandum summarizes findings and proposed phased decisions,
beginning with interim measures that you might announce next week,
along with good news about exports and the balance of payments. (U)
The study has focused on our trade with non-Communist coun-
tries; issues peculiar to East-West trade were not included in the study
or in the decisions proposed below. (U)
Progress in carrying out this study has been slow, largely because
of the difficulty of securing reliable data. The task force conducting the
study has estimated that all the indentified disincentives may result in
a combined annual export loss of $5–10 billion, but these figures cannot
be supported by firm evidence. (C)
The five major disincentives are:
—ambiguities in the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act3
—overlapping anti-boycott laws and regulations
—foreign policy export controls
—nuclear export controls
—arms export controls. (C)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Confidential. Sent for action. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Henry. J.” An attached
February 26 memorandum for the record by Denend notes that Owen’s memorandum
“was forwarded to the President for decision prematurely. Thus, the decisions taken
were not implemented. Subsequently, a fully coordinated recommendation (NSC 1137)
was forwarded to the President on this subject which he approved.” The subsequent
memorandum to Carter was not found.
2 See Document 164.
noting that the act “makes corrupt payments to foreign officials illegal under United
States law. It requires publicly held corporations to keep accurate books and records and
establish accounting controls to prevent the use of ‘off-the-books’ devices, which have
been used to disguise corporate bribes in the past. The law also requires more extensive
disclosure of ownership of stocks registered with the Securities and Exchange Commis-
sion.” See Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1977, Book II,
p. 2157.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
The study has thus far covered only these five major disincentives.
There are about a dozen other laws and policies that discourage or re-
strict exports, but they are much less significant than these five. We
could go on to examine these other disincentives and produce a single
report after they have all been examined but, given the duration of the
study to date and the business community’s impatience, I believe it
would be better to divide the venture into two phases:
—The first phase, consisting of (i) a report and recommendations
on the five major export disincentives listed above, which are summa-
rized in this memorandum, and (ii) a Presidential decisions announce-
ment similar in form to your export policy announcement in September
1978. A draft text of this statement is attached.4
—The second phase, culminating in the new report on export in-
centives and disincentives that the Congress has mandated for July,
1980,5 could include any further action that then seemed politically fea-
sible on the major disincentives, as well as recommendations on the
secondary disincentives not considered in the first phase. The Presi-
dent’s Export Council6 would be involved in preparing this second
phase. We would also inform Reginald Jones7 of the first phase deci-
sions, before they are announced publicly. (U)
In Phase I we have looked for recommendations that would reduce
the negative effect of the five major export disincentives and demon-
strate your appreciation of US business interests, without requiring
controversial legislative proposals or abandonment of fundamental
policies in other fields. This limits the scope and effectiveness of these
recommendations: Strongly supported policies, in some cases recently
affirmed by the Congress or the Executive Branch, would be compro-
mised by any major dismantling of export disincentives. (C)
My recommendations regarding each of the five main disincen-
tives are set forth below. (U)
4 Attached but not printed is a draft Presidential statement entitled “Reduction of
Export Disincentives,” dated January 19. Carter initialed at the top of the draft statement
and wrote “ok.” The draft differs from the statement that was ultimately issued on Feb-
ruary 27; for the text of the latter, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States:
note 2, Document 164.
5 The 1979 Trade Agreements Act directed the President to submit a report on ex-
ports to Congress by July 1980. See Document 248. Carter sent Congress a report on U.S.
export promotion policies on September 9; see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United
On December 22, 1980, the President’s Export Council submitted its final report, entitled
“The Export Imperative,” to Carter; for his remarks on receiving the report, see Public
7 Reginald Jones was Chairman of the President’s Export Council.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
1. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. You would reiterate support for the
purpose of the Act but note business complaints about its ambiguities
and its provision for duplicate administration by the Justice Depart-
ment and the S.E.C.; you would announce that the procedures for pro-
viding guidance to business on the Act that you called for in your ear-
lier export policy statements have now been established, and that
Justice now will begin providing guidance on the meaning of the Act
and will publicize the substance of each decision under the procedure.
You would suggest that after a year of operating experience under the
new procedure, its effectiveness in eliminating uncertainty will be re-
viewed by the Executive Branch in consultation with representatives of
the business community; and you would suggest that the Congress
then might wish to review any remaining issues. (State, Commerce,
Justice, Treasury, USTR, NSC, and DPS concur.)8 (C)
2. Anti-boycott Laws and Regulations. You would propose no action
on this matter, but would reiterate your support for the purposes of the
legislation, express your satisfaction that several boycotting govern-
ments have moderated practices that conflict with US anti-boycott
laws, and note that business uncertainty also has been alleviated by
clarification of US Government regulations. No agency recommends
action that might reopen debate on this subject in the Congress at this
time. This argues against seeking more ambitious changes advocated
by some agencies, i.e., congressional amendment of the Tax Reform Act
of 1976 so as to tie its penalties to violations of Commerce Department
regulations under the Export Administration Act, or repeal of the Tax
Reform Act (Ribicoff act).9 (C)
3. Foreign Policy Export Controls. You would declare your endorse-
ment of the amended Export Administration Act, citing particularly its
tighter guidelines for use of export controls in foreign policy sanctions,
as distinguished from national security cases; you would note our re-
cent publication of a clearly identified and shortened list of goods, tech-
nologies and countries subject to export control for foreign policy
reasons; and you would reaffirm your policy of seeking broad interna-
tional participation in such economic sanctions where feasible and of
very selectively applying such export controls when the target country
has ready access to alternative supply. (C)
All concerned agencies concur with this statement of existing
policy, although some would prefer policy changes in favor of export
8 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation and wrote “But do not in-
sinuate future approval of bribery. J” below it.
9 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation and initialed “J.” The Ex-
1979, aimed to control U.S. exports for reasons of national security, foreign policy, or
short supply.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
interests. The existing policy allows considerable flexibility in applying
export controls for foreign policy purposes, such as disassociating the
United States from abhorrent acts of foreign governments, e.g., apart-
heid in South Africa or support of terrorism in Libya or Chile. Cy Vance
opposes reversal of recent decisions based on present policy, which
you reaffirmed in a decision memorandum last December 29.10 Conse-
quently, we are not presenting other options examined in the study of
export disincentives, such as limiting foreign policy export controls to
cases where you find that the sanction is likely to cause a favorable
change in the target country’s policy, or limiting the essentially sym-
bolic sanctions, i.e., where alternative supply is likely, to countries en-
gaged in actions hostile to fundamental US interests. (C)
If you wish to consider changes in present policy before an-
nouncing your interim decisions, a delay of several weeks would be en-
tailed while State prepared an analysis. (C)
Approve statement confined to present policy11
Submit additional options, without delaying statement
Submit additional options, delaying statement
4. Nuclear Export Controls. You would note that under your Admin-
istration there has already been major progress in liberalizing our own
nuclear export practices, such as providing multiple reload licenses for
most of our principal trading partners, providing general licenses for
components for most reactors abroad, and eliminating licensing re-
quirements for non-significant quantities of nuclear material; in
streamlining Executive Branch procedures under the Nuclear Non-
Proliferation Act; and in harmonizing with other suppliers our nuclear
export policies in dealing with cases of proliferation concern. (C)
You would now direct the responsible executive agencies:12
(1) in considering exports of dual-use items of significance for nu-
clear explosives, to assure that primary emphasis is placed on countries
of proliferation concern, and to minimize the impact on commerce with
our major trading partners;
on extending various export controls for foreign policy purposes. Carter communicated
his decisions to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representa-
tives in two separate letters dated December 29, 1979. (Carter Library, National Security
11 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation and initialed “J,” writing
“(hard for me to understand)” in the adjacent margin.
12 Carter made a checkmark in the margin adjacent to all four numbered points
below.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
(2) to continue efforts to harmonize international conditions for ap-
proving or denying exports and re-exports of dual-use items which we
continue to license;
(3) to eliminate the need for a separate retransfer authorization for
those cases where the retransfer was foreseen and approved in the
NRC license; and
(4) to continue to seek ways of rationalizing the export review
process for countries with good non-proliferation credentials, and take
other steps to enhance US reliability as a supplier of nuclear materials
and equipment. (C)
All concerned agencies concur.13
5. Arms Export Controls. While foreswearing an intention to in-
crease arms exports, you would direct (a) firm deadlines for action on
cases, parallel to those mandated in the new Export Administration Act
(EAA) for civil use items and (b) establishment of an appeals procedure
within the Executive Branch to provide a court of last resort for the US
exporter who is unable to secure action on an arms export request
within a reasonable period of time. (This might head off a move to ex-
tend to arms the provision in the new EAA which would move delayed
cases for civil items to the courts.) All concerned agencies concur.14 (C)
RECOMMENDATION: That you indicate your preferences as to
each of the five issues and authorize prompt issuance of the Presiden-
tial statement, which has been cleared by your speechwriters, Stu Eiz-
enstat, Zbig and Al McDonald.15
13 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation and initialed “J.”
14 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation and initialed “J.”
15 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation and initialed “J.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
231.
Memorandum From the United States Trade Representative
(Askew) to President Carter1
Washington, February 8, 1980
SUBJECT
Nonrubber Footwear Imports
I. BACKGROUND
Following a U.S. International Trade Commission (USITC) finding
of serious injury to the domestic nonrubber footwear industry in 1977,
you ordered negotiation of orderly marketing agreements (OMAs) and
domestic measures to enable the industry to adjust to import competi-
tion.2 In so doing, you rejected the Commission’s recommendation for
an additional high duty on imports over 266 million pairs as not fairly
balancing your concerns for domestic jobs and production, inflation,
and expanded world trade. You stated that you were reluctant to in-
clude import restraints in your remedy but had done so in view of the
serious situation in the domestic footwear industry.
OMAs were negotiated with Taiwan and Korea, effective through
footwear imports from other countries if imports from them appear
likely to disrupt the effectiveness of the OMAs.
The import relief program has come under criticism recently be-
cause of a surge in imports from countries not under restraint, pri-
marily Italy. Imports, instead of declining as a result of the rollback of
Korean and Taiwanese shipments, increased from 374 million pairs in
million pairs to 97 million pairs in the same period. Domestic produc-
tion and employment are on a downward trend.
The import surge has threatened the credibility of the relief pro-
gram. The shoe industry and unions prefer imposition of global
quotas—i.e., against all exporting countries. A statement of the in-
dustry’s views is attached.4 They would like a commitment from you
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 51, Memos from the President [2]. Limited Office Use. Sent
for action. Hormats initialed the memorandum on Askew’s behalf. Carter wrote at the
top of the page: “Reubin—ck w/Schultze re statement. J.” Executive Order 12188 of Jan-
uary 2 renamed the Office of the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations the Office
of the United States Trade Representative.
2 See Document 17.
3 See Document 32.
4 Not attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
that import levels will be brought down to 370 million pairs and that a
mechanism will be established to assure that this figure is met. They are
also hopeful that this mechanism can be continued for three additional
years after expiration of the current relief program. These objectives are
opposed strongly by (a) consumer groups, who are concerned about
the inflationary impact of quotas; (b) U.S. shoe retailers; (c) foreign sup-
pliers who would be hurt and, in the case of Europe, might impose bar-
riers of the same sort.
Fortunately, the upward trend of imports appears to have re-
versed, based on recent data and projections. Various forecasts and our
contacts with the EC and other exporting countries lead us to conclude
that imports in 1980 will drop significantly from 1979 surge levels, to
roughly 380–385 million pairs.
I believe that imposition of a global quota is not warranted at this
time and I have told this to the industry and unions. However, the in-
dustry does need to be given more certainty about our intention to
moderate imports and limit future surges in order to restore the credi-
bility of the relief program.
II. OPTIONS
The first option would be to continue quiet efforts to reduce imports
below 1979 surge levels. It would not, however, lock the Administra-
tion into a position where it will have decided in advance: (a) how
much imports have to fall; and (b) how restrictive an action should be
taken if action is later judged necessary. Treasury, State, Justice, Na-
tional Security Council and International Development Cooperation
Agency favor this option. (Fred Kahn)
These agencies believe that a commitment now to restrict imports
if, in the future, those imports exceed a trigger level as called for in op-
tion two, would signal a significant retreat from the Administration’s
anti-inflation objectives—enumerated in a wide range of economic pol-
icies. Moreover, coming at the same time as possible price-increasing
actions on steel imports, such a commitment could be read as a reversal
of Administration trade policy.
The proponents of this option believe a commitment to restrict im-
ports should not be made when imports are falling and will probably
continue to fall. A decision to restrict shoe imports, in their view,
should be made only when we see whether the level of imports in fact
remains excessively high. A trigger could force us to take a major pro-
tectionist step affecting scores of countries if imports exceed 385 million
pairs by a small margin. Many of these countries would be LDC oil im-
porters. Moreover, they believe, a commitment now to bring imports
“toward pre-surge levels” (370 million pairs), would guarantee the in-
dustry a ceiling on imports—even if the industry makes no effort to

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
meet import competition. This option has the disadvantage of failing to
provide the certainty of relief that the industry and unions want.
The second option would be to assure the industry and unions that
the Administration is committed to maintain the integrity of the foot-
wear relief program by working to reduce imports in 1980 significantly
below the 1979 levels and prevent new surges. We will more closely
monitor imports to anticipate the sharp changes that can occur in a
fashion-oriented industry. If we find that imports are not dropping sig-
nificantly from 1979 levels toward pre-surge levels, we will take appro-
priate action5 to achieve this objective. We would leave open all op-
tions, including voluntary restraint agreements, orderly marketing
agreements, tariffs, tariff-rate quotas, and global quotas. A press re-
lease to this effect would be issued.6
Under this option, we would only consider the use of global
quotas as a last resort, if absolutely necessary to control surges. How-
ever, it is essential that we keep this option open not only because it
may ultimately be the only effective way to moderate imports but also
to give credibility to our efforts to negotiate more acceptable solutions
with the surging countries. If the import situation unexpectedly deteri-
orates and our other efforts to correct the problem are unsuccessful, I
would, after consultations with the agencies, recommend appropriate
unilateral action for your approval.
This option has the advantage of being more acceptable to the in-
dustry and unions than the first option because it is more specific in set-
ting our objective for imports in 1980, i.e. a significant drop in imports
and prevention of new surges. However, by indicating that action will
be taken only if imports do not drop significantly, this option suggests
a range of acceptable imports above the pre-surge level of 370 million
pairs to perhaps 385 million pairs before unilateral U.S. action would
be necessary. This leeway would give us flexibility in dealing with the
situation and would avoid arbitrarily triggering import restraints if the
target of the lower end of the range is exceeded. This option is favored
by Commerce, Labor, Interior, Agriculture, CEA7 and DPS. (OMB)
(Landon Butler)
III. RECOMMENDATION
That you approve option two which would commit the Adminis-
tration to work to reduce imports in 1980 significantly below 1979
levels and prevent new surges from occurring. All means of achieving
5 Carter underlined the phrase “take appropriate action” and wrote “?” in the adja-
cent margin.
6 Attached but not printed is a draft press release dated February 28.
7 Carter underlined “CEA.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
this option would be left open including the possibility of using global
quotas if necessary. I have discussed this issue with the unions and, al-
though they still prefer a commitment to limit imports to 370 million
pairs, they can accept the approach in option two.
OPTION I (Treasury, State, DOJ, NSC, IDCA, Kahn)
OPTION II (Askew, OMB, DPS, CEA, DOC, DOL, DOI, USDA) Butler8
8 Carter indicated his approval of this option, writing “But: a) keep the statement as
non-specific as possible; b) Include a strong [paragraph] near top re fighting inflation. J.”
Carter’s decision was announced on February 29; for the text of the announcement, see
Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pp.
232.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Economic Policy
Group (Miller) to President Carter1
Washington, February 8, 1980
SUBJECT
Administration Steel Policy
As you know, United States Steel is threatening to file broad-based
antidumping petitions against European and Japanese steel producers,
unless the Government offers the industry relief from imports, environ-
mental regulations and wage-price guidelines, and provides incentives
to capital formation. Other steel companies would probably follow
suit.2
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 81, [Steel] [8]. No classification marking. Carter wrote at the
top of the page: “Bill—ok—Carefully orchestrate our PR effort—Here & in Europe/
Japan. J.” The memorandum was sent to Miller for his signature under cover of a Feb-
ruary 7 memorandum from Solomon, who reported that Hormats, Cooper, Owen, and
Commerce Department officials agreed to the memorandum; a handwritten note on Sol-
omon’s memorandum indicates that comments received from Schultze and Kahn had
been incorporated into the memorandum for Carter. (Carter Library, Anthony Solomon
2 In a February 12 memorandum to Eizenstat, McDonald characterized this memo-
randum as “quite disturbing. It places this extremely complex problem on the President’s
desk prematurely, offers no reasonable set of options for Presidential review, accepts as
inevitable a major confrontation internationally and domestically, and inadequately de-
scribes the dire consequences of following this course.” McDonald urged making “every
effort to work out an amicable solution with the industry and the Europeans.” (Carter Li-
brary, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files, Box 283, Steel (CF, O/A

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
Declining economic activity, particularly in the automotive and
construction sectors which are major steel consumers, and increases in
costs are now putting pressure on U.S. steel companies. We are sensi-
tive to this short term problem, to the industry’s long run need to mod-
ernize, and to their difficulties with generating sufficient capital for
modernization. We have indicated a willingness to work with the in-
dustry to improve government policies.3
It is important to emphasize, however, that this Administration al-
ready has a substantial program of measures in place to help the steel
industry. Those measures include the Trigger Price Mechanism (TPM),4
an EDA loan guarantee program, a reduction in the depreciation guide-
line life for steel plant and equipment, and a steel industry-EPA review
of environmental regulations. This program has been operating since
1978, and significant progress has been made.
However, in the last quarter of 1979 imports were running at a rate
profit in 1978. Industry profits continued to climb in the first nine
months of 1979, but because of U.S. Steel’s record losses in the fourth
quarter, the industry’s annual profits in 1979 will be close to the 1978
level. At this level industry profits as a percent of capital will remain at
about half the average for all manufacturing industries. The average
rate of utilization of steel industry plant and equipment in 1979 was 87
for 1977. In 1980 the utilization rate is expected to fall back into the
from 1977 to 1978. We expect the industry’s cash flow to remain
roughly constant in 1979, but it will drop in 1980, as profits decline.
In light of our existing program and current industry conditions,
new initiatives of the kind the industry is requesting are not appro-
priate since they would require an unacceptable level of subsidization
and would conflict with anti-inflation and trade policies.
1. Your principal advisors on this issue recommend the following
policy:
3 In a February 15 memorandum to Carter, Miller reported on a meeting the pre-
vious day between EPG members and steel industry representatives. (Carter Library,
Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 80,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
a. The Administration is sensitive to the concerns and conditions of
the steel industry, steel workers and affected communities, and will
continue to try to improve government policies in this area.
b. This Administration is taking actions to assist the industry.
1. The Trigger Price Mechanism (TPM) appears to have eliminated
the injurious effect of dumping and has reduced imports. The Adminis-
tration consulted regularly with the industry on how the operation and
methodology of the TPM could be improved.
2. A maximum reduction of depreciation guideline lives for steel
plant and equipment, consistent with our statute, contributed in part to
the substantial improvement in the industry’s cash flow. We recognize,
however, that the industry still has a cash flow deficiency. At some
later time, if the overall economic situation permits a tax cut, we will
propose actions designed to improve cash flow and stimulate invest-
ment. Such action would particularly benefit capital intensive indus-
tries such as steel.
3. There is an intensive steel industry-EPA review of environ-
mental regulations affecting the industry to determine if our environ-
mental goals can be achieved at a lower cost. This cooperative process,
which is of substantial benefit to both the industry and the EPA, and re-
sulted in the adoption of the bubble concept for air pollution control,
will continue.
4. The Tripartite Committee, consisting of industry, labor and gov-
ernment officials, will continue to review issues of interest to the steel
industry and steel workers.5
5. Given our trade and anti-inflationary policies and the situation
under which the Trigger Price Mechanism (TPM) was initiated, the Ad-
ministration will adhere to its policy, as stated repeatedly to the in-
dustry, labor, the Congress, and the public, and suspend the TPM if
major steel antidumping cases are filed. We would be prepared, how-
ever, to reactivate the TPM if the dumping cases were withdrawn or re-
solved in an appropriate manner.
2. Should the U.S. Steel Company and other U.S. companies file
their threatened antidumping petitions against European and Japanese
producers (because the Government refused to grant their requests) we
recommend the Administration suspend the Trigger Price Mechanism
(TPM) for several reasons:
—If we don’t suspend TPM now, we are contradicting our stated
policy of not running a dual antidumping system, and the credibility of
our trade and anti-inflationary policies could be seriously affected.
—The filing of the petitions suggests that the industry does not be-
lieve the TPM, which was instituted as a temporary measure, is now
adequately addressing the problem of dumping.
5 Establishment of the Tripartite Advisory Committee was one of the recommenda-
tions of the Steel Task Force; see Document 79.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
—This is particularly true if petitions are brought against Japanese
producers, whose average costs are the basis of trigger prices.
—With the new antidumping statute,6 the TPM fast track proce-
dure offers no saving in time once an investigation is started.
—Petitions against EC producers would mean that roughly 43 per-
cent of current U.S. steel imports (33 percent EC, 10 percent Canada)
need not be monitored by the TPM. If the petitions also include Japa-
nese producers, then 76 percent of current U.S. imports would not re-
quire TPM monitoring.
—With a petition against Japanese steel producers, the Japanese
can be expected to refuse to supply cost of production data which is the
basis of the TPM.
—We do not have sufficient staff to simultaneously administer the
TPM and process major antidumping cases; nor do we believe the TPM
should be applied selectively.
3. The filing of antidumping petitions may lead to a serious disrup-
tion of U.S.–EC trade relations. (The Japanese are less concerned, since
they are not as vulnerable to dumping charges.)
In order to mitigate the damaging effects of these petitions on
U.S.–EC relations, we should instruct Ambassador Enders to inform
Commissioner Davignon immediately when the petitions are filed, and
he and other Administration officials should—through intensive con-
sultations—endeavor to explain to the EC that:
—We cannot deflect these cases in the absence of a more restrictive
import regime which would be more detrimental to the EC, and/or
unacceptable subsidization of our steel industry which conflicts with
our MTN Subsidy/CVD Code obligations and our macroeconomic
policies.
—The MTN provides increased discipline in our trading relation-
ships. New rules were negotiated and it is natural that they should now
be used.
—We should urge the Community not to overreact, and to recog-
nize that the U.S. Government has no legal right to refuse to process
these cases. They are private legal actions which should not trigger pro-
tectionist actions by governments.
—The dumping petitions will take time to complete (at least 160
days) and the outcome, both with regard to findings of sales at less than
fair value and injury, is uncertain. European retaliation prior to any de-
termination of these cases could trigger a U.S. counter-action, precipi-
tating an unwarranted trade war.
6 The Trade Agreements Act of 1979 revised the way in which anti-dumping peti-
tions were investigated and assessed.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—We urge the EC to cooperate with us as we seek information
overseas. It is in all our interests to see these cases disposed of as
quickly as possible. We will of course stay in close touch with the
Commission.
—The TPM assured access to our market and was of particular
benefit to EC steel producers. We have deliberately avoided abolishing
the TPM. We have suspended it, and will be ready to reinstate it.
Heads of governments also should be involved, since broader
U.S.-European relations are at stake. We want not only to avert Euro-
pean retaliation; we also want to prevent this issue from damaging
these relations, at a time of grave external crisis. Henry Owen will
submit to you draft letters to European leaders on this issue.7
G. William Miller8
7 No draft letters were found.
8 Miller signed “Bill” above this typed signature.
233.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Miller1
Washington, February 28, 1980
MEMORANDUM FOR
The Honorable Walter Mondale
The Honorable Cyrus Vance
The Honorable Charles Schultze
The Honorable Stuart Eizenstat
The Honorable Richard Cooper
The Honorable Henry Owen
The Honorable Paul Volcker
The Honorable Henry Wallich
The Honorable Lyle Gramley
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
SUBJECT
Our Meeting on the Proposed IMF “Substitution Account,” March 4, 19802
I have requested this meeting because the Substitution Account
proposal involves some potentially important obligations as well as
benefits for the U.S., and negotiations on the Account are nearing a de-
cision point.3 It will be discussed by finance ministers at a meeting of
the IMF’s Interim Committee in late April and, at the request of the
French, will also be taken up at the Venice Summit.
Outline of the Proposal
In brief, the Account would accept dollar deposits by foreign cen-
tral banks and issue, in exchange, claims denominated in Special
Drawing Rights (SDRs), which are valued on the basis of a “basket” of
16 currencies. The Account would invest its dollar holdings in interest-
earning U.S.G. securities and would pay interest to the holders of the
SDR-denominated claims. The claims issued by the Account would be
of indefinite maturity, as is the SDR reserve instrument created by the
IMF. Initially, the Account might start at $10–20 billion and could rise
to $50 billion over 5 years or so.
This scheme presents a number of potential advantages for the
United States and other countries:
—The international monetary system is moving in an uncontrolled
way from extremely heavy reliance on the dollar toward greater reli-
ance on other major currencies such as the Deutschemark, the Swiss
franc and Japanese yen. The process of diversification, if left to itself,
can lead to heavy pressures on the dollar at inopportune times and po-
tentially large costs to the U.S. in terms of dollar support. It can also
cause serious economic and financial problems for the countries whose
currencies are “targets” of diversification, such as Germany.
—While the existence of the Account would not necessarily halt
this process, it could provide an attractive and non-disruptive off-
market alternative to diversification through the market, and a “safety
valve” that could be made available to potential diversifiers in times of
market strain.
—From a longer-term perspective, the Account would be sup-
portive of the generally agreed objective of moving away from national
currencies and toward the SDR as the principal reserve asset of the in-
ternational monetary system. If the Account succeeds and the SDR as-
2 No record of the meeting was found.
3 Solomon briefed Miller on the status of the deputy-level negotiations concerning
the substitution account in a January 16 memorandum. (National Archives, RG 56, Office
of the Under Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs, Subject Files of Anthony Sol-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
sumes an increasingly important role, the international monetary
system as a whole should become more stable through minimization of
shifts among various reserve assets.
Main Issues in the Negotiations
The central issues relate to maintaining financial balance in the Ac-
count. The Account can experience losses of two kinds: the interest it
receives from the U.S. Government on its dollar investments may not
be enough to cover the interest it pays on its SDR-denominated liabil-
ities; and it can show a negative “net worth” if the dollar exchange rate
declines relative to the SDR. The question is how these losses are to be
financed. Although other countries entered the negotiations with the
position that the U.S. should bear these costs, it is now generally ac-
cepted that the Account is of potential benefit to depositors and the
system as a whole as well as to the United States, and that any costs
should therefore be shared equitably.
Gold. One approach to financing losses—which is essential if this
key issue is to be resolved, and which appears to have the support of
the major countries—is use of part of the IMF’s gold holdings. As-
suming general agreement to use of some IMF gold, the main question
here is whether the gold should be available to finance all losses by the
Account, or whether the U.S. should be obligated to make special
above-market interest payments to cover part of any interest gap, with
the balance of any losses to be financed with IMF gold.
Some countries are interested in minimizing the need for sales of
IMF gold, and see special U.S. “extra” interest payments as a way of
achieving this objective. Others are less concerned about the modest
gold sales that would be needed to cover interest shortfalls than they
are about assuring—symbolically, for domestic political reasons—that
the U.S. carries a “burden” in connection with the Account’s opera-
tions. We have argued that the U.S. cannot agree to such supplemen-
tary payments over and above market interest rates; that it is politically
impossible for us; that it is unnecessary given the availability of IMF
gold; and that it is unrealistic and inappropriate for others to insist on
such payments for the sake of imposing a symbolic burden.
There is some concern over presentational aspects of using gold for
the substitution account—that it could be interpreted as a step toward
“remonetization,” contrary to U.S. policy and interests. It is difficult to
see how the gap in negotiating positions can be bridged without some
use of IMF gold, but it is at the same time important to minimize such
presentational or image problems. We have therefore insisted, and the
other major countries have agreed, that there must be some provision
for actual sales of gold to meet an interest gap; and that remaining gold
held by the Account would not be valued at the market, but would be re-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
corded in ounces as a memorandum item on the Account’s books or
valued only at the price necessary to cover any net worth shortfall.
Guarantees. Even if the gold issue can be resolved satisfactorily,
gold does not provide the whole answer: it is conceivable that the
amounts of IMF gold available to the Account may become insufficient
to maintain the Account’s financial position, and participants will insist
on a contingency provision to cover this possibility. We have indicated
that, although we are not prepared to make supplementary interest
payments to the Account, we are prepared to consider sharing (propor-
tion not yet discussed) in financing any negative balance in the Account
at the time of a decision to terminate its operations—provided that such
a decision requires the joint consent of the U.S. and other participants,
i.e., that we have a veto. Under such an arrangement, there would be at
least two options in the event IMF gold became insufficient to balance
the Account’s financial position: the Account could terminate at that
point and redeem its obligations in full without any calls on guar-
antees; or it could continue operations (creating new SDR claims on it-
self to cover any current interest shortfall) and balance its accounts
through claims on the ultimate guarantees.
Some countries, while indicating there is a need for an ultimate
guarantee at liquidation of the Account, have gone further to argue that
guarantees should be callable periodically—before liquidation of the
Account—to provide for “maintenance of value” on a current basis.
This would mean that someone—presumably the U.S. and depositors
in some agreed proportion—would have to pay money into the Ac-
count each year a shortfall occurred. The U.S. has argued that current
maintenance of value is unnecessary, given the permanent/indefinite
maturity of the Account’s obligations and operations, and that the ulti-
mate guarantees should suffice to maintain the integrity of the Ac-
count. We have also said that there is no realistic prospect that the U.S.
would be able to obtain legislative authority to make maintenance-
of-value payments on a current basis. It is also doubtful whether other
countries would in fact be prepared to make such periodic payments to
the Account.
Legislative Implications
Although we cannot determine precise legislative requirements at
this point, some form of legislation would probably be necessary under
any variant of the Account that could be negotiated.
—Authorization would be required for the U.S. to participate in a
joint guarantee to be activated upon termination of the Account. It is
also possible, but not certain, that the Congress would require some
form of appropriations action, even though a call on the U.S. commit-
ment would be subject to U.S. veto. (If appropriations were required,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
we would probably have to seek a permanent/indefinite appropria-
tion, since the amount of our obligation would be indefinite.)
—Authorization and appropriations would almost certainly be
needed in advance if the U.S. were to assume obligations to make guar-
antee payments on a current basis.
—Authorization might be required to raise the ceiling on long-term
Treasury debt, depending on the exact arrangements negotiated on the
Account’s investment of its dollar holdings.
—U.S. payment of special above-market interest rates on the Ac-
count’s investments, to cover part of any interest shortfalls, technically
would not require legislation, but could trigger Congressional criticism
and efforts to curtail the Secretary of the Treasury’s authority to deter-
mine interest payable on the public debt. In any event we do not con-
template any such supplementary payments, and have made that posi-
tion very clear.
Recommendation
I recommend that the U.S. take the following position at the forth-
coming meetings:
First, that we are prepared to support establishment of a substitu-
tion account if key questions can be resolved satisfactorily.
Second, that we are not prepared to make supplemental, above-
market, interest payments to the Account.
Third, that we will support use of a portion of the IMF’s gold to
meet financial imbalances in the Account, whether such imbalances
arise from interest rate differentials or from exchange rate changes,
subject to safeguards to minimize any interpretation that gold is being
“remonetized.”
Fourth, that we will participate in a shared guarantee of the Ac-
count’s financial position, to be activated upon a decision to terminate
the Account, with that decision subject to veto by either the U.S. or a
majority of the depositors.
Fifth, that we are not prepared to agree to calls on this guarantee in
advance of a decision to terminate the Account.
If an arrangement along these lines can be negotiated, and there is
at least a reasonable chance, the Account would entail minimal costs or
potential exposure to costs for the U.S. The interest rate paid to the Ac-
count would be a market rate, comparable to what the Treasury would
have to pay on borrowings from any other source. The ultimate guar-
antee would be shared, would be payable upon liquidation, would be
subject to U.S. veto, and in all likelihood would never be called.
The inter-agency International Monetary Group chaired by Tony
Solomon has been closely involved in developing U.S. positions

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
throughout the negotiations, and is unanimously agreed on the course
recommended above. In addition, Tony has consulted periodically
with Senate Banking Committee members Proxmire, Stevenson and
Heinz, Senator Javits, and Chairman Reuss and others on the House
Banking Committee. They are very supportive of both the broad prin-
ciple and the specific U.S. negotiating objectives.4
4 On April 24, Finance Ministers in Hamburg for a meeting of the IMF Interim Com-
mittee announced that work on a substitution account would be suspended. (Paul Lewis,
cial IMF history, Boughton offers three explanations for the abandonment of the substitu-
tion account. The first two, Solomon’s March 1980 resignation (Boughton notes that Sol-
omon was the initiative’s strongest advocate in the administration) and Volcker’s
anti-inflationary monetary policy (which “eased fears of a continuing glut of dollars”),
decreased the urgency with which the project was pursued. The third reason (which was
“more fundamental,” according to Boughton) “was the dissatisfaction with the stalemate
over how to cover exchange risk. Without a consensus on the use of the Fund’s gold as
part of an overall burden-sharing plan, the proposal had no hope for success.”
(Boughton, Silent Revolution, p. 943)
234.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance, Secretary of
Commerce Klutznick, and the United States Trade
Representative (Askew) to President Carter1
Washington, March 8, 1980
SUBJECT
Steel Policy
We are facing a potential crisis in U.S.–EC relations. The question
before us arises from the decision of U.S. Steel to file anti-dumping
cases against steel imports from France and Germany on Monday.2 We
need to decide how to prevent this filing from disrupting trade and po-
litical relations with Europe. Secretary Miller is sending you a memo on
the situation.
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
Askew. This memorandum is attached as Tab A to a March 9 memorandum from Owen
to Carter entitled “Steel TPM.”
2 March 10. Ultimately, U.S. Steel did not file an anti-dumping case.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
We strongly recommend that you support the option in his memo
to temporarily retain the Trigger Price Mechanism (TPM).3
On Monday we expect U.S. Steel to file dumping complaints
against steel imports from West Germany and France. U.S. Steel has
prepared cases against seven EC member states and is preparing cases
against Japan and other steel producers. U.S. Steel is filing only two
cases at this point because it—and the rest of the industry—is hoping
that a negotiated resolution to the steel problem can be arrived at over
the next 60–75 days. This limited filing gives us better prospects for
managing the problem.
Roy Jenkins has written you the attached letter expressing his con-
cern over the situation and asking for consultations before you consider
suspending the TPM.4 European leaders believe that the situation can
be contained over the next two months or so if the TPM is maintained
and no further cases are filed. Maintenance of the TPM would prevent
steel price volatility, and would be useful in persuading other com-
panies not to join U.S. Steel in filing cases. Should the TPM be sus-
pended, they believe that the situation could quickly get out of control.
Europe is facing a number of key trade decisions. Our Ambassador to
the EC (Enders) reports that if the TPM is not maintained, the EC will
probably be unable to resist pressures to impose a large tax on vege-
table oils and fats, e.g., soybeans (affecting $3 billion in U.S. exports).
Pressures will also grow for restrictions on U.S. exports of textiles to
Europe.
With regard to steel, Europe appears to be vulnerable to dumping
complaints. From what we know at this point, the seven U.S. Steel cases
could, if pushed to a successful conclusion, reduce EC steel exports to
this market by about two-thirds.
3 In a March 9 memorandum to Carter, Miller recalled Carter’s affirmation that he
would suspend the TPM in the event of a request by U.S. steel producers for a major for-
eign dumping investigation. (See Document 232.) Miller reported that Jenkins and Da-
vignon had subsequently urged retention of the TPM, arguing that suspension “would
result in considerable pressures for EC trade actions that would be detrimental to U.S. in-
terests. Under these circumstances, the Vice President, Commerce, USTR, State, Agricul-
ture, Labor, and DPS recommend that the TPM not be suspended immediately even if
U.S. Steel files the two petitions.” (Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic
Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 80, Steel [1]) Miller appears also to have
sent Carter an earlier memorandum on the TPM issue that makes arguments similar to
those made in his March 9 memorandum. (Memorandum from Owen to Carter, March 9;
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 17, Euro-
randum to Carter, Owen noted that Miller, Eizenstat, Cooper, and Askew agreed “that
we have no choice but to defer our decision until after consultation with the EC.” (Ibid.)

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
This situation could have a profound impact on not only our trade
but also our political relations with Europe and European support for
certain of our foreign policy objectives.
We recommend the following course of action (see attached press
release).5
(1) Temporarily maintain TPM at present levels.
(2) Announce that this is being done to prevent immediate disrup-
tion of steel trade and to complete a review of the accuracy of TPM
calculations.
(3) Also announce that a future decision on continuation of TPM
will take into account our assessment of cases filed, any additional
cases and the impact of cases on international trade.
(4) Continue efforts to find a solution to the problem.
The pros and cons of this course of action are:
PROS
1. Allows time to arrive at a negotiated result if that is possible. Suspen-
sion of TPM at this point could result in a filing by U.S. Steel of its other
five cases and probably a filing of petitions by other companies. Euro-
pean leaders, in turn, could lose control of the situation. Negotiation in
this climate would be difficult at best.
2. Avoids other companies joining U.S. Steel. Other U.S. steel pro-
ducers (Bethlehem, Republic, National) have said that they have pre-
pared dumping cases but will not file them as long as we maintain TPM
and continue to look for a solution.
3. Necessary to enable European leadership to manage the situation. EC
Commissioner Davignon has said that price volatility6 resulting from
suspended TPM would cause him to lose control of the situation, but
that he can manage the situation as long as the dumping complaints are
limited and we maintain TPM.7 The Europeans, like us, want to prevent
the steel trade issue from spilling over into other trade and foreign
policy areas.
5 Attached but not printed is an undated draft Department of Commerce press re-
lease entitled “United States Steel Corporation Files Antidumping Petitions Against Im-
ports from West Germany and France.”
6 An unknown person underlined the phrase “price volatility” and wrote “?” in the
adjacent margin.
7 Davignon made statements along these lines in separate conversations with
Askew and Hormats. (Telegram 3141 from USEC Brussels, February 19; Carter Library,
Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Briefing Book Files,
Box 121, Briefing Book: EPG [Economic Policy Group] Executive Committee Meeting

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
4. Time works in our favor if the situation remains fluid. Steel imports
from Europe appear to be falling, and the American steel market is
strengthening. This should ease the tension.
5. Maintains TPM flexibility. If the steel industry moves in an unsat-
isfactory way, or if conditions otherwise warrant it, we remain free to
suspend TPM.
CONS
1. Administration might appear “soft” on steel. We have said we
would suspend TPM if broad antidumping cases are filed. While U.S.
Steel has limited its filing to two EC producers, they are the largest EC
producers and the amount of trade involved is substantial. Maintaining
TPM even on a temporary basis may be seen as a reversal of our previ-
ously stated intention to suspend it.
2. Inflation costs. Our willingness to maintain TPM could open us to
the charge that we have not done as much as we can to counter inflation
in this market.8 We believe, however, that the impact of many steel
dumping cases, if pursued, could be more inflationary than the alterna-
tive solution.
Efforts to achieve a satisfactory solution will be difficult. We know
that some representatives of the industry have totally unrealistic expec-
tations. But we have already made progress in reducing the number of
antidumping suits, and we believe we should continue our efforts to re-
solve this difficult issue through discussion. It is possible that the most
satisfactory outcome is simply to let the U.S. Steel cases follow their
procedural course through Commerce and the ITC, retaining TPM and
avoiding additional cases. The trade and foreign policy costs associated
with the alternative of immediately suspending TPM, which could
cause many other suits to be filed, is sufficiently high that we should do
all that we reasonably can to avoid it.
him to “bear in mind that continuing the TPM and processing antidumping suits at the
same time will be more inflationary than either of the two alone. Also, any negotiated so-
lution of the dumping cases is likely to be more protective and, therefore, more infla-
tionary than the status quo. Maintaining the TPM will probably be interpreted as incon-
sistent with an intensified anti-inflation program.” Owen noted in his March 9
memorandum to Carter (see footnote 4 above) that “Treasury, CEA, and OMB believe, as
do I, that inflation should be the dominant concern in making this decision. Other
agencies don’t disagree with this as a matter of principle, but they don’t think that
keeping TMP is more inflationary [than] suspending it.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
235.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, March 11, 1980
SUBJECT
Tony Solomon’s View on Steel TPM (U)
I called Tony Solomon, who is vacationing on the West Coast, to
ask his views on the steel TPM. Here are my notes as to what he said:
—As the guy who put all this together and who negotiated with
them (the steel people) for two years, it makes no sense not to suspend
—The combination of TPM and the US Steel suits would have a
significant inflationary impact. He has talked to 30–40 people on the
West Coast, all of whom agree that the only issue on which you are vul-
nerable is inflation. Maintaining TPM in the face of the US Steel suits
would make it look as though the Administration were fueling infla-
tion. This should be the dominant consideration in your decision. You
would receive strong consumer criticism if you did not suspend. (C)
—The US Government would be in a stronger position to negotiate
with the steel firms if we had suspended TPM and thus demonstrated
our toughness. Suspension of TPM would put more pressure on Rod-
erick,2 since the rest of the industry will want to see it restored. If we
don’t suspend, we will look like a paper tiger, and US Steel’s terms will
be that much stiffer as a result. (C)
—The Europeans are anxious to keep TPM, in large part, in order
to firm up prices in the European market. TPM suspension will not pro-
duce a much worse European reaction than the suits themselves. (C)
—Your credibility is at stake and your image would be damaged
by a reversal of our past position. The head of the National Steel Com-
pany had approached Tony two months ago to propose a deal under
which US Steel would only file two suits and we would maintain the
TPM. Tony replied that this didn’t make sense, since Roderick could
still keep the four other country suits dangling over our head, and we
would encounter vigorous criticism from the US public. The head of
National Steel replied: “You are right; we can’t fool you, but maybe we
can fool the White House.” (C)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Sent for information. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “cc Lloyd—info. C.”
2 David Roderick was Chairman of U.S. Steel.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
236.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Economic Policy
Group (Miller) to President Carter1
Washington, March 14, 1980
SUBJECT
Administration Steel Policy
Consultations with EC Commissioner Davignon2 produced the
following:
—that protectionist pressures in the EC are likely to become more
unmanageable if the TPM is suspended and if U.S. steel firms other
than the U.S. Steel Corporation file antidumping petitions; and
—that if the TPM were kept in place and if other firms did not file
petitions against EC steel producers, he would review without commit-
ment the U.S. Steel petitions to determine what EC actions, if any, were
needed to correct dumping where there are large margins and trade
volumes.
Since U.S. Steel continues to threaten imminent submission of
anti-dumping petitions, I recommend that you make a decision clari-
fying the Administration’s policy on the TPM as soon as possible.
Papers outlining the arguments for each option—suspending the TPM
(Tab A), maintaining the TPM (Tab B), delaying a decision on TPM
until 20 days after the cases are filed (Tab C)—are attached.3
The options are:
1. Suspend TPM if and when the two U.S. Steel petitions are filed
and announce at that time that the TPM will be reinstituted if the cases
are withdrawn. In addition, instruct all Administration officials to
avoid seeking any further restrictions on steel trade.4 This would not
preclude announcement of second quarter trigger prices if the petitions
are delayed. Supported by Treasury, CEA, NSC, Kahn and the OMB.5
These agencies oppose both options 2 and 3 on identical grounds. In
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 80, Steel [1]. No classification marking. Carter initialed “C”
at the top of the page.
10–11 visit to Washington to discuss the steel issue with U.S. officials. (National Archives,
Askew and Klutznick discussed Davignon’s visit, argued in favor of TPM retention, and
proposed a scenario for future negotiations. (Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of
Economic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 80, Steel [3])
3 Tabs A–C were not attached.
4 This would not preclude attempts to negotiate an elimination of the dumping
margins and thus withdrawal of the suits. [Footnote in the original.]
5 Carter underlined the words “Treasury,” “CEA,” “NSC,” “Kahn,” and “OMB.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
our opinion they are not distinct options since they will produce the
same results.6
2. Maintain the TPM for 90 days if U.S. Steel limits its petitions to a
maximum of two countries, to allow time to seek a negotiated solution
that is satisfactory. Supported by State, Labor, Agriculture, Commerce,
USTR, DPS, and the Vice President.7
3. Announce second quarter trigger price (at the same level as first
quarter) and postpone making a decision on the suspension of the TPM
until 20 days after the petitions have been filed. Use the 20 day period
to evaluate the petitions for sufficiency and to consult with our Euro-
pean trading partners. Supported by Commerce and USTR8 if you re-
ject option 2.
G. William Miller9
6 Carter indicated his approval of this option
8 Klutznick presented this proposal in a March 12 memorandum to Carter in which
Askew concurred. (Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers,
Charles L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 80, Steel [3])
9 Miller signed “Bill” above this typed signature.
237.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council of
Economic Advisers (Schultze) to President Carter1
Washington, March 17, 1980
SUBJECT
Steel TPM—An Emergency
The Administration’s failure to announce its decision regarding
maintenance or suspension of TPM has created uncertainty which is
discouraging needed steel exports to this country. This uncertainty
needs urgently to be resolved, if the inflationary effects of a drying up
of our steel imports are to be avoided.
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 80, Steel [3]. No classification marking.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
As you know from the package that Bill Miller sent you last
Friday,2 I believe that the right course is to suspend TPM. Any other de-
cision would be seen as inflationary—thus eroding some of the gains
secured from announcement of your new economic program.3 We
would have sent the wrong signal to the critical labor negotiations. We
would be criticized for inconsistency and for yielding to pro-inflation
domestic pressures.
I see no advantage in the three week postponement of your deci-
sion that STR proposes. Indeed, this might be the worst of both worlds.
Publication of second quarter trigger prices in the face of US Steel’s two
suits, would be criticized as inflationary, while the fact that a decision
on TPM suspension was still only 21 days away would maintain the
uncertainty that now discourages steel trade.
The effectiveness of our anti-inflation program hinges, in the end,
on people believing that we will stick to it. The steel TPM is our first
test.4
2 See Document 236.
3 Carter announced a new anti-inflation program on March 14. For the text of his re-
marks, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1980–81, Book I,
4 The White House announced on March 19 that it would maintain the steel trigger
price mechanism at the same level for 3 months. It also cautioned that the TPM would be
suspended if steel producers initiated a major anti-dumping case. (Clyde H. Farnsworth,
238.
Editorial Note
In a March 21, 1980, letter to Roy Jenkins, President of the Commis-
sion of the European Communities (EC), President Jimmy Carter noted
that his “domestic advisers are strongly and unanimously of the view
that if U.S. Steel files its suits, our government must suspend the
Trigger Price Mechanism (TPM) or face grave inflationary conse-
quences.” Carter told Jenkins that “in authorizing the Commerce De-
partment to publish the second quarter Trigger Price Mechanism at an
unchanged level, I have decided that we will suspend that mechanism
immediately if any major anti-dumping suits are filed.” Noting that he
had not foreclosed the possibility of reinstating the trigger price mecha-
nism, Carter expressed his “hope that this meets some of Commis-
sioner Davignon’s concerns and that in the meantime you will be able
to discourage any European over-reaction, as I have sought to resist

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
protectionist pressures in the United States. Any such reaction might
set off a chain process that could endanger the MTN results of which
we are both so rightly proud.” (Carter Library, Plains File, President’s
Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 1, European Communities, Commis-
On March 21, the U.S. Steel Corporation filed anti-dumping com-
plaints against steel producers in Belgium, France, Italy, Luxembourg,
the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and West Germany. In re-
sponse, the Department of Commerce suspended the trigger price
mechanism, while suggesting that it could be reinstated “in the event
that the petitions are withdrawn or otherwise satisfactorily resolved.”
(Clyde H. Farnsworth, “Protective Pricing in Steel Suspended,” The
veyed to the U.S. Mission to the EC, the EC “Commission’s disappoint-
ment and bitterness over the recent turn of events on the steel issue,”
asserting “that the filing by [U.S.] Steel and the suspension of the
trigger price created a completely new situation which the EC would
have to assess carefully before developing a new policy. Davignon was
especially critical of what he regarded as a cop-out by the administra-
tion which would effectively leave the US industry to regulate the
market.” (Telegram 5178 from USEC Brussels, March 21; Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, International Eco-
mission released a statement expressing disappointment in the
suspension of the trigger price mechanism, asserting that “a means of
fighting protectionist tendencies in the U.S. has, for the time being, dis-
appeared.” While disavowing “rumors concerning possible retaliatory
measures” and the possibility of a trade war, the EC also denied “that it
might propose a modus vivendi such as ‘orderly marketing arrange-
ments’ or self restraint on steel exports.” (Telegram 5527 from USEC
Brussels, March 27; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D800155–0663)
Over the next several months, as the investigation into the anti-
dumping complaints progressed, U.S. officials engaged in informal
talks with representatives of U.S. Steel in an effort to resolve the issue.
In July, Davignon traveled to Washington to discuss the situation with
U.S. officials, “urging that the Government and the steel companies
find some way of settling the cases—presumably in a way that does not
hurt the European steel producers too much.” Davignon cautioned that
there was a “growing possibility of a ‘Trade War’” and expressed con-
cern “that ‘we will let the situation get out of our control.’” (Memo-
randum from Council of Economic Advisers member George Eads to
Schultze, August 5; Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Eco-
nomic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 80, Steel [3])

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
In September, the Tripartite Advisory Committee, established in
December 1977 pursuant to the report of the Steel Task Force (see Doc-
ument 79), submitted its recommendations on the U.S. steel industry.
On September 28, the President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs and
Policy, Stuart Eizenstat, and Domestic Policy Staff member Joshua
Gotbaum sent Carter a draft response to the committee’s recommenda-
tions for his comments. Carter wrote on the draft response: “Basically
ok—proceed—check any changes with me.” At the bottom of the first
page of the response, he added: “Emphasize need to control inflation.”
(Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files,
On September 30, Carter announced a revitalization program for
the U.S. steel industry that reflected the recommendations of the Tri-
partite Advisory Committee. The program included provisions encour-
aging investment in industrial modernization, technological research
and development, and compliance with environmental regulations, as
well as assistance for dislocated workers and communities and the con-
tinuation of the Tripartite Advisory Committee. It also established a re-
vised trigger price mechanism that would bring about the “expeditious
investigation of unfair trade practices.” In his statement, Carter also an-
nounced that U.S. Steel would drop its anti-dumping suits. For the text
of Carter’s statement on the steel revitalization program, as well as his
remarks announcing the program, see Public Papers of the Presidents of
239.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, March 29, 1980
SUBJECT
Possible French Proposal on Monetary Reform at the Venice Summit
Giscard announced in November and again in January that he
would offer a major proposal on monetary reform at the Venice
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
memorandum was sent to Carter under cover of an April 2 memorandum from Owen,
who commented: “I agree with Cy’s conclusion: The French probably won’t have a pro-
posal; and if they do it will probably be of a kind that will fit into our present plans. Art

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
Summit.2 Neither he nor other French officials have offered any details.
Giscard gave drafting responsibilities, but few instructions, to Bernard
Clappier, former head of the Bank of France.
We tend to discount earlier reports that the Giscard proposal
would envisage major structural changes in the monetary system, in-
cluding separate currency zones, a return to the gold standard, and
forcing the U.S. to guarantee the value of dollars held by foreigners.
While the French still dream of fixed exchange rates and a return to
gold, they realize their isolation. The Germans, as well as the U.S.,
would be unalterably opposed.
Present indications are that the French may be backing off, after
warnings from the FRG and us that any proposal should be thoroughly
vetted in the Summit preparatory work, i.e., we will brook no sur-
prises.3 If the French do make a proposal in the monetary area, it is
likely they will lower their sights to two specific concerns: greater con-
trol of the Eurocurrency markets, and improving the process of recy-
cling surplus OPEC funds to the oil importing LDCs. These issues are
already under discussion in the IMF and among major central banks.
We have indicated to the French, and also to the Germans, who had
similar thoughts, that the former is too technical for the Summit. Recy-
cling is now on the agenda, and we hope to produce a statement which
will demonstrate major country concern about this question. This will
be a major problem for the world economy in 1981–82, but we do not
want to be too far in front of the developing countries in pushing for a
solution soon.
In addition to the recycling question, we hope to use the Summit to
move forward two issues in the monetary area: the Substitution Ac-
count, and more effective IMF Surveillance. We do not foresee detailed
discussions on either issue. At present, we think it questionable that the
French will have a major proposal on monetary reform for the Summit,
Hartman told me this morning that Clappier, who is supposed to be drafting this pro-
posal, hasn’t even set pen to paper yet—and still doesn’t have any new ideas to put for-
ward. Giscard could get a brain-storm that would change all this over-night, but it hasn’t
happened yet.” (Ibid.)
would offer a proposal to encourage international monetary stability at the Venice G–7
Summit. (“France Preparing Currency Proposal,” The New York Times, November 30,
1979, p. D13) In January, Giscard promised a proposal on international development; his
spokesman subsequently suggested that the proposal would also address international
Central Foreign Policy File, D800060–0623)
“concerns about the timing and content of a possible initiative by President Giscard”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
and any specific proposals would likely fall into areas we already plan
for discussion.
240.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, April 24, 1980
SUBJECT
The Venice Summit
This memorandum reports on a trip to Italy last week to meet with
representatives of the Summit nations to prepare for the Venice
Summit.
1. Macro-economic policy. There was general agreement that the
Summit communique should, as recommended in a paper that Charlie
Schultze prepared for our group,2 call for continued fiscal/monetary
restraint—plus measures to improve productivity by encouraging the
shift of resources from consumption and the public sector to invest-
ment. The Canadians (whose new government’s3 views on macro-
economic policy appear to diverge from those of other Summit gov-
ernments) indicated some reservation about committing themselves to
politically unpopular measures for the latter purpose. Others said that
it would help their heads of government to take these difficult meas-
ures if the Summit said that they were needed. (C)
2. Energy. Only the Germans objected to some kind of quantitative
goals or yardsticks for (i) reduced oil imports in 1985 and 1990, and
(ii) aggregate increased production of alternative energy sources by
1990. All agreed that present efforts in both these areas are inadequate.
It was also agreed that there should be close monitoring of commit-
ments, to make sure that they are fulfilled. The French thought that a
collective commitment to increased production of alternative energy
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
“Sounds ok. C.” Brzezinski also initialed at the top of the page.
2 The paper was not found.
3 Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau formed a majority Liberal government in Canada
after the February 1980 Federal election.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
sources (coal, nuclear power, synthetics) should be the main outcome
of the Summit. All saw energy as being its main business.
3. North/South. All, except the British (who are cutting their foreign
aid), agreed that more attention should be paid to North/South issues
at this than at previous Summits. The German proposal to focus on
helping LDCs produce energy found favor; so did the US suggestion
that the World Bank be asked to examine means of increasing its activ-
ities in this field, including the possibility of creating a new IBRD affil-
iate for this purpose, in which OPEC could play a large financing role.
It was agreed to convene a special Summit preparatory sub-group to
examine the US proposal to give the war on hunger higher priority in
the Summit countries’ aid programs—with particular emphasis on in-
creased food production, improved food storage, and strengthened ag-
ricultural research.
4. Political. The French delegate objected to any Venice consider-
ation of political issues (although this didn’t prevent him from agreeing
that strong language about terrorism should be included in the com-
munique). The British said that they had been told the French would
eventually agree to Summit consideration of political issues, if this was
done informally. The Italians may propose that a seven-nation group,
which would be an extension of the present Summit Preparatory
group, meet before the Summit to canvass political issues. Several dele-
gates spoke of the need for some such means of involving Japan, the
major EC countries, and the US on a regular basis in informal consider-
ation of political issues [before?] they come to a head, quite aside from
Summit preparations.
heads of governments to figure how they wish to run the Summit. (This
leaves you free to arrange a breakfast of the four on the second day, if
you wish.) The general view was that it might be wise to start the first
day with a brief discussion of economic issues, so that the economic
types could then go off to revise the draft communique in light of this
discussion, while heads of governments devoted most of the first day
and their dinner to political issues. The second day would be devoted
to economic issues. The press conference will be at 6:00 p.m. of the
second day.
6. Comment. I agree with the French that a collective commitment
to greatly increased production of alternative energy sources should be
the Summit’s main outcome. It would help to elicit efforts from other
Summit nations comparable to those the US now plans to undertake. At
a dinner for OECD Secretary General Van Lennep last night, Con-
gressman Wirth said that he thought such a commitment by the indus-
trial nations would be welcomed by the American people as a sign that

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
the energy problem was being tackled on the global scale required for
success. It would, he thought, redound to your political benefit.
It would also, I believe, provide the sense of allied cohesion that
comes from jointly mounting a large and useful undertaking—re-
sponding to the current crisis, by making us less dependent on vulner-
able Middle Eastern oil, in somewhat the same way that the Marshall
Plan responded to the crisis of 1948, by enhancing Western Europe’s
ability to resist Soviet pressure. The Summit countries seemed more
ready at this meeting to join in this kind of commitment than they were
at our previous meeting, perhaps because events in Iran have high-
lighted the insecurity of their sources of oil supply.
7. Your Bilateral Visit. Dick Gardner has some interesting ideas
about your bilateral visit—about one of which I will write you about
separately: a meeting between you and representatives of the FAO and
the other three international food organizations headquartered in
Rome, at which you would receive a medal honoring your contribu-
tions to food and agriculture in poor countries.4 He also suggested you
be accompanied to Rome by leading Americans of Italian descent (as
Schmidt is accompanied by prominent German businessmen and labor
leaders on his bilateral visits overseas); I have reported this suggestion
to Al McDonald.
8. Next Steps. The Italians will now prepare a first draft of the com-
munique along the lines indicated above. They will send it to members
of the Preparatory Group in mid-May, and I will submit it to you for re-
view then. The Preparatory Group will meet again in late May and
early June to put the communique in final shape, so that it will be ready
for submission to the Venice Summit.
4 Neither a memorandum from Owen to Carter on this proposal nor any record of
the proposed meeting between Carter and international food organization repre-
sentatives was found.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
241.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Cooper) to Secretary of State Muskie1
Washington, May 16, 1980
Domestic Economic Policy and Foreign Policy
You have been inundated by briefing materials on all manner of
foreign policy issues, and I hesitate to add to the load.2 But I am writing
about a topic not likely to be covered in the voluminous briefing books,
namely the relationship between our domestic economic policies—espe-
cially regarding energy and overall monetary-fiscal policies—and for-
eign policy.
Macroeconomic Policy
It used to be said that when the U.S. sneezes the rest of the world
catches pneumonia. That is not as true as it was 25 years ago, but it still
contains a strong element of truth. If the United States is in economic
recession, and if Europe and Japan do not at that moment happen to be
having a boom, then most non-communist countries (and even a few
communist ones) will find themselves in economic difficulty for
reasons beyond their control. Because of the recession they will be
selling less directly to the United States, and in addition the prices of
the raw materials they sell, which are sensitive to U.S. recessions, will
be reduced to all customers. These factors will of course be aggravated
if, as in 1975, Europe and Japan are also in recession.
These days, in non-affluent countries, economic difficulties spell
political difficulties. Political unrest mounts, sometimes explosively,
and it becomes much more difficult to preserve or to restore democratic
government.
The difficulties can be postponed to some extent by borrowing
from abroad, and that is what many countries did in 1974 to 1976. But if
the external situation does not improve, such borrowing only post-
pones and aggravates the agony.
The lesson that I draw from this is that there are strong foreign
policy reasons (quite apart from the usual domestic reasons) for
avoiding a deep and prolonged recession. It is up to the United States,
with such help as it can get from other major countries, to maintain a
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot
Muskie initialed “EM” at the top of the page.
2 Muskie was appointed Secretary of State on May 8 and entered on duty that day.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
degree of buoyancy in the world economy. A pause in economic ac-
tivity may be necessary now to break inflationary expectations; but it
should only be a pause. A corollary of these concerns is that we should
keep our markets open to the products from developing countries so
they can earn the foreign exchange they need to buy food and capital
goods and to repay their debts. If these two conditions are not met, car-
rying out our foreign policy will be very much more difficult in many
parts of the world.
Energy Policy
We are probably more vulnerable today to foreign threat than at
any time since General Howe landed in New York and set out north-
ward to divide the American colonies. The danger now is not from
physical attack, but from an attack on our economic well-being (and
our political cohesion) arising from our extreme dependence on oil im-
ported from politically unreliable and possibly unstable countries.
What happens in the world oil market is vitally important to four of our
cherished aims.
—It is important for macroeconomic policy, since rapidly rising oil
prices virtually assure both recession and inflation.
—It is important for the well-being of other developed and devel-
oping countries who cannot easily stand the strain of inflation, severe
balance-of-payments difficulties, and low growth.
—It is important for preservation of unity between us and our
major allies, for, as within the United States, nothing is more divisive
politically than a scramble over limited supplies of oil.
—It is important for maintaining our freedom of action in foreign
policy and for garnering allied support for that policy, e.g., with respect
to the Soviet Union or the Middle East, because Japan, Europe and even
some Americans feel hostage to our current dependence on Middle
East oil.
I conclude from this that we need a major domestic effort to reduce
our dependence on imported oil. Only by reducing this dependence
can we abort the threat and restore the confidence within the United
States and with our allies that is necessary for an effective foreign
policy. As with macroeconomic policy, domestic energy policy is a cru-
cial element of foreign policy.
We must also press, through the International Energy Agency and
the Venice Summit, other major countries to conserve oil as well. Our
main energy efforts must be in the consuming countries. For reasons I
can spell out if you wish, I am deeply skeptical about striking a “global
bargain” on oil prices and oil supply with the OPEC countries, al-
though of course we should maintain our good relations with Saudi
Arabia and other OPEC moderates.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
242.
Summary of Conclusions of a Presidential Meeting1
SUBJECT
Trade Talks with Japan
PARTICIPANTS
White House
The President
STR
Reubin Askew, United States Trade Representative
NSC
Rutherford Poats, NSC Staff
Summary of Conclusions
Governor Askew reported that his discussions with the Japanese
Government and automobile industry executives had yielded better re-
sults than expected,2 principally:
—the Japanese Government’s decision to propose to the Diet re-
moval of all tariffs on automobile parts next year;
—acceptance of nine of the twelve US requests for changes in
Japan’s testing standards;
—scheduling of two Japanese government-industry missions to
the United States on buying of auto parts and investment in US manu-
facture of parts for Japanese autos;
—Toyota’s public commitment to go into production of cars in the
United States if pending feasibility studies are favorable and Toyota’s
management supports this conclusion.3
He was confident that a change in government after the June elec-
tions4 would not nullify this progress.
Governor Askew reported no immediate progress in opening
Nippon Telephone and Telegraph (NTT) procurement to US suppliers,
but he believed he had enhanced prospects for satisfaction on this issue
by insisting that Japan apply the MTN code on government procure-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
on the resolution of issues in the U.S.-Japanese automobile trade. (National Archives, RG
4 A national election took place in Japan on June 22.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
ment fully to NTT or risk losing access to $16 billion in USG
procurement.
The President endorsed this tough line. He also asked Governor
Askew to maintain pressure on Japan to carry out its automobile trade
and investment commitments.
243.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, May 27, 1980
SUBJECT
Summit Preparations (U)
I have just returned from the second Summit Preparatory Meeting;
economic preparations are in good shape, although there are still some
disagreements. (C)
1. The draft communique’s section on macro-economic policy
stresses the need for (i) prolonged fiscal and monetary restraint, to
dampen inflationary expectations; (ii) policies that will encourage in-
vestment by shifting resources from the public to the private sector,
from consumption to investment, and from declining to growing in-
dustries. This is the most important part of the Summit as far as Mrs.
Thatcher is concerned. She believes that this kind of hortatory language
will help heads of government by showing that these painful policies
are regarded by all major industrial countries as the right recipe. (C)
2. The energy section includes strong commitments regarding in-
creased production of alternative energy sources, particularly coal and
synthetics. This section also blesses the agreements we got at the IEA
Ministerial Meeting (the Washington Post report notwithstanding) re-
garding (i) the establishment of national IEA annual oil import yard-
sticks, which can be converted into oil-import ceilings if the oil market
tightens, and (ii) reducing the Summit countries’ aggregate 1985 import
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
Sent for information. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “good. J.” The memorandum
was sent to Carter under cover of a May 28 memorandum from Brzezinski, in which he
reported on the preparations for the discussion of political issues at the Venice G–7
Summit. (Ibid.)

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
goal by 4 mbd.2 (If the oil conservation charge is still in dispute, I be-
lieve you can get the allies to support it vigorously at the Summit; I
asked Lambsdorff to speak up on its behalf at the IEA meeting, with
good results. See Tab A.)3 (C)
3. The North-South section focuses on helping LDCs produce
more:
—energy, and includes an interesting proposal for a new World
Bank affiliate to this end;
—food, via more emphasis on research, production (irrigation), and
food storage. The UK and Japan are still trying to cut back on the food
proposals. (C)
4. There are shorter sections on trade, international monetary af-
fairs, and terrorism. The principal problem here is the trade section:
Our language on barring bribery and avoiding wasteful competition in
export credits won’t sell; we will have to compromise. (C)
5. The Italian delegate asked me to pass on his government’s
strong request that a Four-Power Summit Meeting at Venice be
avoided. The Italians believe that the press would find out about this
meeting and that it would then overshadow the Summit’s constructive
results in Italy, where it would be deeply resented—making it very dif-
ficult to get Italian parliamentary support for measures regarding Iran
and the USSR. They were appalled that a four-power meeting on Italian
soil should even be considered, given their role as host country and
record of cooperation, to please a country which has shown as little
concern for US interests as France.4 (C)
6. A few further comments:
—All allied economic discussion focuses on US proposals. If we
don’t take the initiative, nothing happens. But the Europeans and Japa-
nese expect us to consult about these proposals—to listen to their con-
cerns. The IEA conference went well because Charles Duncan met most
2 Telegram 137327 to all OECD capitals, Jidda, Abu Dhabi, Doha, Manama, Kuwait,
Algiers, Baghdad, Dhahran, Caracas, Jakarta, Tunis, Lagos, Mexico City, Quito, and
Washington Post published a story, written by Ronald Koven, entitled “West Rejects U.S.
3 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated article published in an unknown
newspaper entitled “19 Allies Back U.S. Oil Tax.” The article, written by Paul Lewis of
The New York Times, is based on an article published in the May 23 edition of The New York
Times entitled “Europeans Back Carter on Oil Tax.” (The New York Times, May 23, 1980,
p. D5)
noted Giscard’s belief “that only the Four and not the Seven should deal with political
issues” at the Venice G–7 Summit. The Carter administration favored political discus-
sions involving all seven Summit countries.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
of the delegations separately before the conference started, and thus
was able to take account of their concerns in the phrasing of our pro-
posals.5 I’ve tried to do the same in Summit preparations, and will call
my opposite numbers before going to the final preparatory meeting in
Paris next week, to tell them that you hope they will be able at that
meeting to report any Summit economic concerns their heads of gov-
ernment want you to be aware of before you leave for Venice. (C)
—Deep US-European political disagreements and criticism of US
foreign policy, which was evident in side talks, did not unduly shadow
our economic discussions. There is considerable allied respect for US
domestic economic policies, which the allies hope we will maintain.
Ditto for our trade policies; your recent decisions on shoes, leather-
ware, and Japanese automobile imports are admired. There is, how-
ever, deep concern over what is happening in the Congress to the US
appropriations needed to fulfill our commitments to multilateral
banks; these concerns were somewhat mitigated by what I was able to
tell my colleagues about your efforts to back these requests. (C)
—To get allied agreement for US economic proposals we need
German support. After the US, Germany is clearly the most influential
country in this area: Schmidt is admired for his economic performance
and respected for his recent election successes. We got what we wanted
at the IEA because we cut a deal with the Germans beforehand. On the
Summit, the Germans are o.k. on the macro-economic section, reluc-
tantly committed to the energy section, and firm on North-South
issues, except for worrying about our record. They are attracted by the
Brandt idea of a North-South Summit in 1981. All this could change be-
tween now and Venice; I can’t be sure how much German colleague’s
assent reflected Schmidt’s views. That is one reason I want to phone
him and the others to make sure that they have checked with heads of
government. (C)
5 Duncan reported to Carter on the IEA meeting and his subsequent bilateral dis-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
244.
Memorandum From the United States Trade Representative
(Askew) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Color Television Receiver Relief Extension
PROBLEM
By June 30, 1980, you must decide whether to proclaim an exten-
sion of import relief for the U.S. color television industry. We need your
decision before you leave for the Summit because one option recom-
mended is to extend the existing orderly marketing agreements
(OMAs) with Korea and Taiwan, and these would have to be renegoti-
ated by June 30. The United States International Trade Commission
(USITC) unanimously advised that termination of import relief on
color television receivers and subassemblies from Taiwan and Korea
would have an adverse economic effect on the domestic industry. By
law, relief can be extended for a maximum of 3 years and at a level no
greater than that in effect immediately before such extension. Attached
is a paper summarizing further background on this case.2
COMPACT,3 a coalition of eleven labor unions and three pro-
ducers supports a continuation of relief. As of Friday, June 13, you had
received 11 Congressional letters on this issue.
Within the interagency Trade Policy Review Group (TPRG), the
Departments of Labor, State, Treasury, Commerce, Interior, and the USTR
support an extension of relief. The CEA, COWPS, IDCA, and Justice favor
termination.
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 51, Memos from President [1]. Confidential. Carter initialed
“C” at the top of the page.
2 Not attached; however, Attachment 1, an undated paper entitled “Background,”
is attached to another copy of Askew’s memorandum in the Carter Library, Staff Office
Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 39,
Hutcheson, Rick [9].
3 Allied Industrial Workers of America, International Union; American Flint Glass
Workers Union of North America; Communications Workers of America; Glass Bottle
Blowers’ Association of the United States and Canada; Independent Radionic Workers of
America; Industrial Union Department, AFL-CIO; International Association of Ma-
chinists; International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers; International Union of Elec-
trical, Radio, & Machine Workers; United Furniture Workers of America; and United
Steelworkers of America. [Footnote in the original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
RECOMMENDATIONS
I. Continue Relief
Agencies supporting continued relief argue that:
1. Extension of relief will provide more time for the industry to
achieve benefits from the planned and implemented technological
product innovations. Terminating relief during this economic recession
could deny them some of these benefits.
2. Substantial idle color TV capacity exists in Korea and Taiwan
which could result in a major increase in imports if U.S. import restric-
tions are completely lifted.
3. Failure to grant relief would make the United States the only
major world market open to unrestricted import competition in color
TVs.
4. Job loss in the industry could accelerate if relief is terminated.
5. Although relief has been in effect for the past 3 years in the case
of Japan, and one and one-half years in the case of Korea and Taiwan,
prices of color TVs have been stable relative to prices of most other
articles.
All but one agency supporting continued relief recommend that
you authorize USTR to seek to negotiate orderly marketing agreements
(OMAs) with Korea and Taiwan at a combined level of 800,000 to
These OMAs would not include incomplete receivers without picture
tubes and receivers of a screen size 12 inches or less. Both exclusions
represent a substantial liberalization of the existing relief. In addition,
the Japanese OMA would be terminated; although we would indicate
to Japan that any surges from recent levels could lead to U.S. restric-
tions. We would monitor the other countries to be in a position to pre-
vent surges.
In the event that we cannot reach agreement by June 30, it is rec-
ommended that you implement a global quota of 1.4 million complete
sets (including incomplete sets with picture tubes) the first year and
1.55 million in the second. This quota would exclude the same products
as the OMAs. The quota would have indicative levels for individual
countries to limit disproportionate surges.
The agencies supporting extension of relief feel that this proposal
would:
(a) provide a meaningful extension of relief;
(b) meet the concerns of Korea and Taiwan who have been se-
verely restrained under the existing relief;
(c) continue the restructuring of the industry without significant
inflationary consequences.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
It is unlikely that COMPACT, particularly the unions, will publicly
support this formulation, mainly because of the exclusion of incom-
plete receivers. This exclusion was recommended by virtually all
agencies because they felt it did not provide meaningful protection for
U.S. workers. I would propose to try to negotiate OMAs at the lower
end of the ranges indicated (especially in the second year), if I can bring
COMPACT to a more favorable posture.
The Department of Labor feels that the above approach will not
provide sufficient relief to the domestic industry and recommends that
you implement a global quota for two years at 1.4 million complete re-
ceivers and 3.05 million incomplete receivers each year. Labor would
also exclude 12 inch and under receivers but feels that it is critical to in-
clude incomplete receivers and to have global coverage of imports.
Under this option, OMAs could be negotiated later with Taiwan and
Korea. It is considered likely that COMPACT would endorse this
approach.
Should you decide to approve either of the relief options, we will
provide you with a proclamation to be signed by June 30. Every effort
will be made to keep your decision secret until after the Summit.
II. Terminate Relief
COWPS, CEA, IDCA, and Justice support termination of relief for
the following reasons:
1. Domestic firms have adjusted to import competition. Domestic
production and exports were at record levels for 2 years. Capital invest-
ment, capacity, capacity utilization, and productivity all increased. In-
ventories and imports declined, and U.S. firms have initiated signifi-
cant cost savings measures, and substantially rationalized production
by moving labor-intensive subassembly and component operations
offshore.
2. Four foreign firms have moved their final assembly operations
to the United States, joining three others already in the U.S. market.
These entrants helped cause the significant decline in complete color
television imports from Japan.
3. Despite the OMAs, domestic employment has declined. Contin-
uation of relief is not likely to stop this trend. As the U.S. industry con-
tinues to rationalize, production will become increasingly automated,
and job losses should continue.
4. Domestic producers can better compete with imports in terms of
price. During the OMAs, some domestic manufacturers have become
competitive in the low-priced private label market in which they previ-
ously had been unable to sell.
5. Termination of relief will remove a distortion in the interna-
tional color television market place and the small consumer cost caused
by trade diversion.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
6. Termination of import relief will allow the Korean electronics in-
dustry to recover from the serious consequences of the OMA, and
strengthen the Korean economy in this period of political instability. It
would also avoid problems with Taiwan and Japan which would occur
were relief continued.
DECISION
I. Extend import relief either by:
A. Seeking to renegotiate OMAs with Taiwan and Korea and im-
for 2 years should negotiations be unsuccessful (as recommended by
USTR, State, Treasury, Commerce, and Interior).4
B. Implementing a global quota for two years at 1.4 million re-
ceivers and 3.05 million incomplete receivers each year (as recom-
mended by Labor).
II. Terminate import relief (as recommended by CEA, COWPS,
IDCA, and Justice).
III. Please Discuss with me.
Attached to this memorandum is the Trade Policy Staff Committee
paper on this case.5
4 Carter indicated his approval of this option and initialed “J.” Presidential Procla-
mation 4679 on color television receiver imports was released on June 30; for the text, see
Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1980–81, Book II, pp.
5 Not attached; however, a June 10 Trade Policy Staff Committee paper, Draft Docu-
copy of Askew’s memorandum in the Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Eco-
nomic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 51, Memos from President [1].

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
245.
Decision Memorandum From the Chairman of the Trade
Policy Committee (Askew) to President Carter1
Washington, June 30, 1980
SUBJECT
U.S. Trade Relations with Japan: Trade in Light Trucks
Issue
On May 23 the U.S. Customs Service announced, as the result of a
quasi-judicial process, that cab chassis (lightweight truck chassis with
the cab attached but without cargo boxes) which are dutiable at 4 per-
cent will be reclassified as unfinished trucks dutiable at 25 percent. You
need to decide whether a) to leave the higher duty in place, b) to use it
as a negotiating lever to gain trade concessions from Japan, or c) to
lower it unilaterally.
Background
A 1979 court decision, which reversed the rationale of an earlier
ruling on which Customs had relied, prompted the review of cab
chassis classification. Customs made its decision to reclassify on the
legal and technical merits.
Reclassification will affect the so-called “mini-pickups,” an item of
major trade interest to Japan. Heavier trucks from Europe without
cargo boxes are not now affected. In 1979, approximately 389,000
mini-pickups valued at $1.4 billion were imported from Japan: roughly
half by Toyota and Nissan, and half by GM, Ford and Chrysler. In the
first quarter of 1980, imports of these trucks rose to a projected annual-
The currently applied 25 percent rate was proclaimed in 1963 as a
penalty duty directed against EC truck exports as part of U.S. retalia-
tion for European import restrictions on U.S. poultry. (Before that the
tariff was 8.5 percent.) The increased tariff curtailed Volkswagen ex-
ports to the U.S. of its cargo vans and trucks. (Ironically, VW is now the
only firm producing comparable small trucks in the U.S.—30,000 to be
produced in 1980—although GM and Nissan have announced plans to
start U.S. production, and Ford is expected to do the same.)
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
In the early 1970s the Japanese began shipping cargo boxes and cab
chassis separately for assembly in the U.S. to take advantage of the low
4 percent duty on cab chassis. Customs found this practice acceptable
for about 10 years until a recent court decision caused it to reconsider.
In making its decision to reclassify lightweight cab chassis as substan-
tially complete trucks, Customs noted that U.S. assembly involved less
than 3 percent of the parts and 7 percent of the value of the completed
trucks.
Following normal practice, the reclassification will become effec-
or after August 21 you have authority to reduce the 25 percent duty on
trucks: (a) unilaterally to 8.5 percent either temporarily or permanently;
(b) by a combination of unilateral action and agreement with Japan, to
tariff-rate quota with a higher rate of duty on imports over a certain
quantity; and (c) by an agreement with Japan which is approved by
Congress to any rate of duty between 25 percent and free.
During the MTN the U.S. offered to reduce its truck tariff from 25
to 3.4 percent. The EC offered only minimal payment and we withdrew
the offer. Separately the U.S. indicated to Japan in the MTN that, in
view of the controversy concerning the classification of cab chassis, the
U.S. would be willing to consider a reduced tariff for mini-pickups.
Japan did not show much interest, and the U.S. also withdrew this
offer. Last December we again offered to negotiate a reduction in the
truck duty, but Japan was not interested.
Reclassification comes at a difficult moment for the Japanese polit-
ically. The Ohira Government fell May 16 and Mr. Ohira died on June
12. Elections were held June 22, but until the establishment of a new
government in mid-July at best, it is unlikely the GOJ could negotiate a
major tariff reduction. Although any new government in Japan will
maintain close ties with the U.S., it will face increasing pressure from
business circles—which were instrumental in the LDP’s smashing vic-
tory—to retaliate against a six-fold increase in the duty on a major Japa-
nese export.
So far, the GOJ reaction to the reclassification announcement has
been low-key. Japanese Embassy officials met with representatives of
several USG agencies to express the GOJ’s great regret that Customs
decided to reclassify, to indicate, from their point of view, that we owe
them because the U.S. raised a duty 21 percentage points, to state that
reclassification will be a problem in the context of GATT, and to reserve
the GOJ’s GATT rights. (The GATT issues are complicated and without
precedent; however USTR lawyers believe that a sound GATT defense
can be made by the U.S.) The GOJ has reminded us of its recently an-

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
nounced auto package,2 indicated reclassification will create difficulties
for these efforts, and urged the USG to reduce the truck tariff to avoid
disruption to trade. (Japan acted unilaterally in taking the initiatives
contained in the auto package. While we told the GOJ it would be given
credit for eliminating duties on auto parts in any subsequent dealing on
automotive products, we made it very clear that we were not com-
mitted to initiating discussions or reducing the tariff on trucks.)
Domestically this issue cannot be isolated from the problems cur-
rently facing the U.S. auto industry and its workers. In your May 14
meeting with them, Caldwell of Ford, Meyers of AMC, and Fraser all
stressed the importance of maintaining the 25 percent truck tariff at this
time of drastically declining sales and employment in the industry.3
May truck production was off 67 percent from last year, while May car
output was off 44 percent. The 31 percent import penetration (from Jan-
uary to April) of the U.S. light truck market, moreover, is higher than
the 27 percent import share of the car market. Additionally, the in-
dustry is concerned that a reduction in the 25 percent duty (which ap-
plies to cargo vans as well as trucks) would result in huge increases in
the presently negligible cargo van imports further depressing U.S.
motor vehicle sales. (None of the options below contemplates a reduc-
tion in the tariff on cargo vans nor have the Japanese requested such a
reduction. If you approve an option to reduce the tariff for mini-
pickups it will be done without reducing the tariff on cargo vans.)
Caldwell has reversed his company’s previous request that the ef-
fective date of reclassification be delayed for 2½ years (until Ford’s
planned U.S. small truck capacity is in operation). He claims that im-
mediate imposition of the 25 percent duty would increase U.S. truck
sales by up to 200,000 units and auto employment by up to 20,000 jobs
during the 1981 model year. (There is general agreement, even by indi-
viduals in the industry, that these estimates are highly exaggerated.)
GM believes the higher tariff should be enforced but that it could be
used as a bargaining chip and reduced over time to induce production
in the U.S. Nissan has asked that implementation of the reclassification
be delayed for 2½ years when its U.S. truck plant will be in operation.
Chrysler suggests the increased tariff be phased in but does not believe
2 See Document 242.
3 Carter met with automotive industry and UAW representatives in the Cabinet
President’s Daily Diary) No memorandum of conversation of this meeting was found. A
report on the meeting was published in the May 15 edition of The New York Times. (Regi-
Philip Caldwell was Chairman of the Ford Motor Company, Gerald Meyers was
Chairman of the American Motors Corporation, and Douglas Fraser was President of the
United Auto Workers.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
it will result in significant sales or employment benefits. Toyota has re-
quested that the tariff be reduced to 6.8 percent and that implementa-
tion be delayed for a reasonable period of time.
Estimating the impact on the U.S. truck market of an immediate 21
percentage point increase in the duty is difficult. The impact depends
largely on assumptions of how much of the duty increase would be
passed through to retail. Toyota has announced a price increase of $800
per truck. Toyota believes the 25 percent tariff will result in a 30 percent
decrease in all imports of mini-pickups. Toyota claims it could be sub-
ject to dumping charges if it absorbed a substantial portion of the 25
percent duty. The recent erosion of the yen/dollar exchange rate has
considerably narrowed profit margins and could further support such
dumping charges.
U.S. Government estimates indicate that the price increase could
former case imports would fall by approximately 26 percent and in the
latter by 13 percent. In view of the recent appreciation of the yen
vis-a`-vis the dollar, it is likely that the price increase would be closer to
the high side of these estimates.
Some consumers will shift to domestic pickups and station
wagons, others to imported small cars and station wagons, and others
will defer purchases. To the extent that the higher duty on mini-
pickups would lead to increased sales of domestic trucks, there could
be a small increase in oil imports. The mini-pickups are more fuel effi-
cient than the nearest, comparable U.S.-made pickup (half-ton) by an
average of about 5 mpg when not loaded. However, the fuel economy
advantage of the imports decreases as the pay load increases. The new
Corporate Average Fuel Economy requirements will force fuel
economy improvements on U.S.-made trucks thereby reducing fuel
economy as a distinguishing feature in the next few years.
Projections indicate that the total U.S. production of mini-pickups
will remain at the 30,000 units made by Volkswagen until model year
1982 even if the 25 percent reclassification occurs. GM will at that time
have a plant in operation with a capacity of 250,000 to 300,000 mini-
pickups. In 1983 Nissan’s U.S. production will enter the market with
120,000 units. It is anticipated that Ford will announce plans to build
mini-pickups.
Customs and Nissan officials indicate that exporters and importers
will have difficulty finding a new loophole to circumvent reclassifica-
tion. Toyota is reviewing the possibility but doubts that it will be eco-
nomically feasible. Ford, Chrysler and GM indicate they are not ex-
ploring a new loophole. In order to be dutiable at the cab chassis rate
manufacturers could increase substantially the U.S. value added, labor
or parts, or they could remove the cab entirely. Customs will rule on

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
particular configurations on a case-by-case basis. Customs has not yet
received a formal request for a new ruling.
Options
Option I: Seek to negotiate the best possible package of concessions
from Japan before reclassification is implemented August 21, 1980.
Whatever concessions are obtained will be accepted as adequate. Be-
fore reclassification is implemented, the 25 percent tariff would be per-
sion for 2½ years would give Nissan time to complete its U.S. truck
plant and keep the pressure on Toyota to build in the U.S. In reducing
the duty your proclamation would: a) note Japan’s recent liberalization
of automotive standards and auto parts tariffs; b) note that a six-fold in-
crease in the tariff on this $1.4 billion item would aggravate inflation
and provide only minor immediate benefit to U.S. industry or labor;
and c) note that the 25 percent penalty duty was directed at the EC, not
Japan. (Given the large volume of trade, if the 25 percent truck tariff is
maintained, reclassification would result in an increase of the average
U.S. tariff on dutiable imports of all Japanese products of 1.08 per-
centage points, eliminating almost half of the 2.2 percentage point re-
duction which will result from tariff cuts agreed to in the MTN.)
Pros
—Avoids the inflationary effects of reclassification.
—Reduces political and trade friction with Japan during a time of
political transition in Japan.
—Consistent with the open market position you have taken on
auto imports.
—A suspension for 2½ years would help Nissan in moving pro-
duction to the U.S.
Cons
—At a time of falling auto sales and increased auto unemploy-
ment, would be criticized by the UAW, most of the domestic auto in-
dustry, and many Congressmen; would increase pressure for restric-
tive legislation on autos.
—Reduces the negotiating leverage that the 25 percent duty
provides.
Option II: Use the bargaining leverage to negotiate a significant
package of acceptable concessions from Japan in return for lowering
the 25 percent duty on trucks. Any concessions package would be sub-
mitted to you for approval. If negotiations are successful, then reduce
reclassification would go into effect if no agreement were reached by
August 21, 1980.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Pros
—Utilizes the leverage of reclassification to seek trade concessions
we have been seeking unsuccessfully from the Japanese.
—Congress would probably support the 25 percent duty as le-
verage if we get meaningful concessions.
—Would be responsive to Congressional and public concern over
rising U.S. trade deficit with Japan and continuing Japanese import
barriers.
—Reduces friction with Japanese by agreeing to negotiate now.
Cons
—Negotiations might yield minimum results which would anger
industry and labor and endanger our earlier decision not to seek volun-
tary restraints on Japanese car imports. Short of an OMA limiting Japa-
nese autos, it is highly unlikely we could get sufficient concessions in
the auto sector to satisfy the U.S. auto industry. An OMA is a possibility
only after the USITC finds injury in its Section 201 investigation.
—If the concessions are primarily in non-auto sectors, it might ap-
pear that a negotiating chip that could have helped the troubled U.S.
auto industry had been wasted.
—May cause political problems with the Japanese who may resent
being asked to pay for removal of a penalty duty levied against the EC
at a time when we continue to need their close support on Iran and Af-
ghanistan. They believe that under the GATT they are entitled to 8.5
percent, a position we are prepared to contest.
—If we are unable to reach a satisfactory agreement with the Japa-
nese, we would be left with a 25 percent duty on an item not now in sig-
nificant production in the U.S. although comparable models could be
available as early as model year 1982.
Option III: Implement reclassification and hold the truck tariff at 25
percent for the time being. Inform the Japanese that in the current polit-
ical and economic climate in the U.S., we do not believe that negotia-
tions would prove successful. We will continue to consult with the
Japanese on the situation and will be willing to negotiate a reduction in
the truck tariff when it becomes feasible and appropriate.
Pros
—Would be responsive to demands of many in the U.S. auto in-
dustry who seek some protection from imports in a recession, even
though it does not affect passenger cars.
—Would minimize the chance of negotiations that might yield
minimum results which would anger industry and labor and endanger
our earlier decision not to seek voluntary restraints on Japanese car im-
ports. Short of an OMA limiting Japanese autos, it is highly unlikely we
could get sufficient concessions in the auto sector to satisfy the U.S.
auto industry. An OMA is possible only after the USITC finds injury in
its Section 201 investigation.
—Would be responsive to Congressional and public criticism that
we do not deal firmly enough with Japan and that we are not suffi-
ciently concerned with our growing trade deficit with Japan.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
Cons
—May cause serious political problems with the Japanese affecting
not only auto issues but possibly broader cooperation as well.
—Would place a 25 percent duty on an item not currently pro-
duced in significant quantity in the U.S. although comparable models
could be available as early as model year 1982.
—Would have inflationary impact.
Decision
Option I: Negotiate the best possible package of concessions before
reclassification is implemented August 21, 1980. Accept whatever is
negotiated and reduce or suspend the duty to 8.5 percent before it is
applied.
Supported by: State.
Option II: Negotiate a reduction in the truck tariff from 25 percent
to 6.8 percent or anywhere in between in return for Japanese conces-
sions large enough to offset significantly domestic political opposition.
The package of concessions would be submitted for your approval. If
unsuccessful, the 25 percent duty will be applied.
Supported by: Treasury, NSC, CEA, Justice, Agriculture.4
Option III: Inform the Japanese that we are unable to negotiate a re-
duction in the 25 percent truck tariff until the domestic political and
economic climate improves.
Supported by: USTR, Commerce, Labor, Transportation.
4 Carter indicated his approval of this option and initialed “J.” On August 21, the
cab chassis tariff was increased to 25 percent. In response, Japan announced that it would
seek bilateral consultations with the United States under the auspices of the GATT.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
246.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Miller to
President Carter1
Washington, July 1, 1980
SUBJECT
Automobile Industry
Following your meeting of May 14 with the domestic auto pro-
ducers and the UAW leadership,2 you asked for an interagency review
of the industry and its problems. This memorandum reports on the re-
sults of that review; describes a package of recommended actions to
help the industry, its workers, and affected communities; and seeks
your decision on one issue—short-term import relief.
I. The Outlook for the Industry
The current situation faced by the industry can be divided into two
parts: (1) the dramatic change in energy prices has shifted consumer
preferences sharply toward smaller, more fuel-efficient cars, a shift for
which the domestic industry was ill-prepared; and (2) business condi-
tions have deteriorated sharply since mid-March, compounding the in-
dustry’s unemployment and profitability problems.
The Present Situation
—Production and Sales—In 1978, sales of domestically-produced
sales had fallen to a seasonally-adjusted annual rate of 7.5 million units,
reflecting the plunge in demand for larger and less fuel-efficient cars.
Spurred by rebates and a generally strong economy, sales reached
plans for the second quarter were for 7.3 million units. However, as the
economy weakened, these plans were continuously revised down-
ward, so that actual second quarter domestic production will be close
to a rate of about 5.5 million units. Truck sales are off even more
sharply than auto sales. Both Ford and Chrysler have permanently
closed plants.
—Employment—By the third week in June, indefinite layoffs had
grown to 239,000. The Ford and Chrysler permanent plant closings
mentioned above account for about 33,000 of these indefinite layoffs.
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
to Carter under cover of a July 1 memorandum, which Carter initialed. (Ibid.)

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
Layoffs have been heavily concentrated in the industrial midwest, with
approximately 70 percent in Michigan, Ohio, Missouri, and Indiana.
The layoff figures cited do not include the broader supplier industries,
which are estimated to total approximately 450,000, or dealers that
have closed or trimmed back employment. Thus, total auto-related
layoffs may be approaching 800,000.
—Financial—In the first quarter, General Motors reported profits
88 percent below the comparable levels of 1979. Ford’s North American
operations lost $473 million, although overseas profits reduced the cor-
poration’s total loss to $164 million. Chrysler reported losses of $448
million. Ford has announced deferrals of its capital investment plans
dollars). GM, on the other hand, is increasing and accelerating its
planned investment.
—Imports—Reflecting the growth in small-car demand, the import
shares of the domestic automobile market rose from 17.7 percent in
of 1980. The Japanese share of total automobile imports has risen from
sales slump, imports have suffered proportionate sales reductions in
the market segments within which they principally compete (compact
and subcompact), but the fact that demand in these market segments
has remained relatively strong pushed the import share of the total do-
mestic market up to 28.4 percent in May.
Outlook for the Next Few Months
The industry is pinning its hopes for a recovery on the 1981
models; no one expects a major increase in sales prior to their introduc-
tion in the fall. Unemployment in the industry may be nearing its peak,
but it is normal for plants to be shut down for a month or so to retool; in
some cases, these shutdowns will be lengthened by a week or so as the
manufacturers hold off introduction of the 1981 models to reduce in-
ventories of 1980 models. In July the auto firms will report their second
quarter financial results; reflecting the recent fall-off in sales, these are
likely to be as bad or worse than those of the first quarter.
Outlook for the Intermediate Term (Fall of 1980 to Fall of 1983)
During this period, the industry plans largely to complete its cur-
rent round of downsizing, thereby positioning itself to compete more
effectively against imports. GM, for example, plans to enlarge its ca-
pacity to produce fuel-efficient, front-wheel drive automobiles from 1.5
wheel drive car capacity will reach 7.7 million in that year.
The extent of actual improvement in either industry employment
or industry profitability will depend crucially on the public reception

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
these new downsized domestic cars receive and on the overall state of
the economy. The industry faces three significant problems during this
period:
—Employment—The level of total domestic sales may be so re-
duced by the recession, a subsequent sluggish recovery and continued
high import penetration that high and regionally concentrated unem-
ployment will continue for some time, both among auto workers and
dealers.
—Disinvestment—Prior to the onset of the recession, the ability of
the industry to complete its downsizing was not in serious question,
but the magnitude of the investments (and borrowing) required were
large by historical standards. The recession will significantly worsen all
the companies’ financial results over the next couple of years. Thus, it is
quite possible that some companies will have trouble financing previ-
ously announced domestic downsizing plans. The firm of primary con-
cern is Ford, which could elect to reduce its domestic size significantly
because of the magnitude of its current and anticipated losses or due to
its bleak view of its domestic future. This situation could be exacer-
bated if, as has been widely reported, the banks are reacting to the
Chrysler situation3 and reducing their overall exposure in the automo-
bile industry by cutting back new loans to the weaker manufacturers.
—Imports—Imports may hold or even increase their current high
share of the market. In order for the industry to weather the interme-
diate period of transition without relief from import competition, not
only must the industry finance its conversion to smaller cars, but the
public must also find these cars attractive relative to imports. The
success of the new U.S. smaller cars is by no means automatic.
Over the past few years, imports have held about a 38 percent
share of the subcompact and compact models, compared to a share of
less than 5 percent for standard and larger cars. They have increased
3 By the late 1970s, Chrysler Corporation, the third largest U.S. automotive pro-
ducer, faced a financial crisis. In December 1978, Chrysler representatives broached the
possibility of Federal assistance with White House officials. In July 1979, Chrysler pub-
licly announced that it had requested $1 billion in Federal government assistance; the an-
nouncement came after the company had suffered a quarterly loss of $207.1 million, its
largest ever. Following months of negotiations, on December 21, 1979, Congress ap-
proved $1.5 billion in loan guarantees for Chrysler, contingent upon the company’s ful-
fillment of certain conditions. This represented “the largest Federal rescue plan ever for
an American company.” (Reginald Stuart, “Chrysler is Seeking a Billion in U.S. Aid After
proves a Compromise Plan on Aid to Chrysler,” The New York Times, December 21, 1979,
Carter signed the Chrysler Corporation Loan Guarantee Act of 1979 into law; for his re-
marks at the signing, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
their share of the domestic market principally because the segments in
which they have been strong have been growing rapidly. If these seg-
ments continue to grow in importance, and if import penetration in
them is not reduced, then imports might ultimately capture as much of
the total domestic market as they now have of the small car market, i.e.,
38 percent.
Whether correctly or not, the public presently perceives foreign
cars to be fuel-efficient and of higher quality than domestic cars.
Changing this perception will not be easy. The fact that GM’s X-car has
been so successful does not necessarily indicate that the imports can be
beaten back. Much of GM’s gains have come at the expense of Ford and
Chrysler. Chrysler’s K-car, if successful, may snare buyers from Ford’s
presently weak compact line as much as from Toyota, Nissan, or
Honda. Ford is especially vulnerable since its downsizing has lagged
significantly behind either GM or Chrysler.
Outlook for the Longer Term (1984 and beyond)
This is the subject of a separate larger study headed by DOT.
Briefly, the principal problems for this period are related to:
—International Competitiveness—The Japanese (or others) may have
a substantial and persistent cost advantage that translates into the po-
tential for an ever growing share for imports.
—Job Diminution Due to Productivity Gains—The long-term survival
of the US auto industry depends on productivity gains competitive
with those with other countries. To the extent that such gains are real-
ized, fewer workers will be required to produce a given number of cars.
Depending upon the rate of productivity improvement assumed,
The former figure is only slightly above the current level of industry
employment. The latter is roughly equivalent to the 1978 level.
—GM Dominance—In 1979, General Motors’ share of domestic car
If Chrysler survives, and if Ford “shrinks” its North American opera-
tions, the structure of the domestic auto industry is likely to be changed
radically: the “Big Three” will become the “Big One” plus an “Interme-
this change does not necessarily pose a problem.
II. Description of the Package
The EPG recommends several proposals that will increase employ-
ment, ease the transitional difficulties of the localities and regions, and
improve the investment climate. The proposals are limited to those that
can be done now and, with one exception, to those that do not require

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
any new funding. This section presents consensus recommendations in
the areas of credit, regulation, unemployment, and taxes.
[Omitted here are recommendations on credit, regulation, unem-
ployment, and taxes.]
III. Trade
The Section 201 case before the USITC,4 if it results in a finding of
injury, will require that you reexamine your position on short-term im-
port relief. Some of your advisers believe that you should request the
USITC to accelerate its investigation in order to demonstrate your rec-
ognition of the urgency of the situation and as an initial signal to the
Japanese and domestic interests that you may be prepared to modify
your position on this issue and consider appropriate relief.
Background
It is clear that your handling of the import issue is of central impor-
tance in this review. Domestically, the unions, companies (in varying
degrees), and many members of Congress feel that import restraints are
necessary to demonstrate your support for the U.S. auto industry and
its workers. Internationally, decisions in this area will be watched
closely and may significantly affect the willingness of other countries to
fulfill the Venice Summit commitment to resist protectionist pressures
(particularly in light of the decision to extend color TV relief5 and of for-
eign anxiety about the steel dumping cases6) and the climate in the in-
ternational trading system—even though most countries already have
significant barriers to auto imports.
The Administration’s current policy, which has been stated repeat-
edly before congressional committees and in other public fora, is to
oppose voluntary Japanese export restraints and legislated import
restraints on autos. This policy, approved by you in March,7 was predi-
cated on the adverse consequences of restrictions for our anti-inflation,
trade, and energy policy objectives and the limited benefits to domestic
4 The UAW filed an automotive import relief petition with the USITC on June 12.
(Clyde H. Farnsworth, “Auto Workers Union Asks U.S. To Curb Foreign Car Imports,”
filed an automotive import relief petition with the USITC. (Peter Behr, “Ford Asks ITC to
5 See Document 244.
6 See Document 238.
7 Askew
sought
Carter’s
decision
on
whether
the
United
States
should
“[d]iscourage the Japanese from restraining exports of automobiles” in a March 14 mem-
orandum. A handwritten note at the top of Askew’s memorandum reads: “Original to
Camp David.” (Carter Library, White House Central Files, Subject File, Box TA–30, TA
was found.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
firms and workers because most U.S. small cars (compacts and sub-
compacts) were already selling virtually as fast as they could be pro-
duced (also, the lack of explicit legal authority to restrain trade).
Since your decision in March, there have been a number of signifi-
cant developments which have a bearing on the auto import situation
and on public perceptions thereof. These include the following:
(1) As described in the first section of this memorandum, wor-
sening economic conditions and tight credit have severely depressed
second-quarter car production and sales (including U.S.-produced
small cars), employment, and auto company financial results.
(2) Before March, the domestic producers’ weakness was concen-
trated in their large car sales, with small cars being produced at or near
capacity and sold at record rates. After March, idle capacity in some
small car lines and a general lagging of sales of small cars appeared as
well, even though U.S. small cars have held their share of the small car
market against imports.
(3) The import share of the U.S. market has continued at record
high levels (it actually increased slightly—from 26.4 percent in the first
solute sales of imports declined after March (from an annual rate of 2.8
million units in the first quarter to 2.1 million in May). High import
penetration, in conjunction with depressed sales, poor financial results
of the auto firms, and major new layoffs have given impetus to de-
mands for trade restrictions.
(4) In May, Treasury decided to reclassify cab chassis, thereby
raising the tariff from 4 to 25 percent, effective mid-August. This deci-
sion affects $1.4 billion in U.S. imports, mostly from Japan, and should
produce some relief for the domestic industry (see separate decision
memo by Ambassador Askew).8 While this change was made for legal
reasons, if you do not decide to modify it, it will benefit the domestic
automotive industry through increases in sales and employment and
you can take some credit domestically for leaving it in place (this is of
particular interest to Ford).
(5) Since October 1979, the trade adjustment assistance program
has certified over 370,000 autoworkers as eligible for assistance (where
imports have been found to be a cause of unemployment)—170,000
have been certified since February. The Administration has had to re-
quest an additional $1.5 billion largely to meet the needs of these
workers—with considerable public attention—and this amount is
likely to increase further.
8 See Document 245.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
(6) The UAW, on June 12, filed a complaint with the USITC, under
Section 201 of the Trade Act of 1974, for import relief, a significant step
for a traditionally “free trade” union which demonstrates how seri-
ously it views the import situation. The USITC is expected to take its le-
gally allotted six months to investigate the complaint, but is expected to
vote publicly on injury about November 10. The Congress, the Presi-
dent, or the petitioner (UAW) may request an expedited determination
by the USITC. The filing launches a domestic legal process which is
fully consistent with our international GATT obligations.
lion until after 1984), along with substantial cuts in overhead (e.g.,
white collar staff) for its current operations. These cutbacks are thought
by some to be the beginning of a Ford retrenchment in North America
and greater concentration in overseas operations. GM has announced
an increase in and acceleration of its investments.
(8) The Congress passed a concurrent resolution which, among
other things, calls on the Administration to review its import policies in
order to assess their possible effect on the domestic industry’s effort to
retool for lighter, fuel-efficient cars.
(9) There have been a number of significant developments recently
in Japan (which accounts for 80 percent of our auto imports), including:
—The fall of the Ohira Government. The June 22 electoral victory
of the Liberal Democratic Party was substantial, but it is considered un-
likely that a new Prime Minister and Cabinet will be selected until the
latter part of July. During this transition period, there is little that the
Japanese Government can do substantively on the auto issue.
—Growing irritation between the Japanese Government and Japa-
nese auto companies. Major factors are the Treasury decision on cab
chassis tariffs, which the companies feel should have been opposed
more vigorously by the government, and the failure of the auto com-
panies to respond to MITI’s pleas to restrain their auto exports. Such ir-
ritations complicate the domestic problems of the government in han-
dling the auto issue.
—At our urging, the Japanese Government has decided to elimi-
nate most auto parts tariffs in 1981; simplify auto standards and li-
censing procedures; and send missions to the United States to promote
imports by Japan of auto parts from America.9 This should create lim-
ited additional sales opportunities for U.S. auto producers, though
these gains will not be realized for some time. (NOTE: The U.S. cab
9 See Document 242.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
chassis tariff increase may make it difficult for the new Japanese Gov-
ernment to implement the elimination of parts duties.)
—Two Japanese auto companies (Honda and Nissan) have an-
nounced new investments in the United States, and a third (Toyota) has
committed to invest here if a feasibility study now under way con-
cludes that such an investment would be economically viable.
—While Japanese auto exports have fallen in recent months, there
is no evidence that the auto companies are artificially restraining their
sales to the U.S. market. The companies appear to be worried that any
such restraint will cause them to lose market share to one another and
create a serious risk they will be sued by their U.S. dealers for antitrust
violations.
—At your request, the Japanese Government has been examining
the issue of expansion of auto capacity in Japan, directed at the U.S.
market. Their initial reaction is that such expansion is not taking place,
and they plan to say so publicly. It appears they will be reluctant to ex-
plore this issue any further.
(10) Recent economic developments suggest that the domestic ben-
efits of trade restrictions may be somewhat higher and the costs some-
what lower than were estimated in March, largely due to the appear-
ance of some excess U.S. capacity to produce small cars. Despite
possible upward revision of the benefits of trade restraints, under any
reasonable set of assumptions, the short-term effects on auto employ-
ment are not large relative to current unemployment levels. For the
next year (i.e., from July 1980 to June 1981), the maximum plausible im-
port restriction is probably 250,000. If this were to generate 250,000 ad-
ditional sales of domestic cars, auto industry unemployment would be
reduced by about 19,000 workers, compared to current indefinite
layoffs of about 240,000 workers. Indirect unemployment would be de-
creased by another 28,000 persons, compared to about 450,000 unem-
ployed in the broader supplier industries. In the following year (July
units) is conceivable. Still assuming the “upper bound” one-for-one do-
mestic supply response, the employment gains during that year would
tion on Japanese imports could raise the price of the average imported
lion, depending on whether domestic prices also rise. A restriction of
500,000 units could add $689 to the cost of a Japanese import and could
of between $25,000 and $100,000 for each job created. This ignores
any possible savings in government outlays resulting from higher
auto industry employment. (Attachment B to this memo provides

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
estimates of the costs and benefits of import restraints under various
assumptions.)10
(11) The Commerce Department, in May, completed and released a
survey of auto trade restrictions in other countries that indicates most
other markets have substantially higher barriers to imports than the
United States.
Decision
Some of your advisers feel that you should request the USITC to
accelerate its investigation and announce that you will expedite your
decision on import relief should the USITC find injury. Others feel you
should permit the investigation to go forward as scheduled.11
The current USITC schedule calls for a public vote on injury about
November 10 and submission of its report to you in mid-December.
You would then have 60 days to review the report and decide whether
to grant import relief (by mid-February). If you were to decide to nego-
tiate orderly marketing agreements, you could take an additional 90
days to conclude and implement such agreements (by mid-May).
If you request the USITC to accelerate its investigation, it is con-
ceivable that its injury determination could be made 4–6 weeks earlier.
It is unlikely the USITC could move much faster, given the time re-
quired to complete statistical surveys, hold public hearings, and receive
post-hearing briefs. (In a recent case on canned mushrooms, the USITC
accelerated its investigation by one month at USTR’s request.)12 As-
suming the USITC would be willing to respond in a similar fashion on
autos, its injury determination could be made in early October (pos-
sibly late September).
At that point—that is, before USITC’s recommendations for relief
are submitted—USTR’s General Counsel believes it would be within
10 Attachment B, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Costs of
Trade Restrictions.”
11 In a June 30 memorandum to Carter, Mondale supported the acceleration of the
USITC investigation. In a July 1 memorandum to Carter, Eizenstat and DPS member
Ralph Schlosstein summarized the positions of several U.S. officials on accelerating the
investigation: Eizenstat, President’s Deputy Assistant for Intergovernmental Affairs
Gene Eidenberg, McDonald, and Butler favored acceleration, while Schultze opposed it.
Owen advised Carter to “proceed with efforts to obtain a favorable Japanese statement
regarding plans for future Japanese capacity, and decide later whether to accelerate the
ITC investigation only if Japan is not forthcoming.” McDonald offered his views in a July
1 memorandum to Carter entitled “Automobile Imports.” All three memoranda are in
the Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential File, Box 194,
12 Askew sought Carter’s decision on whether to provide relief for U.S. canned
mushroom producers in an October 10 memorandum. Carter decided in favor of pro-
viding tariff relief. (Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers,
Charles L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 51, Memos from President [1])

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
USTR’s authority to initiate discussions with the Japanese on a possible
Orderly Marketing Agreement if you felt that relief was in the national
interest. (USTR would probably have to be authorized to negotiate the
full range of U.S.-Japanese auto-related issues, including the cab
chassis tariff and the final disposition of the 201 case.) USTR might, in
fact, conclude such an agreement before the USITC completes its report
to you. You could not, however, implement an agreement until you re-
ceive the USITC’s report. It is conceivable that agreement could be
reached with Japan by late October and implemented in November
under this approach. Should you await the final USITC report before
deciding to grant relief, it is unlikely you could reach an agreement
prior to mid-November and implement it before next year.
If the Japanese were unwilling to conclude an agreement, you
would have to impose across-the-board relief on imports, including im-
ports from Europe and Canada—through tariffs, tariff rate quotas, or
quotas—since in initiating discussions with Japan on restraints, you
would have effectively made the decision to grant relief.
Your request to the USITC for an accelerated USITC investigation
would state that while you are not prejudging the outcome, a number
of recent developments in the auto industry (e.g., high import penetra-
tion, poor financial results, layoffs, depressed sales, idle small car ca-
pacity) have heightened public concern about the current and future
condition of the auto industry. You would indicate that you share that
concern and feel that, given the importance of this issue to the nation,
expedited USITC consideration of this case and expedited consider-
ation of relief should it find injury, is warranted. You would recognize
the need to give a fair hearing to all parties and stress the importance of
doing so, but also stress that failure to move more rapidly may cause
more serious complications.
The advantages of this approach are:
—Demonstrates your recognition of the urgency of the situation
and is an initial signal that you may be prepared to modify your posi-
tion and provide relief.
—Lays the groundwork for you to modify your position on trade
restraints, within a legally established framework.
—Only approach under consideration here that offers the possi-
bility of increasing auto employment and production in the near term,
even though increases may be small.
—In moving up your decision, you will assure domestic unions
and firms that they will have an early decision. It demonstrates your
concern and will be regarded as a significant step.
—Send signal to Japanese auto companies not to aggressively push
exports and expand capacity.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—May reduce Congressional momentum to legislate restrictions.
—Gives you the possibility, but not the certainty, of announcing
relief by November and putting it into effect before the end of 1980—as
opposed to as late as May 1981 under the regular process.
—Failure to give this sort of signal of concern almost guarantees
increased domestic criticism of your efforts to deal with auto industry’s
problems, given the limited non-trade actions available to you.
—Responds to the concern expressed by the UAW and others that,
except for Germany, the U.S. market remains the only major market to-
tally open to imports.
The disadvantages of this approach are:
—Likely that this request will be seen as a signal of intent to re-
verse your previous position on trade restraints and as prejudicing the
USITC procedure.
—The USITC Chairman has indicated privately that the Commis-
sioners would find it extremely difficult to speed up the process in such
a complex and sensitive case and give all parties a fair hearing.
—Conditions may not have changed sufficiently since March to
justify this action. Though even modest employment benefits are im-
portant, they are gains at the expense of higher auto prices and
inflation.
—Likely to cause concern internationally that you are moving in a
protectionist direction after having reaffirmed at the Venice Summit a
commitment to an open world trading system.
—Could cause increased apprehension in Europe that their auto
exporters will get caught in an eventual across-the-board import relief
action, when Japan is “the cause of the problem.”
—Creates the possibility you will have to make a decision on im-
port relief before the election. In the event the USITC does not find in-
jury, you will be in an awkward spot domestically.
—Over the short term (i.e., the next model year), substantial re-
strictions on imports, coupled with a domestic recovery and a con-
tinued shift in consumer preferences toward smaller cars, could cause
the domestic industry to bump up against small car capacity restraints,
increasing the likelihood that domestic small car prices will rise
substantially.
Please indicate your decision below on requesting an expedited
USITC investigation:13
13 Carter did not indicate his decision.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
Approve (recommended by Treasury, DPS, USTR, DOT, DOL,
Commerce)
Disapprove (recommended by CEA, Alfred Kahn, State, OMB, Henry
Owen (see separate memo))14
IV. Likely Perception of the Proposal
Overall, this package will be well received by auto interests, al-
though there will be some criticism that it does too little. In this regard,
the trade issue is critical. Our perception of how the various parties af-
fected by the proposals will receive them is as follows:
A. Industry—In general, they will be supportive and perceive the
Government as being concerned and reacting promptly. In several
areas, they will be disappointed that more was not done. They wanted
more in the regulatory area, and legislative tax proposals. All were con-
cerned with the problems of credit which prevailed at the time of the
May 14th meeting, but these concerns have since eased. For at least two
companies, Ford and Chrysler, the treatment of the trade issue will be
particularly critical to their perception of the overall package. There
will, however, be something there for each of the companies.
—GM, by virtue of its strong financial and market position, will
benefit from all actions the government takes. It has made tax and regu-
lation its two top priorities.
—Ford’s overwhelming concern is the trade issue (including cab
chassis). Regulation and the problems of the dealers were also issues
they raised, but much lower priority. Ford will view our response on
these areas as positive.
—Chrysler, AMC, and VW will benefit from the regulatory
changes and the improved availability of dealer credit.
B. Unions and Employees—Import restraint is the most important
item in their set of priorities. They will support the dealer credit ele-
ment and adjustment aid for communities, as well as the formation of
the auto committee. Historically, the unions have been critical or nega-
tive on tax breaks for industry.
C. State, Local, and Congressional—They will see the overall pro-
gram as positive but weak without the import restrictions.
V. Contribution from Industry and Labor
All members of the EPG feel that it is important to ensure that our
program is perceived as a cooperative effort to which all parties con-
tribute and not simply as a series of concessions by the government to
the automobile industry. During past weeks we have discussed with
14 The memorandum was not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
the industry areas in which we feel you may ask for their cooperation.
(We have withheld discussing the package with the UAW until you
have made your trade decision.) Most industry representatives have
reacted favorably to our suggestions. The areas we have discussed are:
A. Wage-Price Restraint. If you are willing to consider new steps to
deal with Japanese imports, there will be concern with the possible in-
flationary impacts of any restraints. We have indicated to each of the
companies that under the circumstances you are likely to seek new
commitments from them to restrain prices. All have agreed to re-
commit themselves to our existing price guidelines. These guidelines
do not, however, significantly restrain price increases, both for tech-
nical reasons, and because industry profits are low. While a restate-
ment from the industry of their commitment to the wage-price guide-
lines may be symbolically useful, it may not be perceived publicly as a
significant action.
B. Participation in the Auto Industry Committee. The usefulness of the
auto industry committee will only be as great as the commitment by all
parties to participate openly and supportively. General Motors,
Chrysler and VW all have indicated their willingness to do so. Ford and
AMC have reservations, primarily regarding the loss of flexibility they
fear from prenotification and open discussion of economic decisions to
close plants. We believe that all parties would be willing to sit down to
discuss how a group would be structured and to begin to set its agenda.
C. Fuel Economy. There is considerable public concern that, despite
our regulations and industry investments, the U.S. auto industry will
still remain far behind the Japanese in the fuel economy of its fleet. We
have indicated to the companies that it is important for them to indicate
publicly to you their commitment to push ahead as fast as possible in
downsizing their fleets, and their confidence that their cars would soon
be competitive from a fuel economy standpoint in world markets. All
companies agreed to make firm statements on this subject.
D. Productivity and Product Quality. If our manufacturers are to re-
main competitive in world markets, it is important for them to improve
the efficiency of their operations and the quality of their products. This
will require a concerted effort by management and labor to introduce
improved production techniques. Many of these changes may require
sacrifices on the part of labor and extraordinary investment and risks
by management. Chrysler and the UAW have already agreed to work
together on this issue, and discussions between Ford and the UAW are
under way. We are optimistic that their representatives will have posi-
tive statements to make concerning their future cooperation on the

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
issue. In any case you should raise this issue in the meeting with the
industry.15
15 Carter met with automotive industry representatives on July 8 at the Detroit Met-
dential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No memorandum of conversation of the
meeting was found. After the meeting, Carter announced his administration’s automo-
tive industry revitalization program. He also announced that he would ask for an acceler-
ation of the USITC investigation. For the text of Carter’s remarks announcing his deci-
sions, as well as a July 9 letter to USITC Chairman Bill Alberger in which Carter requested
the acceleration of the USITC investigation, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United
against the automotive import relief petitions filed by the UAW and Ford Motor Com-
pany. (Clyde H. Farnsworth, “U.S. Rejects Limits on Japanese Autos,” The New York
247.
Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts1
1. The Venice Summit was a well-prepared, highly successful, and
harmonious event. The sessions were marked by a strong sense of
unity—“we are all in the same gondola”, as the Japanese Foreign Min-
ister said—and an awareness that the difficult decisions that will need
Limited Official Use; Immediate. Drafted by Katz’s Special Assistant Ruth Gold; cleared
by Hormats, DOE, Bergsten, EUR/RPE Director Robert Beaudry, EA/J Director Alan
Romberg, Jenonne Walker (S/P), and Cooper’s Executive Assistant Edward Morse; and
approved by Cooper.
2 No minutes of the economic discussions at the Venice G–7 Summit were found. A
memorandum of conversation of the June 22 political discussion at the Summit is in the
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 38,
Memcons: President: 6/80. Carter’s handwritten notes on the Summit are ibid. and in the
Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 4, Summit
nique´ on Afghanistan issued on June 22. Telegram 177830 to all diplomatic and consular
posts, July 6, transmitted the text of the G–7 declaration on hostage-taking issued on June
D800324–0816, respectively) For the text of both statements, see Public Papers of the Presi-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
to be taken in the period ahead will be less difficult if the industrial de-
mocracies act together. Energy dominated the economic discussions
and Afghanistan the political. Participants reached a common assess-
ment of the strategic importance of these and related challenges facing
the Western world, as the communiques make clear. Their language is
strong, forthright, and unambiguous; the positions and decisions are
fully consistent with, and indeed supportive of, US policies. Whether
the long-term goals the principals endorsed at Venice will be given ef-
fect will depend on sustained follow-up action by all the Summit
countries.
2. The communique´s are being repeated to all diplomatic and con-
sular posts: the “Declaration of the Venice Summit”, which is the major
statement on key economic issues;4 the separate political communique
on Afghanistan, Secto 04021; the statements on hijacking, and on ref-
ugees.5 Posts have already received the Summit declaration on the
taking of hostages, State 177830.
3. For the first time since the economic summits were initiated in
1975, one of the main sessions in the two-day period was set aside for
political discussion. The other two sessions were devoted to the eco-
nomic agenda. In addition, the participants took their meals together,
the Heads of Government in one group, the Foreign Ministers in an-
other, and the Finance and Energy Ministers in a third group, at all of
which there were useful wide-ranging informal discussions. The
Summit also provided opportunities for bilateral meetings. President
Carter met separately with each of the Heads of Government and with
the President of the EEC Commission. Thus the value of the Summit
meeting lies not only in the decisions reached but also, and equally im-
portant, in the expanded contacts and understanding among national
leaders that the two-day meeting encouraged. It lies also in the benefits
derived from the preparatory process and follow-up. The work of pre-
the “Declaration of the Venice Summit” issued on June 23. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D800349–0815) Documentation on the drafting of the Decla-
ration, with particular emphasis on the economic portions, is in the Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 27, President, Europe,
the text of the Declaration, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy
the G–7 statements on hijacking and refugees, both issued on June 22. (National Archives,
Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1980–81, Book II, pp.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
paring this Summit began in February and served not only to resolve
contentious issues which would otherwise have required the attention
of Heads of Government, but also gave impetus and direction to other
international activities, particularly the IEA and OECD Ministerials.6
As a result, Summit participants were free to spend a larger part of their
limited time together discussing broad policy issues. Further, the pre-
paratory process involved frequent discussions among a range of offi-
cials from the Summit countries covering all of the issues covered in the
communique´. This process fosters a higher level of mutual under-
standing and compromise than would be the case without the Summit.
Organized follow-up is also an integral part of the Summit process,
helping to assure that commitments undertaken by Heads of Govern-
ment are pursued. The Summit series will continue with the seventh
Summit meeting scheduled to take place in Canada in 1981.
4. Political discussion. The introduction of a separate political dis-
cussion at the Economic Summit was natural, given the strategic im-
portance of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the opportunity the
Venice Summit offered the Heads of Government to share their assess-
ments of this event face to face. The principals confirmed the strong
Western reaction to the Soviet aggression. The advance work on the po-
litical agenda and communique´ prepared the leaders to deal promptly
and directly with the Soviet ploy in announcing the withdrawal of
some troops from Afghanistan on the eve of the Summit. The result was
solid Summit unity in calling for complete Soviet withdrawal from
Afghanistan.
5. Economic discussions. Energy was clearly the central issue. As
the President said on arriving at Andrews Air Force Base, “The one
word that permeated all of the discussions was oil.”7 It occupied more
than 75 percent of the time devoted to the economic agenda. “Unless
we can deal with the problems of energy, we cannot cope with other
problems” says the Summit Declaration in its opening paragraph. It
recognizes OPEC’s responsibility for exacerbating inflation, recession,
and unemployment in the industrialized world, and undermining and
in some cases destroying the prospects for growth in the developing
countries. The Declaration lays out at some length the essential ele-
ments of a strategy agreed among the seven nations to free themselves
from their excessive dependence on imported oil within this decade.
The main elements are conservation of oil in all sectors of their econ-
omies where substantial savings in the use of oil are possible, and reli-
isterial level in Paris June 3–4.
7 For the full text of his remarks on June 26, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
ance on fuels other than oil to meet the energy needs of the future—
coal, nuclear, synthetics, and renewable sources—whose potential to
increase supply is estimated at the equivalent of 15–20 million barrels
daily of oil by 1990. By carrying out the agreed strategy, the partici-
pants expect that the share of oil in total energy demand will be re-
duced in the Summit countries from 53 percent now to about 40 percent
by 1990, that collective energy use will increase only 60 percent as fast
as GNP (the ratio used to be one to one), and that collective oil con-
sumption in 1990 will be significantly below present levels. The Decla-
ration notes the mutual dependence of the industrialized democracies,
the oil exporting countries, and the non-oil developing countries for the
realization of their economic aspirations, and adds, as the Western
countries have said many times before, that the participants “would
welcome a constructive dialogue . . . between energy producers and
consumers in order to improve the coherence of their policies.”
6. On his return from the Summit, President Carter said of the en-
ergy talks, “We recognize that we must break the relationship between
economic growth in the future and our dependence on energy; in other
words, to have more growth for less energy . . . Obviously our
over-dependence on foreign oil takes away our own basic security, the
right that we have to make our own decisions . . . Oil politics is literally
changing the interrelationship among nations. We must stand united,
cooperate whenever we can, and meet a common challenge to the secu-
rity and certainty of the future brought about by rapidly increasing un-
controllable prices of oil, and excess dependence by all of us on imports
of oil.”
7. In addition to energy, the agenda covered macroeconomic issues
(inflation and growth), monetary problems, trade, and relations with
developing countries. The Heads of Government agreed that curbing
inflation and breaking inflationary expectations is the immediate top
macroeconomic priority. It requires restrained fiscal and monetary pol-
icies. None of the participants urged the US to abate recession by stimu-
lating the US economy now; they recognized the danger of rekindling
inflationary expectations nor were they persuaded that there was a
trade-off between inflation and unemployment. Rather, the discussion
focused on inflation as a cause of unemployment. In addition to
short-run demand management, the principals agreed that parallel ac-
tion on the supply side is necessary to encourage investment and inno-
vation and increase productivity.
8. The discussion of international monetary questions at Venice
was limited. There was general satisfaction with the current operation
of the foreign exchange market, and the discussions focused primarily
on recycling problems arising from the latest oil price increases. The
Summit recognized that a combination of financing and adjustment

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
was needed to deal with the large payments imbalances and that the
private markets would again have to undertake the bulk of the recy-
cling responsibility. Regarding the private markets, the Germans em-
phasized their concern about the safety and solvency of private finan-
cial institutions and suggested that the “safety net” which private
banks in Germany have among themselves might be a useful example
for the private sector to build on internationally. This gave rise to the
favorable mention in the communique´ of BIS efforts to strengthen pru-
dential aspects of banking operations, which could be supplemented
by private bank efforts. The Summit made clear that in addition to recy-
cling through the private market, OPEC should increase direct lending
to countries with financial problems, and the international financial in-
stitutions—the IMF and World Bank—would have to play an ex-
panded role. Several of the participants stressed the responsibility of
OPEC to provide substantially increased grant aid to ease the burden
on the developing countries that OPEC’s stunning oil price increases
had caused. With regard to the IMF, the Summit pledged to implement
the proposed quota increase,8 supported the Fund’s efforts to borrow
additional resources, and encouraged the IMF to seek ways to make it
more attractive for countries with financial problems to use its re-
sources, including measures to reduce charges to low-income devel-
oping countries. The Summit also endorsed the World Bank’s new
structural adjustment lending program and emphasized the impor-
tance of the IMF and World Bank working closely together. The French
did not unveil a monetary “initiative,” as had been long rumored.
9. Participants agreed on the importance of strengthening the open
world trading system and resisting protectionist pressures. They
agreed to strengthen the international arrangement on export credits,
and to work toward an agreement to prohibit illicit payments to foreign
government officials in international business transactions. They urged
“the more advanced of our developing partners gradually to open their
markets over the coming decade.”
10. Relations with Developing Countries. In addition to the mas-
sive balance of payments deficits of the developing countries caused di-
rectly and indirectly by the recent more than doubling of the price of
oil, the problems for LDCs to which the Summit participants called at-
tention and on which they offered their cooperation included devel-
oping indigenous LDC energy resources, enhancing food security, and
moderating population growth. The World Bank was asked to consider
the possibility of a new affiliate or facility for LDC energy exploration,
development, and production, “and to explore its findings with both
Revolution, pp. 53, 854)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
oil-exporting and industrial countries.” To improve the ability of
food-deficit LDCs to feed themselves, the Summit countries proposed
to help LDCs prepare comprehensive long-term food strategies, to im-
prove national and international research services, to support new
IBRD and FAO programs to improve LDC grain storage and distribu-
tion systems, to provide increased food aid, and to replenish on an eq-
uitable basis the International Fund for Agricultural Development
(which was initially to be financed half by OPEC countries and half by
industrialized Western countries; the final division of the contributions
to the one billion dollar fund was agreed at 43 percent OPEC, 57 per-
cent Western countries).
11. With respect to aid to developing countries, the Declaration
gives strong support to the replenishment of the multilateral develop-
ment banks. It ends the North/South section with a strongly worded
paragraph (no. 26) calling attention to the need for the oil-exporting
and the industrialized Communist countries to share equitably with
the industrial democratic countries the responsibility for aid and other
contributions to LDCs.
12. Follow-up action. As hitherto, the Personal Representatives of
the Heads of Government (Ambassador Owen for the US), will meet
periodically to review actions necessary to give effect to the Declaration
and to prepare for the next Summit meeting. The first such meeting
after the Venice Summit will be in September. In addition, the Declara-
tion itself sets up two groups for specific follow-on work. The first
(para 16 of the Declaration) calls for “a high-level group of repre-
sentatives of our countries and of the EEC Commission” to review peri-
odically the results achieved in the energy area. The Tokyo Summit
Declaration also set up such a group. This is necessary because France
is not a member of the IEA. The second (para 26 of the Declaration) in-
structs the Personal Representatives to review aid policies, procedures,
and other contributions to LDCs and report back their conclusions to
the next Summit. With respect to the energy group, it will likely be at
Assistant Secretary level; it will meet after the IEA Governing Board
meeting in July, and then again in September in conjunction with the
first meeting of the Personal Representatives on Summit follow-up ac-
tion in general, and thereafter as necessary. The mission of the aid
group (para 26) is really two-fold: to consider (i) what might be done to
make the North-South dialogue a more useful process and (ii) how to
get OPEC surplus countries to do more for the developing countries in
view of the enormous burden their oil price policies have imposed and
the income transfer from the oil-poor LDCs to the oil-rich they entail.
13. Further follow-up action. The Declaration refers in para 6 to the
need to understand better the long-term effects (on the environment,
the climate, and natural resources) of industrialization and economic

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
development generally. “A study of trends in these areas is in hand” it
adds. The reference here is to a soon to be completed US study, “Global
2000,”9 which we will review with the six countries. A report on the
projections in the study and the future problems they raise will be
brought to the attention of Summit ’81.
14. The energy section of the Declaration has quite specific targets
for coal, nuclear, synthetic, and renewable fuel development. Within
the US, we will prepare for the field an analysis of where we stand with
respect to these targets and what further needs to be done. The posts
will be able thereby to keep their host governments informed of US
progress in meeting the energy commitments and to monitor and en-
courage progress in the host government.
Christopher
9 On July 24, the Department of State and the Council on Environmental Quality is-
sued their joint report on environmental issues, “Global 2000 Report to the President.”
(Joanne Omang, “Report to President Warns About Overcrowded Earth,” The Washington
Documentation on the report is in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and
Humanitarian Affairs.
248.
Memorandum From Secretary of Commerce Klutznick and
the United States Trade Representative (Askew) to President
Carter1
Washington, July 29, 1980
SUBJECT
Decisions on Export Promotion and Disincentives
Section 1110(a) of the Trade Agreements Act of 1979 requires you
to review export promotion programs and export disincentives and to
report the results of that review to Congress. This report was to have
been submitted to the Congress by July 15, 1980, but due to the com-
randum reads: “Final Draft.” Neither Klutznick nor Askew initialed the memorandum.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
plexity of the policy issues we have just now completed this review.
The project involved very extensive private sector input, including
some 250 letters from trade associations, individual exporters, labor
unions, and others, six conferences on topics affecting our export pos-
ture, and input from Commerce’s field offices and about 50 Foreign
Service posts. Finally, we met with the President’s Export Council lead-
ership of Reginald Jones, George Busbee, C. William Verity, and Harry
Gould.2
U.S. exports have grown strongly over the last decade and our
share of industrial country exports rose in real terms, even though our
share declined somewhat in value terms because of the depreciation of
the dollar. Our export growth was not adequate to keep up with rising
oil import costs, so we ended the decade with a 1979 trade deficit of
$24.7 (f.a.s.) billion. The prospect for continuing price-induced in-
creases in our oil import bill—even if we reduce the volume of oil—
makes it imperative we improve our export performance in the future.
Our review found that certain Government programs are having a
serious detrimental effect on the ability of American companies to com-
pete in global markets. While this impact cannot be precisely quanti-
fied, it is our best judgment that the ability of American companies to
compete in world markets is being weakened substantially by the im-
plementation of measures to achieve other policy objectives. What is
needed is to tailor the operation of these measures and programs so
they do not have excessive or unintended effects on our exports.
During the course of our review, we found a great deal of skepti-
cism in the business community about whether the Administration is
actually concerned with exports. Most are of the view that the Admin-
istration does not consider exports significant, and that the National
Export Policy statement of September 19783 constituted a statement of
worthy objectives which the Administration has not pursued effec-
tively. The business community and most interested legislators were
critical of your February 1980 interim report on export disincentives4 as
having avoided the tough issues. In releasing that report you said you
would consider additional actions and would convey your views on
export promotion and disincentives in your July report to Congress.
2 Reginald H. Jones was the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of General Elec-
tric. George D. Busbee served as the Governor of Georgia. C. William Verity, Jr., was the
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Armco, Inc. Harry E. Gould, Jr., was the
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Gould Paper Corp.
4 The interim report was included in Carter’s February 27 statement on the reduc-
tion of export disincentives. See footnote 4, Document 230.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
Thus while the wording of Section 1110(a) of the Trade Agree-
ments Act does not require you to make any recommendations as to
how to improve our export performance, we believe that you should
announce some specific steps designed to help U.S. exports when you
submit your report to Congress. We propose that you submit a brief
signed report, to which would be attached the lengthy and comprehen-
sive review of export promotion and disincentives. Your report would
contain the actions you are taking or plan to take on the basis of the
major findings of this review. We have attached a draft of your report,5
which was written on the assumption you would act favorably on all
our recommendations.
We recommend that you announce significant export-oriented ac-
tions in four areas: (1) taxation of foreign earned income; (2) Export-
Import Bank funding; (3) uncertainties regarding the Foreign Corrupt
Practices Act; and (4) export controls. These are the major issues of con-
cern to the exporting community and are the areas in which we believe
feasible actions are possible without sacrificing other major policy
objectives.
This memorandum and the accompanying report have been circu-
lated to all agencies on the Trade Policy Committee, and we have
worked very closely with the agencies having primary jurisdiction over
each issue. All relevant agencies concur with the recommendations in
this memorandum.
RECOMMENDATIONS
A. TAXATION OF FOREIGN EARNED INCOME
In comments received from trade associations, companies, and
U.S. embassies, the taxation of Americans working abroad was the
issue most frequently identified as an export disincentive. The export
community regards the Administration’s position on this issue as a key
indicator of the seriousness of the Administration’s commitment to ex-
port expansion. The President’s Export Council leadership considers
this to be the number one issue and the “litmus test” of your report to
Congress.
Most of our competitor nations exempt from tax all or many of
their nationals who reside and work abroad. Hence the tax liability of
American citizens employed abroad frequently makes it more costly to
hire Americans where the local income tax is lower than the U.S. tax.
Various segments of the exporting community argue that these addi-
tional costs have some or all of the following consequences:
5 Not attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
(1) U.S. companies are replacing many of their American per-
sonnel with foreign personnel.
(2) If American companies engaged in engineering or construction
work abroad hire Americans in spite of the greater cost—because the
companies are more confident of the skills and reliability of American
employees—the companies risk losing contracts for overseas projects
because of the higher cost of employees, and U.S. exports are lost.
(3) If the companies hire nationals of other countries instead of
Americans, they may gain the contracts, but the valuable follow-up ex-
ports of supplies and equipment will be lost, because foreign nationals
favor more familiar foreign suppliers.
(4) A number of foreign operations by American companies tend
to create exports from the United States and also generate substantial
earnings which help the United States balance of payments. Some U.S.
companies feel they can be more successful in these beneficial foreign
operations if they are able to use American employees rather than for-
eign employees, without having U.S. tax laws make this practice more
costly for them.
(5) American companies operating abroad sometimes pick up or
develop valuable technology in the course of their foreign operations. If
this technology is in the hands of foreign employees, it is more likely to
be lost to foreign-owned companies as these employees change em-
ployers than would be the case if the technology is in the hands of
American employees.
(6) The detrimental effect on exports involves not only present
competitiveness, but also a snowballing effect on future competitive-
ness as foreign companies gain strength at our expense.
(7) The special deductions allowed for foreign living costs and
hardship conditions under present law are insufficiently generous and
too complicated.
On the other hand, the cornerstone of U.S. tax policy has always
been that all U.S. citizens share in the obligation to finance their gov-
ernment. That principle would normally govern tax policy in the ab-
sence of a countervailing national interest. It is of course difficult to
quantify the effect of U.S. tax policy on exports in the aggregate. Not all
Americans working abroad have an effect on exports. Many pay high
foreign taxes, so have little or no U.S. tax after the foreign tax credit.
And of course other factors such as increased foreign competition affect
the success of U.S. exporters. Thus, taxation of U.S. employees working
abroad is not solely responsible for the difficulty exporters are
encountering.
The U.S. tax is most likely to be significant for employees in a posi-
tion to influence exports, working in places where the foreign tax is low

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
(so the foreign tax credit does not eliminate the U.S. tax liability), com-
pensation is necessarily high to offset hardship conditions, costs are
high (so the tax bracket is also high), or in labor intensive industries (so
the tax cost of U.S. personnel overseas is a significant component of
total costs). The U.S. tax could also be significant where only some of
these factors, or other factors, are present. The AFL–CIO believes in the
principle that Americans should be taxed similarly everywhere in the
world.
You last considered this issue in January 1980 when you an-
nounced that the operation of the 1978 law should be studied for at
least its first year (1979) before further changes were proposed.6 The
1979 returns were generally due in June 1980 (some in October) and
will not be processed for analysis until March 1981.
In the meanwhile, a number of bills have been introduced in
Congress to exempt all or most foreign earned income. Tentative rev-
enue cost estimated for these bills is roughly $500 million. In testimony
before a subcommittee of the Senate Finance Committee on June 26, As-
sistant Treasury Secretary Lubick7 indicated that the Administration
had an open mind on this issue, but believed that any further relief
should be targeted to the extent possible to those areas where further
relief is considered necessary.
On balance, although the tax data on the 1978 changes are not yet
available, the Secretary of Commerce and the U.S. Trade Representa-
tive believe that the evidence gathered in preparing this report is so
persuasive that some further relief is appropriate and that your an-
nouncing that conclusion now would be helpful in overcoming the
view of the export community that the Administration does not care
about exports. There is widespread support in both tax-writing Com-
mittees of Congress for further relief.
We recommend that you state that the review conducted for
Congress indicated that U.S. taxes on the earned income of U.S. indi-
viduals abroad do adversely affect the ability of U.S. exporters to com-
pete in some markets, and that you will give early and favorable
consideration to appropriate measures to deal with this in the Adminis-
tration’s 1981 legislative program.
6 Carter made this announcement in identical letters to the Speaker of the House of
Representatives and the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, both
dated January 24. The text of these letters is in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United
7 Donald C. Lubick was the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Tax Policy.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
If you accept this recommendation, work would commence to for-
mulate the specifics of the changes.8
B. EXPORT FINANCING
Eximbank financing is the most important official incentive for
U.S. exports. Recent Congressionally-determined Eximbank budget
levels, however, have not fully met U.S. export needs. These needs de-
pend essentially on: (1) foreign official export credit competition; and
(2) the availability of private sources of financing for U.S. exports. In
the near-term, a strong Eximbank is needed to meet highly subsidized
foreign official export credit competition. Meeting this competition
head-on not only would support U.S. exports directly, but also would
greatly enhance the U.S. position in the negotiations to reduce official
export credit subsidies. It would put pressure on our trading partners
to follow through on the intent of the Venice Summit Communique,9
which recognized that a more market-related system of export credit
interest rates should be negotiated by December 1, 1980.
You requested an increase in Eximbank loan authority to $4.1 bil-
lion and an additional $1 billion through the Federal Financing Bank
for FY 1980. Some members of Congress wished to raise the FY 1980 au-
thorization level for Eximbank direct loans to about $5 billion; how-
ever, no FY 1980 appropriation has passed and Eximbank therefore re-
both U.S. exporters and our negotiating efforts to reduce export credit
subsidies.
To solve the short-term budget problem, all of your principal eco-
nomic advisers have agreed that we should urge Congressional ap-
proval for an increase in Eximbank’s program activity. In order to bring
the Bank’s budget up to the requested level, an additional $1.35 billion
is needed—up to $350 million in direct credits and the balance in finan-
cial guarantees. This would bring the FY 1980 Eximbank budget up to
the $5.1 billion level you originally requested. The appropriations com-
mittee has already acted, and the full Congress may take action to in-
crease the Eximbank’s funds for FY 1980 before recessing at the end of
8 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation. On
September 9, Carter submitted to Congress a “Review of Executive Branch Export Pro-
motion Functions and Potential Export Disincentives.” In the message accompanying the
review, Carter asserted that “the evidence gathered in preparing this report does illus-
trate the importance that the export community attaches to this tax issue. U.S. taxes on
the earned income of U.S. individuals abroad do clearly have an adverse effect on the
ability of some U.S. exporters to compete in some markets. Accordingly, I will propose to
the Congress, in my 1981 legislative program, revisions of the current law in order to deal
with this problem.” (Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
July. The wording in your report will be adjusted to reflect the status of
this issue at the time the report is actually sent to Congress.
The underlying problem, however, is assuring an adequate and re-
liable amount of Eximbank financing. There are several aspects to con-
sider. Eximbank lending has not kept pace with export growth. Some of
your advisors believe that fact is testimony to the strength of U.S. ex-
ports and that additional Eximbank lending would not have signifi-
cantly increased exports. Others believe that U.S. exports would have
been significantly higher if there had been more Eximbank financing
and that our problems will be exacerbated if the export credit interest
rate negotiations are not completed in a wholly satisfactory way. Ex-
panding Eximbank funding to meet foreign competition could, how-
ever, have significant budget consequences.
Additionally, Eximbank assistance tends to be most needed pre-
cisely at those times when interest rates are highest and the gov-
ernment is most concerned with reducing the Federal Budget. Finally,
the application of the Congressional budget process has recently
created uncertainty as to the level of Eximbank funding as well as other
international programs in the foreign aid appropriation bill well into
the fiscal year. By contrast, exporters abroad can avail themselves, by
deliberate governmental policy, of ample and competitively-priced
credit for exports almost irrespective of domestic fiscal policies in force.
We recommend that you state you have decided on the basis of this
review that assuring adequate and predictable Exim financing in
coming years has become a significant problem which must be solved.
You would state that you will be working with members of the Admin-
istration and Congressional leaders this fall to determine how best to
resolve this problem, taking into account progress in the international
negotiations.
If you approve this recommendation, a working group would be
formed which would be chaired jointly by the Treasury Department
and OMB and would include appropriate agencies. This working
group would develop recommended approaches for assuring adequate
and reliable Eximbank financing for the FY82 and subsequent budgets
and report to you this fall.10
10 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation. In his
September 9 message to Congress (see footnote 8, above), Carter announced that he
would “be working with Congressional leaders and members of my Administration this
fall to determine how best to ensure adequate and reliable Eximbank financing in the
years ahead, taking into account progress in international negotiations.” (Public Papers of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
C. FOREIGN CORRUPT PRACTICES ACT
Our review indicates that U.S. exporters consider the Foreign Cor-
rupt Practices Act (FCPA) to be the second most significant export dis-
incentive. The Act has two consequences. The first, not unexpectedly, is
that some exports are lost because foreign companies can bribe foreign
officials while U.S. companies cannot. However, this prohibition was
fully intended. As a nation we have decided that bribery in interna-
tional trade is reprehensible and that American companies must forego
exports that can be attained only by illicit payments. Discouraging cor-
ruption in international business on the part of foreign firms requires a
multilateral agreement. We have been pursuing such an agreement ac-
tively in the UN, with only marginal success, but will continue to press
the issue. The steps you took at the Venice Summit give this exercise a
boost.11
The major problem in the FCPA stems from ambiguities in the law
itself and uncertainty in how it will be construed by Justice and the
SEC. In a word, what conduct is prohibited and what conduct is not
prohibited under the law is unclear. Almost without exception ex-
porters and lawyers we consulted report that ambiguities in the law
and uncertainty in how it will be construed by Justice and the SEC
cause some businesses to avoid some export markets or export transac-
tions altogether. Among the most ambiguous provisions are: (1) the
“reason to know” standard under which companies can be held liable
for the actions of foreign partners or agents over whom they have little
control, notwithstanding company efforts to assure compliance with
the FCPA; (2) the distinction between permissible and unlawful enter-
tainment and gift expenditures; and (3) the boundaries of facilitating or
“grease” payments.
the Venice G–7 Summit he had “urged that these seven industrial democracies renew ef-
forts to work in the United Nations toward an agreement to prohibit illicit payments by
their citizens to foreign government officials; and, if that effort falters, to seek an agree-
ment among themselves, open to other nations, with the same objective. While we did
not set a time by which an agreement should be reached in the United Nations, I believe
that one further year of negotiations should be sufficient. Accordingly, if an agreement
has not been obtained in the United Nations General Assembly, I intend to ask the other
heads of government at the 1981 Economic Summit to direct the prompt negotiation of
such an agreement among our seven nations, but open to others.” (Public Papers of the
ment is in line with a recommendation offered in an August 27 memorandum from Eiz-
enstat and Owen to Carter. (Carter Library, White House Central Files, Subject File,

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
The effect of these uncertainties is severe. We found instances in
which companies have: (1) withdrawn from joint ventures for fear they
may later be held responsible for the acts of their foreign partners;
(2) incurred substantial legal and investigative costs to check the back-
grounds of their sales agents abroad; (3) lost contracts simply because
of the time needed to investigate middlemen and institute safeguards;
(4) withdrawn from export markets; (5) declined to enter new markets.
One attorney who polled 12 of his clients prior to our conference re-
ported that six said problems associated with the FCPA did not inter-
fere with their operations because they had simply stopped doing
business in countries where the FCPA might raise problems. Such phe-
nomena appear especially to involve smaller U.S. companies and ex-
ports to LDCs.
In an effort to reduce some of the uncertainties in the law and pur-
suant to your 1978 National Export Policy, the Justice Department insti-
tuted an FCPA Review Procedure. In your February 1980 export disin-
centives statement you announced the procedure and stated that after a
year of operating experience the Attorney General and Secretary of
Commerce would review its effectiveness. You stated that Congress
may then find it appropriate to conduct its own review of the Act.
Our review indicates that exporters are convinced for several
reasons the FCPA Review Procedure will be of very limited usefulness.
First, it binds only Justice, not the SEC. While Justice will publish the
substance of review letters, it has made clear that they may not be con-
sidered as precedents. Even if Justice’s 30-day turnaround target were
met, guidance would not be timely for many fast-moving transactions.
While publication will provide some guidance, considerable time will
pass before the letters cover a broad range of problems. Existing law
cannot fully protect business confidential information provided for
FCPA review purposes. Finally, many companies simply refuse to in-
volve themselves voluntarily with the Justice Department, fearing that
a request for guidance may invite criminal investigation.
Based on our review, we recommend two types of legislative
changes: (1) technical amendments to clarify key provisions without
weakening the purpose of the act or creating loopholes for bribery;
(2) an amendment to eliminate dual enforcement authority by placing
all enforcement responsibility over the bribery portions of the Act in
the Justice Department. (SEC would retain jurisdiction over enforce-
ment of the accounting provisions of the Act.) While these steps could
be taken separately, we recommend both. Acting only to eliminate dual
jurisdiction would relieve some uncertainties but would not in itself
solve the problems stemming from ambiguities in the Act.
We believe the proper time for such legislation is the next session
of Congress. Groundwork is now being laid. Senator Chafee and others

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
have introduced legislation in the last three months. Senator Proxmire,
a key figure, has expressed a willingness to explore technical changes
that do not create loopholes for bribery, but is likely to oppose taking
enforcement jurisdiction away from the SEC. However, since the SEC
did not urge the adoption of the foreign bribery provisions in the first
instance, it may not strongly oppose elimination of dual jurisdiction.
The GAO, SEC, and Chamber of Commerce all have studies of the
FCPA underway that will be completed by fall. Proposing amend-
ments to the Act, however, would almost certainly result in some nega-
tive publicity. Some would view any action here as a weakening of re-
solve against bribery. Your statement would have to be clearly and
carefully worded to minimize such problems.
Clarity:
We recommend you reiterate your firm opposition to bribery, but
stress that uncertainty should not be allowed to hamper exports. You
would note the commencement of the FCPA Review Procedure but
state that the review just conducted suggests that elimination of uncer-
tainties requires changing the Act itself. You would announce you in-
tend to submit to the Congress early next year amendments to clarify
the Act.12
Dual Jurisdiction:
We recommend you state you believe enforcement jurisdiction over
the corrupt payments provisions of the Act should be consolidated in
the Justice Department to provide consistency of enforcement and that
you will submit legislation to that effect. You would note that jurisdic-
tion over the accounting provisions would remain with the SEC.13
D. NATIONAL SECURITY EXPORT CONTROLS
We identified two substantive changes in national security export
controls which we believe should be implemented. The first has al-
12 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation. In his
September 9 message to Congress (see footnote 8, above), Carter announced that he had
“directed that the Attorney General and the Secretary of the Commerce report to me by
March 1, 1981, not only their assessment of the first year of operation of the FCPA Review
Procedure, but also their recommendations of whatever actions may then be necessary to
remove any ambiguities in the Act. Uncertainties should not be allowed to hamper ex-
ports, but in no event will I propose nor will I support any amendments which would
weaken the Act’s proscription of bribery or which would result in loopholes for bribery
of foreign government officials.” (Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy
fered in an August 27 memorandum from Eizenstat and Owen to Carter. (Carter Library,
13 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
ready been agreed to by all relevant agencies and is problem-free: We
will modify existing reexport controls to stop requiring a reexport li-
cense for any case in which we have already approved reexport of the
same product as part of the COCOM process.
The second change, however, has a more far-reaching effect. While
all relevant agencies and all your advisors are agreed that the action
would not compromise our controls or security in any substantive way,
there may be some political reactions in taking the action. Hence we are
referring it to you for decision.
We propose that national security controls on exports of Commerce-
controlled goods and technology to COCOM member countries and to
Australia and New Zealand be essentially the same as present proce-
dures for Canada (i.e., basically, no validated license will be required in
advance of shipment). Instead, the exporter will be required to file with
the Commerce Department, at the time of export, assurances that there
will be no reexport unless our reexport licensing requirements have
been satisfied. Controls on exports of munitions, nuclear-related items,
and items in short supply would not be affected.
Last year the Department of Commerce approved more than
22,000 licenses for export to COCOM countries and to Australia and
New Zealand. There were no denials to these countries on national se-
curity grounds. These licenses account for nearly one-third of the
72,000 export license applications processed last year. At an average ex-
porter preparation cost per license of at least $100, the total burden to
business was over $2 million. All your advisors agree no diminution in
the effectiveness of our controls would result from the change. The li-
censes for exports to these countries now principally serve an informa-
tional function. The information needed (and binding legal under-
taking) will be available from forms that exporters would be required
to complete at the time of shipping. Security objectives might actually
be enhanced, as we would be able to concentrate some additional time
on the problem countries. Finally, an irritant to our relations with our
allies would be removed.
There would, however, be a symbolic effect of “reducing” controls
that some may see as reducing their effectiveness. Senators Jackson and
Garn in particular may disagree in principle. Accordingly, we will
discuss the changes, at least with Senator Jackson, prior to any public
announcement.
We recommend you approve the proposed substitution of post-
shipment reporting procedures in place of validated license require-
ments for shipments to COCOM countries and to Australia and New
Zealand.
In implementing this change, the Department of Commerce would
consult with the Department of Justice and other relevant agencies to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
devise procedures under the modified system that will provide for ef-
fective enforcement and maintain safeguards against diversion.14
14 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation. In his
September 9 message to Congress (see footnote 8, above), Carter reaffirmed his February
27 statement that “[i]n considering new export controls to achieve foreign policy objec-
tives and in reassessing current sanctions—except in the field of arms exports—my Ad-
ministration would be highly selective in the use of controls where the affected country
has access to alternative supply.” He also announced that the United States would “stop
issuing a separate U.S. reexport license in cases where we have already approved reex-
port of the same product as part of the COCOM process.” (Public Papers of the Presidents of
a recommendation offered in an August 27 memorandum from Eizenstat and Owen to
249.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Cooper) to Secretary of State Muskie1
Washington, August 23, 1980
International Factors Bearing on U.S. Tax and Budget Policy
In view of discussions within the administration of potential shifts
in US macroeconomic policy2 and your up-coming lunch with Secre-
tary Miller, I thought a brief outline of the foreign policy implications of
US macroeconomic performance would be timely. While the US share
of world GNP and world trade has declined over the years, what
happens in our economy still has a tremendous impact on the world
economy, and our economic recession will have a substantial depres-
sive effect. This will reduce world inflationary pressures and world de-
mand for oil, but it will increase protectionist pressures, aggravate the
already serious financial problems of LDCs and smaller industrial
countries, and generate political unrest in some countries.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot
marking.
2 On August 28, Carter announced a national “economic renewal program” based
on increased investment, public-private sector cooperation, efforts to relieve the effects of
economic dislocation, and tax relief. See Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States:

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
We face a situation in which “fiscal drag” next year from higher
lion of deflationary pressure to the economy. Thus even a “neutral”
fiscal policy would include a tax cut in that amount. I do not mean to
argue, at this stage, for or against a cut of any specific magnitude. The
timing and size of any potential tax cut will be based on a weighing of
costs (in terms of relaxing or appearing to relax the fight against infla-
tion) against benefits (in terms of higher growth and employment). My
object is to add to the cost/benefit calculation the international implica-
tions of US macroeconomic policy.
You are aware of the steep decline in the first half of the year in the
US economy. The mid-year forecast assumes the decline tapers off in
the second half of the year and we return to modest positive growth in
1981. This pattern of decline, accompanied by an assumed recovery in
1981, is common to all the major industrial countries. In general, the de-
cline elsewhere is forecast to lag that of the US; and the recovery is ex-
pected to be modest as in the US. In particular, from mid-1980 to
mid-1981, the OECD is forecasting real growth of less than 1% for the
six Summit countries other than the US and about one percent growth
for all the OECD excluding the US. With the United States, OECD
growth rates will be even lower. Thus the main engines of growth in
the world economy will be virtually dead in the water during the next
year.
The continuing weakness of growth abroad is at least partly attrib-
utable to the fact that the 1979–80 increase in oil prices has not yet
worked fully through their economies. In addition, the other industrial
countries, like the US, are generally following restrictive fiscal and
monetary policies. Interest rates abroad rose with US rates early this
year. The other industrial countries also have fiscal drag arising from
the effects of inflation on tax revenues and will also have stagnant
public expenditure (in real terms) through the rest of 1980.
There are three aspects of the overseas impact of our economic
growth which I would like to emphasize. The first has to do with the
impact on rates of growth abroad. In the early post-war period a slow-
down in the US had very sharp effects on growth elsewhere in the
world through our demand for imports from abroad. That effect is
weaker today, but is still important. In the meantime, however, growth
abroad and world demand for US exports have become more impor-
tant to us. A fall in European economic activity or a slower recovery
will noticeably affect the depth of our recession and the speed of our re-
covery. CEA’s mid-year forecast takes account of foreign demand for
3 The salary base on which the social security tax was assessed increased on Janu-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
our exports and, indeed, the assumption of the forecast is relatively
pessimistic. The OECD’s latest forecasts represent a shift down from
previous projections of foreign growth. Even with these forecasts the
OECD Secretariat and others in Europe (the EC Commission for ex-
ample) see the major risks of error as being on the down-side.
The second aspect of these macroeconomic developments worth
flagging is the pressure they will put on our trading relationships.
Within the US Government we have tended to view the problems of
automobiles and steel as special cases. It is true that each has a very par-
ticular set of circumstances, explanations, and solutions. However,
industry-specific problems, while they may not be created by the
overall economic slowdown, are strongly exacerbated by it. The
number of problem industries both here and abroad will increase as
slow growth persists. These industry-specific problems, in turn, will be
characterized as “trade problems” and will create pressure for greater
protection. If granted, that protection will increase prices and reduce
efficiency, both compounding the cost of our economic slowdown. It
will also create strains in the political relationships with our allies.
Since similar pressures are operating abroad, the dangerous possibility
of emulative “trade wars” arises.
The third important dimension of the slowdown has to do with our
relationships with developing countries (LDCs). The IMF estimates
that $68 billion of the $115 billion OPEC balance-of-payments surplus
in 1980 will be borne as deficits by developing countries. Moreover,
while the OPEC surplus is projected to decline to something less than
$90 billion in 1981, the developing country deficit will actually rise by
an additional $10 billion due to the economic slowdown in the OECD
countries. Even within the industrial countries, virtually all of the pro-
jected fall in the combined deficit from 1980 to 1981 is concentrated in
the largest economies. As a group, the smaller industrial countries are
not expected to reduce their deficit at all.
Large LDC deficits—due partly to high oil bills, partly to recession-
induced decline in prices of and demand for their exports—will mean
they have to borrow more, and we will see many more calls for debt re-
scheduling. New credits will worsen their already serious debt
problems and merely postpone some of their difficulties. Absence of
new credits will reduce growth in the LDCs, generate political unrest,
and worsen the economic slowdown here and in Europe and Japan.
Of course, the LDCs must begin to make adjustments in response
to their expanded deficits and higher oil prices. But we should not be
blind to the fact that these adjustments entail political strains within the
developing countries and in our relationships with them. These costs
increase as the size and speed of the required adjustment rise.

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
We have set in train a number of actions which will assist LDCs in
their adjustment process, including adaptations in the international fi-
nancial institutions (IMF and World Bank). These measures are, how-
ever, only a partial response to the problem.
Historically, the economic growth of the industrial countries has
been far more important as an engine of growth for the LDCs than the
contributions of aid or lending by international financial institutions.
We should keep these international considerations in mind as we
approach the possibility of a tax reduction and the President’s overall
budget proposals for January.
250.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, September 25, 1980
SUBJECT
Friday Breakfast
1. Bill Miller called up in considerable agitation about the question
of the President’s attendance at the annual IMF/IBRD meeting Sep-
tember 30. The schedulers say that the President will be in town that
day, but he will be busy catching up and so would not have time to
speak to the Bank/Fund meeting.2 Bill believes that the President’s
failure to open this meeting, as he and other Presidents have done in
the past, would:
a) have highly adverse consequences for our relations with devel-
oping countries, particularly in view of our recent negative position in
the UN debates on North/South negotiations. It would be seen by them
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
zinski wrote at the top of the page: “done—OK. ZB.” An unknown person wrote below
Brzezinski’s note: “H.O. reports that Miller has raised this with the P. who seemed recep-
tive but Miller still wants the issue raised at b’fast.”
2 In a September 19 memorandum to Carter, Owen suggested some themes for a
speech by Carter at the annual joint meeting of the IMF and World Bank in Washington.
(Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential File, Box 206,
randum, writing on a White House memorandum requesting his comments: “The P has
no time to prepare for such a speech nor does he gain politically from it.” (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
as a deliberate snub, and would weaken our ability to secure their con-
tinuing support on the PLO issue in the Bank and Fund;3
b) would also sit poorly with the industrial countries, and produce
critical comments from some of the European finance ministers, since
the US President has traditionally opened these meetings, and these
comments would be reported in the US press.
There could also be snide editorial comment in the US press, i.e.,
that the President was too busy campaigning to attend this key interna-
tional meeting.
2. I said to Bill Miller that I would report his concern to you.
Cooper is asking Muskie and Christopher to raise this issue at the
Friday breakfast.4
3. I attach a memo which you have seen, but which did not reach
the President, outlining a Presidential speech to the annual meeting
that could do us a lot of good, domestically as well as abroad.5 Ap-
pearing on TV welcoming an international meeting of 130 Finance Min-
isters, and telling them about successful US economic and energy pol-
icies, would give the President a chance to appear statesmanlike and
Presidential—a world leader in action. We could produce a speech that
would cover this ground and that would take about ten minutes.
4. I share Bill’s concerns. I can also understand the scheduler’s
view that it’s simply not possible. But I’d feel more comfortable if the
President was briefed about the issue in advance, so that he wasn’t sur-
prised if a spurt of criticism (such as he got for not attending the Tito
funeral) ensued—& could decide for himself what to do.6
3 On September 19, a majority of IMF members voted down a proposal to admit an
observer from the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO) to the forthcoming joint
IMF-World Bank meeting. (Juan de Onis, “Aid Bank And I.M.F. Bar P.L.O.,” The New
4 Carter breakfasted with his foreign policy advisers on Friday, September 26, from
5 Attached but not printed is Owen’s September 19 memorandum to Carter; see
footnote 2 above.
6 Owen added “—& could decide for himself what to do” by hand. Carter did ad-
dress the IMF–World Bank meeting on September 30; for his remarks, see Public Papers of

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
251.
Memorandum From the United States Trade Representative
(Askew) to President Carter1
Washington, December 18, 1980
SUBJECT
Agreement Regarding Procurement by Japan’s Nippon Telegraph and Telephone
Company
On Friday, December 19, we will formally conclude negotiations
with the Government of Japan regarding the application of the Interna-
tional Government Procurement Code between Japan and the United
States. This will be done by an exchange of letters between myself and
the Japanese trade representative, Dr. Okita.2 This issue is the sole
major issue remaining from the Multilateral Trade Negotiations. As a
result of this agreement, U.S. exporters will gain access to over $8 bil-
lion in purchases by the Japanese Government, including $3.3 billion
in purchases by Japan’s Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Company
Agreement with Japan was made possible by resolution of the dif-
ficult and highly sensitive issue of coverage of NTT by Code obliga-
tions. As you know, we have insisted that Japan provide full access for
foreign firms to NTT by making all of its purchases subject to the Code.
The Japanese had strongly resisted this proposal. However, after nego-
tiations for more than two years, Japan has agreed to provide full access
to NTT, though not in the form we had originally sought. While we
have been seeking formal Code coverage of all NTT purchases, Japan
has agreed to provide formal coverage of approximately half of NTT’s
purchases while placing the remainder of NTT’s purchases under full
Code requirements through a bilateral agreement with the United
States. In my view, this approach provides, substantively, what we
have been seeking.
I have consulted extensively with the U.S. companies, unions, and
Congressional leaders most concerned about this issue. Many com-
panies, such as IBM and Motorola, strongly support the agreement. No
major company opposes it. The unions are quite skeptical. The
members of Congress agree that we should accept the agreement.
1 Source: Carter Library, White House Central Files, Subject File, Box FG–92, FG
changed by Askew and Saburo Okita, Japan’s Government Representative for Exter-
nal Economic Relations. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
252.
Report Prepared by the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen)1
Washington, January 2, 1981
Report of Meeting of Summit Personal Representatives, Paris
1. General. At the evening meeting of December 9, three general
questions were discussed:
(a) Summit Arrangements. Canadian representatives explained that
the heads of government were expected to arrive at Ottawa July 19;
they will dine July 19 and meet July 20 in a nearby resort (Montebello),
and will return to Ottawa for the second day’s meeting (July 21).
Dinner on Sunday, July 19, will be a tete-a-tete among leaders only, to
help them to get to know each other. The Tuesday, July 20, session in
Ottawa will include Ministers, as in the past. There remained a differ-
ence of view about the appropriate format for the Monday, July 20, ses-
sion in Montebello. Three possibilities were discussed:
—The Canadian Personal
Representative proposed that
all
Monday should be spent in private talks among leaders, with only the
Personal Representatives present as note-takers. Ministers would meet
separately in either Ottawa or Montebello—preferably to discuss issues
requiring Ministerial, rather than heads of government, action.
—The German Personal Representative proposed that the Venice
format be followed, which would mean that two Ministers would be
present with each head of government for the Monday morning eco-
nomic discussions, and Foreign Ministers, only, would be present for
the heads of governments’ Monday afternoon discussion of foreign
policy issues. The Germans felt strongly about the need for such Minis-
terial attendance; the Chancellor would find it difficult, from the stand-
point of coalition politics, to exclude either of the Ministers (both being
of the other coalition party).
—The British accepted the German suggestion regarding Foreign
Minister attendance at the Monday afternoon discussion of foreign
policy, but wanted to limit the Monday morning discussion of eco-
nomic issues to heads of government and Personal Representatives.
The question was raised by some delegations as to whether heads of
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside
January 5 memorandum from Owen; Brzezinski initialed Owen’s cover memorandum
and wrote “fine.” (Ibid.)

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
government might want to have at least one Minister present in the
morning when North/South issues were under discussion.
It was agreed that each of us should check with his leader and re-
port views to Canada as soon as possible.
Comment: The Germans felt more strongly about including Min-
isters in the discussion of economic issues than the others felt about ex-
cluding them. Agreement on including them seems likely.
Derek Burney, of the Canadian Government, will be in touch with
press colleagues of the other Summit governments about media cov-
erage. Discussion of this matter indicated that while some governments
want more informal Summits in theory, none want to reduce on-site
media coverage of Summits by their national media—if only for fear of
offending excluded correspondents.
(b) Foreign Policy Consultation. The Canadian Personal Representa-
tive stressed the need for more effective foreign policy consultation
among the Summit nations and suggested that the Summit Preparatory
Group and the Summit itself might provide a framework for such con-
sultation. The British and other Representatives suggested that it
would be best to proceed pragmatically—i.e., to follow the Venice prec-
edent by arranging a meeting among the seven nations’ foreign policy
experts a month or two before the Ottawa Summit in order to prepare
for discussion of foreign policy issues at that Summit. The Canadians
seemed to recede from their more ambitious proposal in the face of this
suggestion. There was no discussion of existing Four Power procedures
for political consultation.
(c) Future Summits. It was noted that the Ottawa Summit would be
the last in the first cycle of seven Summit meetings, one of which had
now taken place in each of the Summit nations. A question to be consid-
ered at Ottawa would be whether to proceed with a second cycle. If so,
the next host would be France in 1982 and the United States in 1983.
(This is consistent with past practice, which has, with a few exceptions,
not involved Summits being hosted by a country that is holding a na-
tional election in the Summit year. That practice is not surprising: Since
one of the main reasons for holding Summits has been to justify by in-
ternational consensus such politically unpopular economic decisions as
increased access to domestic markets for foreign imports, heads of gov-
ernment have rarely sought to draw attention to Summitry in domestic
election campaigns, although Prime Minister Thatcher is reported to
believe that the preceding Labour government tried to do so.)
2. North-South. The morning meeting on December 10 discussed
the list of questions that the Canadian government had prepared, on
the basis of submissions from other Summit governments, regarding

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
North-South issues. (See Tab A.)2 These questions were intended to
provide a basis for the study of foreign aid that the Personal Repre-
sentatives had been asked at the Venice Summit to undertake for the
Ottawa Summit. It was agreed that each Personal Representative
should submit short answers to these questions, which would be dis-
cussed at the next meeting of the Personal Representatives. (I have
asked the US agencies concerned to prepare these draft answers.) The
next meeting will be February 18 and 19, with a dinner beforehand on
February 17. The United Kingdom Personal Representative indicated
that HMG might host the meeting in London. Three people per country
should attend. (The US Delegation to such meetings has consisted in
the past of the US Personal Representative, the Under Secretary of the
Treasury for Monetary Affairs, and the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs.) After discussion of these questions by the Personal
Representatives in February, they will agree on how the paper re-
flecting that discussion should be prepared for the Ottawa Summit. A
4–5 page introduction, dealing with the wider policy framework within
which these questions is to be addressed, will be prepared by Horst
Schulman, the German Personal Representative.
3. Other Economic Issues. At lunch on December 10, these issues
were discussed:
(a) Macro-Economic Policy. The first step in planning the Ottawa
Summit discussion of macro-economic issues will be to ask someone to
perform the function that Charlie Schultze has undertaken to the satis-
faction of Summit governments in the past—i.e., to prepare a paper on
macro-economic prospects and policies for the Summit Preparatory
Group. The general expectation was that this person will be Charlie
Schultze’s successor as head of EPC Bureau of the seven Summit na-
tions’ macro-economic experts. The new head of the US Council of Eco-
nomic Advisers will be asked to host a March meeting of this Bureau in
Washington, where he will presumably also be asked to head the Bu-
reau and write this paper. The Canadian Personal Representative will
raise this matter at the February Personal Representatives’ meeting.
(b) International Monetary Policy. Whether, and if so how, the Ot-
tawa Summit might address international monetary issues, including
the substitution account, will be considered at the Personal Representa-
tives’ February meeting.
(c) Nuclear Fuel Supply. There was a brief discussion of whether the
Ottawa Summit should consider the issue of US nuclear fuel supply for
Europe and Japan. The Personal Representatives agreed that the US
2 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated and unsigned list of 21 questions
entitled “Aid and Other Contributions to Developing Countries—Consolidated Short
List of Questions.”

International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
would prepare an informal paper describing ways in which this issue
might be addressed, and the pros and cons of doing so. I have asked the
State Department to prepare such a paper, drawing, among other
things, on the substance of the discussions that Ambassador Gerard
Smith had in late 1979 with British, French, German, and Japanese
representatives
about
changes
in
present
nuclear
fuel
supply
arrangements.
4. Energy. At the afternoon meeting on December 10, the Ottawa
Summit energy agenda was discussed.
(a) Monitoring. All agreed that the Ottawa Summit should monitor
fulfillment of energy commitments made at the Venice Summit. This
will include monitoring of Venice agreements regarding international
cooperation to develop new technologies, as well of individual coun-
tries’ national actions to achieve the agreed Venice energy production
and conservation goals. The seven nation High Level Group, estab-
lished at Venice to undertake this monitoring in cooperation with IEA
head Lantzke, will prepare a preliminary report for the Personal Repre-
sentatives by early March, and a final report in May or June. The French
suggested that this Group might also consider whether the production
and conservation targets agreed at Venice should be changed, since
they believe that these targets rest on over-optimistic assumptions re-
garding future OPEC production. The Japanese and others demurred,
but seemed mildly pacified when the French indicated that they would
only raise the need for change in targets if the High Level Group re-
ported that large changes were required by new developments.
(b) Relation to World Bank. It was agreed that the Ottawa Summit
might give a further push to the World Bank’s creation of an affiliate,
largely financed by the private market, to help the LDCs produce more
energy, as discussed at Venice, and that this should be a second item on
the Ottawa Summit’s energy agenda.
(c) Oil Bank. The French and Italian Personal Representatives
pushed for Summit discussion of proposals that their Energy Ministers
have made for new agreements regarding creation of an allied oil stock-
pile and drawing rights on that stockpile. It was agreed that each
Summit Personal Representative would advise the Canadians in two
weeks as to whether he would object to the High Level Group exam-
ining these proposals. Since then the British have objected, suggesting
that these issues should be considered, instead, in the International En-
ergy Agency and the European Community. The Japanese and
Germans have also indicated some reservations, but are prepared to go
along with a consensus in favor of considering these issues. The other
Personal Representatives agreed that the French and Italian gov-
ernments were entitled to consideration of their proposals in the course

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
of Summit preparations. The Canadians will raise this issue again at the
February meeting.
(d) Long-Term Strategy. It was agreed that each Personal Repre-
sentative would distribute to the other Representatives before the Feb-
ruary 18–19 meeting a paper about whether long-term oil pricing and
production strategy should be included on the Ottawa Summit agenda.
(The view of the State Department, which is preparing the US paper, is
that it would not be desirable for the Summit to get into this issue,
unless it seems that the OPEC countries are likely soon to agree on such
a strategy.)
(e) Nuclear Waste. It was agreed that the US Personal Representa-
tive would distribute to the other Representatives before the February
18–19 meeting a paper indicating whether the Ottawa Summit should
consider this issue and, if so, in what context. (This task has also been
assigned to the State Department.)
5. Illicit Payments. I reminded the Personal Representatives’ Group
that the Venice Summit had agreed that if our effort to conclude a UN
agreement prohibiting illicit payments “falters, we will seek to con-
clude an agreement among our countries, but open to all, with the same
objective.” Others noted that the US now labors under a disadvantage,
since US law prohibits such payments while exporters in other coun-
tries are not similarly inhibited. The Canadian chairman asked that the
US prepare a paper on how such an agreement might be negotiated in
preparation for the Ottawa Summit, with a view to seeking acceptance
of the agreement at that Summit. (I have asked the State Department to
prepare such a paper, for distribution to the Personal Representatives
before their February meeting.)
Henry Owen3
3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy
253.
Memorandum From Edward Fried and Henry Owen to
President-Elect Carter1
Washington, November 26, 1976
SUBJECT
Redirecting Foreign Aid
1. The Problem. During the campaign, you signalled your intent to
follow a more forthcoming policy toward the developing countries. Re-
lations have worsened over the past few years because the United
States has been the most hard-nosed of the industrial countries in re-
sisting the demands of the developing countries for a “new interna-
tional economic order.”2 For the most part, these demands are not prac-
tical and the United States, as the richest and most powerful of the
industrial countries, has to take much of the heat for opposing them.
The new administration will be able to soften its rhetoric and explore
the more moderate proposals sympathetically, but these actions will
not go far to meet the demands of the poor countries. Development
assistance through concessional and non-concessional capital transfers
is the only major area where a new U.S. policy could make a big differ-
ence; but at the moment U.S. policy on foreign aid is in a state of
paralysis.
2. Why Is This So? The developing countries could effectively use a
great deal more foreign capital than they are now able to mobilize. Yet
U.S. performance has been getting worse for years; the volume of eco-
nomic aid we supply on concessional terms is down about 40 percent
from a decade ago, adjusted for inflation. Furthermore, we have re-
strained the hard lending programs of the World Bank and the regional
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
to Carter under cover of a December 3 memorandum from Aaron and Lake. Carter ini-
tialed at the top of the page of the cover memorandum and wrote: “Good info—Include
for early Jan mtg w/Congress leaders.” (Ibid.) At the time of this memorandum, both Ed-
ward Fried and Henry Owen were with the Brookings Institution, Fried as a Senior
Fellow and Owen as the Director of Foreign Policy Studies.
without a vote a Declaration on the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order (UNGA Resolution A/RES/3201 (S–VI)) and a Programme of Action on the Estab-
lishment of a New International Economic Order (UNGA Resolution A/RES/3202
Document 257.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
banks, that is, the loans they make on essentially market rates of in-
terest and which require little in the way of budgetary resources from
member governments.
The hard fact is that aid programs—both bilateral and multilat-
eral—are in trouble on the Hill and the administration has done little to
change the situation, even though there is ample reason to do so and
powerful new grounds for making the case. If the United States is to
move effectively to improve North-South relations, it will have to break
the aid bottleneck at home. This would require a new sense of direction
and purpose, a moderate increase of funding in FY 1978, and a substan-
tial reorganization of our programs.
3. The Ford Approach. Most of the outgoing administration’s effort
has gone into persuading the Congress to provide military aid and eco-
nomic supporting assistance to bolster U.S. military allies and to use as
a bargaining counter or as a political payoff in Asian, Middle East, and
African negotiations. Such attention as it has been willing to devote to
development aid has gone to bilateral aid, which can be used more
readily to advance short-term U.S. foreign policy purposes. The result
has been a growing and embarrassing shortfall on the multilateral
front: The Congress has been unwilling to appropriate the funds to ful-
fill our commitments to provide capital for the World Bank and its soft
loan affiliate, the International Development Agency (IDA), for the
Inter-American Development Bank, and for the Asian Development
Bank. There is a shortfall of $500 million past due these institutions, and
the payment of an additional $700 million on previous commitments to
them will carry over into the next two fiscal years. In addition the ad-
ministration has dragged its feet in negotiations with other donor coun-
tries about future funding for these institutions, in particular on the
next replenishment for IDA.
4. An Alternative Approach. During the campaign, you spoke sev-
eral times (most notably in your New York speech to the Foreign Policy
Association)3 of your intention to emphasize multilateral aid. This
makes sense for several reasons:
(a) Multilateral aid is provided by international financial institu-
tions, which can insist on tough self-help conditions without being ac-
cused of U.S. “imperialism.”
(b) About two-thirds of multilateral aid is provided by other
donors—Western Europe, Japan, and the oil exporting countries. Every
dollar of U.S. aid is thus multiplied several times.
3 Carter spoke before the Foreign Policy Association on June 23; a partial transcript
of his speech was published in The New York Times. (“Excerpts From Carter’s Speech and

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
(c) Multilateral hard lending can shore up the international credit
position of the developing countries in the face of pressures from the
world recession and the oil price increase, while automatically distrib-
uting the credit risk among all industrial countries. This helps to main-
tain demand and employment in the industrial countries and reduces
the risk that debt worries will cause a crisis in the international banking
system.
(d) Multilateral concessional aid is detached from controversy
about short-term U.S. foreign policy. It can thus be provided to such
countries as India, which need it and can put it to good use, regardless
of ups and downs in their day-to-day relations with the United States.
5. A Possible Model. A specific program to shift U.S. development
aid to multilateral channels was recommended in 1970 by a task force
of prominent private citizens chaired by Rudolph Peterson, former
head of the Bank of America.4 These proposals were endorsed by many
thoughtful students of development aid; they got nowhere during the
Nixon administration but seem even more relevant today:
(a) Capital development aid should increasingly be provided
through the World Bank group and the regional development banks
(Asian Development Bank, Inter-American Development Bank, and
African Development Bank).
(b) The U.S. bilateral program should consist essentially of tech-
nical assistance, redesigned to seek technological breakthroughs in a
few major fields (e.g., population, agriculture, and education), or to ex-
periment with new forms of development cooperation (for example,
the financing of rural development banks). This bilateral program
would be carried out by a new U.S. Development Institute, which
would supplant AID (although it could selectively draw on its per-
sonnel), be supervised by a mixed public/private board of directors
and, like a foundation, have sufficient continuity to support promising
projects on a long-term basis.
(c) Supporting and military assistance should be provided sepa-
rately from development assistance, and might be included in the De-
fense Department’s appropriation; this would clarify the trade-off be-
tween funds for security assistance and for U.S. armed forces. The
security assistance program should be under the close policy guidance
of the Department of State, since it is directed to political/security
rather than development purposes—even though some or all of it
might be administered by the Department of Defense.
Since U.S. capital development aid would be provided multilater-
ally, this approach would make it easier to move toward the concept of
a world development budget, such as you suggested in your speech to
known as the Peterson Task Force) submitted its report, entitled “U.S. Foreign Assistance
in the 1970s: A New Approach,” to Nixon. For the text of the report, as well as Nixon’s

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
the New York Foreign Policy Association. Such a budget could be
drawn up by the World Bank; it would estimate for a few years ahead
the rough total of capital needed for different developing countries,
how much of this capital would be provided from domestic sources,
and how much foreign capital would be needed. These estimates could
be submitted to the Joint Ministerial Committee on Development,5 a
group of senior government officials from both industrial and devel-
oping countries, and then used as a framework within which donor
governments could consider needs for aid and present requests to
legislatures.
for foreign assistance, of which 55 percent is for development aid (in-
cluding PL 480) and 45 percent for security assistance. The breakdown
of the FY 1977 appropriation is as follows (in billion dollars):
Development Aid:
Bilateral (through AID)
P.L. 480
Multilateral
.7
Sub-total....................................3.1
Security Assistance:
Military
.8
Economic (of which
.75 to Israel and
.75 to Egypt)
Sub-total....................................2.6
A redirection of foreign assistance, featuring heavy emphasis on
multilateral development aid, a redesigned bilateral technical assist-
ance program, and a declining security assistance program would re-
quire the following:
—An increase of about $1 billion for multilateral aid in the FY 1978
budget. This would clear up past due accounts, mostly in subscriptions
to the Inter-American Development Bank, and pay for the U.S. share of
5 Apparently a reference to the Joint Ministerial Committee of the Boards of Gov-
ernors of the World Bank and the Fund on the Transfer of Real Resources to Developing
Countries (more commonly referred to as at the Development Committee), which was es-

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
the fifth replenishment of IDA, negotiations for which are currently
under way (see below).6
—Holding the bilateral aid program to the present level of about $1 bil-
lion, while it is revamped and new funding requirements are estab-
lished. (The Ford administration reportedly will be asking for an in-
crease in bilateral aid in the 1978 budget). Eventually, the bilateral aid
should decline as it is redirected to the provision of technical assistance.
—Reappraisal of security assistance programs, notably to lay out the
future level of funding and its implications for foreign policy and the
defense budget. Some reduction seems feasible.
The increase in the FY 1978 appropriation for multilateral aid is
large because your administration will have to make up in one year for
many years of lagging U.S. attention to, if not neglect of, these pro-
grams. This will be an important budget decision. A strong U.S. lead
now would exert an immediate positive influence on U.S. relations
with the developing countries; more foot-dragging would be damaging
to those relations.
The key decision—the U.S. position on the fifth replenishment of
IDA covering the period 1978–80—will have to be taken early in the
year. All donor countries except the United States and Saudi Arabia
have agreed on a total replenishment for the three years of $8 billion, of
million by the OPEC countries. The U.S. share would be 30 percent of
the total, requiring contributions of $800 million a year beginning in FY
1978. If IDA is not assured of new financing soon, it will have to cut its
program drastically. This would be costly to the poorest countries,
since IDA’s loans are restricted to these countries and represent the
largest single element in their receipts of concessional aid.
If we phase bilateral aid into a smaller more effective technical
assistance program and reduce security assistance, we should be able
to support higher levels of multilateral concessional aid and to take the
lead in negotiations with other donor countries to achieve this objec-
tive. Putting U.S. influence squarely behind multilateral aid, which is
politically disinterested, would be convincing evidence that the U.S.
objective is to improve the welfare of poor countries, not to influence
and Lake noted, at Owen’s request, that Ford would “request an FY 77 supplemental ap-
propriation of $540 million to make up U.S. arias [arrears?] with international financial in-
for IDA V contributions. Together with other funds for international finance institutions,
billion. The point is that as it leaves office, the current Administration is taking a ‘high op-
tion’ in funding international financial institutions after a long period of stringency and
even neglect.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
their politics. This would be effective foreign policy for North-South
relations.
In addition, the United States should be encouraging the World
Bank and regional banks to expand their hard lending programs by in-
creasing their subscribed capital. This mostly requires government
guarantees (callable capital), rather than budgetary resources (paid-in
capital). With their credit guaranteed by these increased subscriptions,
the international institutions will be able to borrow more extensively in
private capital markets and re-lend the proceeds to the developing
countries on commercial terms.
The ability of many of the better off developing countries to service
debt on these terms attests to the fundamental change that has taken
place in their position. Most of them no longer depend on concessional
aid; they can secure loans from the multilateral institutions at market
rates of interest, which support and supplement their own access to pri-
vate capital markets. As a result, concessional aid now can be concen-
trated on the poorest countries. They need more of it, but if it is pro-
vided multilaterally the burden for any one donor country, even the
United States, will not be large and will be within our past level of for-
eign aid, because of the decline in bilateral development and security
aid.
Furthermore, over the years the international financial institutions
have grown steadily and have now reached the point where they are
far and away the largest single channel for providing capital to the de-
veloping countries. These institutions have their failings, but these are
more than offset by the fact that the institutions have made the world’s
development effort international in character. Bilateral aid, whether
from the United States or other countries, increasingly has become a
political anachronism.
In short, as far as capital transfers to the developing countries are
concerned, we have entered into a new and more promising phase, but
we have yet to make this clear in presentations of our capital assistance
programs to the Congress or to the public.
7. Next Steps.
(a) Funding. As indicated above, decisions on the IDA replenish-
ment and on the FY 1978 budget request will have to be taken early in
1977, and will heavily influence political relations with developing
countries.
(b) Reorganization of AID. It would be desirable now to commission
a study to explore the pro’s and con’s of reorganizing the U.S. bilateral
aid program and moving purposefully to a multilateral approach. To
argue that multilateral aid makes much more economic and political
sense today than bilateral aid is not an unqualified vote for the manage-
ment or policies of international financial institutions; there is much

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
criticism of these institutions on the Hill, and this needs to be carefully
weighed on its merits. This study might be carried out in one of several
ways: (i) the new Secretary of State might be asked to organize such a
study within the executive branch; or (ii) a Commission of distin-
guished private citizens might be asked to explore the question; or
(iii) a public policy research institution, such as Brookings, might be
asked to undertake the study with substantial involvement of members
of Congress. An executive branch study was successful in producing a
new program in 1961,7 but the danger of a bias toward the status quo
exists. Either of the other courses would be consistent with your state-
ment during the campaign that you would ask for an outside assess-
ment of aid early in your administration. Reaction to a new Commis-
sion of private citizens might be unfavorable because there is a long
history of outside commissions studying U.S. foreign aid.
(c) Care should be taken not to foreclose this new approach by unsuitable
appointments. The person selected to head AID should be open to
change and have the kind of background that would be suitable for a
technical assistance program, if that should be this agency’s future.
Edward Fried
Henry Owen8
7 Possibly a reference to the 1961 foreign aid task force headed by International Co-
operation Administration Director Henry Labouisse; see Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol.
IX, Foreign Economic Policy, Document 103.
8 Fried and Owen both initialed above these typed signatures.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
254.
Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC 81
Washington, January 21, 1977
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
ALSO
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Secretary of Agriculture
The Secretary of Commerce
The Secretary of Labor
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Chairman, Council of Economic Advisers
The United States Representative to The United Nations
The Special Representative for Trade Negotiations
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Assistant to the President for Energy Policy
SUBJECT
North-South Strategy (U)
The President has directed that the Policy Review Committee un-
dertake an analysis of, and provide options concerning, U.S. policy on
relations between developed and developing nations. The economic as-
pects of this analysis are to be staffed through the Economic Policy
Group prior to their consideration by the National Security Council.
The agencies listed in parentheses should take leadership responsi-
bility for the following subjects:
—Institutional arrangements, including forums in which North-
South issues can be discussed, with proposed strategies for UNCTAD
and CIEC2 (State)
—Commodities, including commodity agreements, the Common
Fund,3 and price indexation (Treasury and State)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 2, PRM/
a recipient, but was deleted on January 22 per Inderfurth’s instructions. NSC Staff Secre-
tary Jeanne Davis forwarded a copy of PRM 8 to the Secretary of Defense under cover of a
January 26 memorandum in which she noted that he had been “inadvertently omitted
from the list of addressees.” (Ibid.) Acting NSC Staff Secretary Michael Hornblow for-
warded a copy to the AID Administrator under cover of a February 9 memorandum in
which he noted the AID Administrator’s addition to the list of addressees of PRM 8.
3 At the end of its fourth session in Nairobi, Kenya, in May 1976, UNCTAD agreed
to consider the establishment of a Common Fund to finance a buffer stock program de-
signed to smooth out primary commodity price fluctuations. See Foreign Relations,

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
—International
financial
matters,
including
aid
and
debt
(Treasury)
—Market access for manufactured goods (State)
—Energy (Schlesinger), relations with OPEC and other LDCs
(State), and related financial issues (Treasury)
—Food (Agriculture)
—Migration of workers (Labor)
—Technology transfer and direct investment (Commerce)
—North-South political issues and the conceptual aspect of the
structure of U.S. relations with the LDCs (State)
Each study should analyze the contribution of the various policy
options to U.S. domestic and global economic interests, humanitarian
interests, international political relationships, and security interests. It
should include an assessment of the impact of each option on the in-
terests and objectives of other industrialized democracies. Each study
should also suggest specific initiatives which the U.S., or the industrial-
ized countries together, might take, and each should assess relevant
Congressional considerations, including the nature, timing, and
strategy of legislative action. These studies should be completed by
February 28 for early submission to the President through the National
Security Council.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
255.
Memorandum From Roger Hansen of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 10, 1977
SUBJECT
Suggested Approach to the North-South “Conceptualization” Effort
After thinking about the best approach to this problem during my
first two weeks on the job, let me briefly outline the pros and cons of
four alternative procedures and request your reaction and advice.
Please excuse the lengthy memo, but if we can’t figure out a productive
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 25,
Thornton. Aaron wrote at the top of the page: “ZB—I have asked Hansen to set up a
meeting with you me Hormats + Owen for early next week. D.A.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
way for me to serve you and the President, then it really doesn’t make
much sense to keep me on the payroll even though I would hate to
leave. First, one word about the task you have given me.
Task Definition
As I understand it, you would like me to try to develop a policy-
relevant conceptual framework against which all U.S. governmental
decisions having any impact on any or all aspects of “North-South” re-
lationships—economic, political, strategic, normative and institu-
tional—can be measured. I assume you consider this task to be of some
importance because without such a conceptual framework, the gov-
ernment will continue to make decisions on the merits of each case as it
arises, with (1) no attention paid to the impact of a decision on a purely
“economic” issue (e.g., the Common Fund) on any other issue on the
“North-South” agenda (e.g., LOS III, G–77 and Non-aligned policy
vis-a-vis the Middle East situation, the strengthening of Lome Conven-
tion ties, proliferation, etc.); and (2) little attention to the implicit
tradeoffs within the “economic” realm (e.g., Common Fund versus
trade liberalization, new sources of “automatic” resource transfers,
etc.). In short, I assume the task to be to see if the U.S. Government
cannot rise above “eclectic incrementalism” in its approach to
North-South relations, and to institutionalize an approach, perhaps in-
creasingly multilateral (stage one, greater OECD concentration; stage
two, OECD–G–77 consultation and/or negotiations) in which all im-
plicit tradeoffs across the relevant spectrum of North-South issues are
automatically raised and considered.
Option No. 1—The Straight PRM–8 Approach
Pros:
1. The PRM–8 process is well under way; the due date for all
papers is February 28.2 Answers to the questions raised in it are needed
for spring 1977 North-South negotiations. If the agencies can be forced
to produce papers which are broad in scope and medium-term in
time-frame, they can be a valuable input into the assigned task.
2. If the PRM–8 process can be used to force the agencies to address
the final issue listed (“North-South political issues and the conceptual
aspect of the structure of U.S. relations with the LDCs”), my task will be
considerably facilitated.
3. If the tasked agencies also pay attention to the first sentence of
the final paragraph of the PRM (“Each study should analyze the contri-
bution of the various policy options to U.S. domestic and global eco-
nomic interests, humanitarian interests, international political relation-
2 See Document 254.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
ships, and security interests.”) my task should be all the more aided by
the PRM–8 process.
Cons:
1. Most of the papers are very likely to be unifocal (economic),
short-term and biased in favor of no change. This is probable for three
reasons. First, most papers are coming through the EPG process.
Second, most are being written by parts of the bureaucracy which have
long-held positions to defend (e.g., the E Bureau of State). Third, most
of these parts of the bureaucracy fall into what I call the “false con-
creteness” school in their conception of the North-South issue. Most are
devout believers that the “South” does not exist as a serious diplomatic
unit; that whatever solidarity is present is rhetorical only; and that the
U.S. can and should “get the LDCs back to rational, bilateral relation-
ships with the U.S.”
These people may be right. But they are not likely to produce
helpful or intelligent papers on the crucial issues.
2. Because of the upcoming negotiations (UNCTAD, CIEC), the
short-term bias of the paper writers, and, to some extent, the wording of
the PRM, the focus of the exercise is very likely to be very short-term in
nature. If so, it will be very difficult to use the PRM–8 process to accom-
plish my task as I interpret it.
3. Since most papers are coming via the EPG route, I personally
have no involvement in the process until the papers reach the NSC
proper. And even if I did, the short-term deadline date (February 28),
the nature of the players, and the focus on upcoming negotiations all
inhibit my ability to use the PRM–8 process until a very late stage in the
game. [None of this should be viewed as a criticism of Bob Hormats,
who is one of my closest personal friends, who has been very helpful,
and who has always had my professional admiration. It is simply a
statement of an unavoidable bureaucratic dilemma.]3
thinking alone. They are reflected by many people with whom I have
talked in both State and Treasury. Even a very high-placed CFR Com-
mittee on Studies colleague of yours now at State with more than a
passing interest in North-South issues is concerned that the State
channels for PRM–8 are most likely to produce an unproductive set of
papers for the broader task you have assigned to me. And the worst ev-
idence concerning my fears surfaced today (February 10) when an As-
sistant Secretary who had just finished reading the E Bureau’s 57 page
draft of the most crucial issue—that relating to “political issues and the
3 Brackets in the original.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
conceptual aspect . . .”4—told me that “it is the most narrowly focused,
damage-limitation exercise I’ve ever read. It gives the President a view
which presents only problems, and no opportunities. It’s so bad we can’t
even improve it with revisions, and are considering an outright dissent
and maybe a proposed alternate draft. But, given channels here, I don’t
think we can possibly win.” This characterization, to repeat, is made
about the sole “political” paper on the PRM–8 list, which was assigned
to the E Bureau. Furthermore, these concerns are shared by S P at State.5
Option No. 2—The Two-PRM Approach
This approach would recognize the high probabilities that the
PRM–8 papers will not be of much assistance to my broader task,
though perhaps quite useful for the next six months of discussions and
negotiations. Therefore it would call for a second PRM specifically ad-
dressed to the longer-term issues with more stress on the linkages between
economic, political, security and normative issues. The exercise might
best begin immediately after the PRM–8 papers were completed.
Pros:
1. The new set of instructions could provoke much more detailed
intra- and inter-Agency thought and discussion of the longer-term con-
ceptual framework being sought.
2. A different set of bureaucratic actors, without long-held positions
on the issues to defend, would provide the major impetus for the re-
view. For example, a carefully worded PRM might guarantee that
much more initial input was produced by the regional bureaus, SP and
the IO Bureau at State rather than the E Bureau. If political, institutional
and security questions are asked—noting that much of the economic
analysis has already been provided in the PRM–8 process and noting
further that that material would be used in the second stage—then the
people involved from the very start will be those (probably) better
qualified to examine the broader issues we wish to analyze.
3. If a new set of actors can become involved from the beginning
under new PRM instructions, there would be no need to involve the
EPG. We would already have their PRM–8 input, we could see that
people like Hormats, Chuck Frank,6 and Fred Bergsten/Dick Cooper/
Tony Solomon stand-ins were involved so that all new economic issues
would be analyzed with the highest degree of professionalism, and
4 Not found.
5 In a February 11 memorandum to Aaron, Hansen discussed in greater detail the
concerns that had arisen within the Department of State about the draft response to PRM
6 Charles Frank was Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and Social
Affairs.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
last, but (parochially?) not least, I could actually draft the new PRM
and be centrally involved from the outset (as, of course, could Tom
Thornton now that he’s on board as the permanent North-South
“cluster leader”).
Cons:
1. For various bureaucratic reasons you might prefer not to ask for
back-to-back North-South PRMs.
2. There may be no way to assure that a more bureaucratically “dis-
interested” and analytically “interested” group would be put to work
on the new PRM by Department Secretariats. No matter how the PRM
is worded, Secretary Vance, for example, might end up sending it to the
E Bureau.
3. Even with a completely recast and non-overlapping mandate,
entrenched bureaucratic interests (mostly of an economic nature) might
limit the capacity of the PRM system at its best to play the kind of con-
ceptualizing role which you are after in the North-South arena.
Option No. 3—Radical Surgery on PRM–8
This option presupposes that the papers, coming through the EPG
process, will fall far short of what will be required to present the Presi-
dent with a cogent option (or policy) paper. The radical surgery would
necessitate a sharp break in the process once the PRM–8 papers get
through the EPG process and reach the NSC per se.
Pros:
1. All good work could be salvaged; all bad work sent back for re-
drafting or scuttled. For example, the State paper on political aspects
could simply be dropped as “not germane at this time.”
2. It would avoid a second North-South PRM.
3. Within the NSC a great deal of alternate drafting of the worst
work might be undertaken and (hopefully) substituted for the Agency
originals.
Cons:
1. This approach might call for you to take harsh actions on papers
cleared by Cabinet members. You might wish to avoid being put into
this position.
2. The procedure will probably leave major gaps to be filled, and
could raise the issue of “the proper role of the NSC” as a major drafter
of sections of PRMs.
3. Even if the cracks could be papered over, it is very difficult to be-
lieve that the end product would not be a rather inferior product.
Option No. 4—A Radical Alternative to PRM–8
The PRM–8 is off to such a bad start at State that two major bureaus
within the Department now feel that they may end up carrying out-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
right dissents to the Secretary rather than attempting to rework the
present draft. It is possible that they may try for a major postponement
in the intra-Departmental due date to write a major alternative presen-
tation. In either case, there is reason to be concerned with the proba-
bility of success of their challenge, since the “official” draft has been
handled through all the proper channels, and perhaps with minor
changes, will probably receive the endorsement of the Under Secretary
for Economic Affairs.
Given this situation some consideration should be given to with-
drawing PRM–8 before it proceeds any further. A new PRM with much
more lead time and a newly written mandate would then present the
opportunity for a much broader consideration of the relevant issues.
Alternatively, what you referred to as a “study group” approach might
be attempted in place of the PRM approach.
Pros:
1. If the PRM–8 process is to produce anything of value, much
more time is needed and a rather lengthy intra-State Department re-
view process will be required. The only other way to circumvent a
choice between a bad PRM and postponed deadline would be for you
to intervene directly with Secretary Vance to express concern that the
State draft is totally out of character with the President’s campaign
themes on the subject and in no way aids in the process of thinking
about the issues from a new perspective. The draft is presently charac-
terized as “pre-Kissinger” by thoughtful critics within the Department.
And unless you desire to intercede shortly, it might be far better to
withdraw PRM–8 than to let it proceed. For if, without very major
changes, it does survive the EPG/NSC process, it will serve the Presi-
dent very poorly.
2. A hand-picked study group might be the only way to get imagi-
native thinking on a rather new subject from the bureaucracy.
3. Is an early North-South PRM needed? A good one would be nice
to have, but with the present odds against getting one out of PRM–8, a
withdrawal of the request may be the best way to avoid the unfortunate
set of choices entailed in the options.
Cons:
1. Decisions will have to be made on some issues on the
North-South agenda shortly, i.e., a position on the Common Fund, and
on CIEC issues. The latter, of course, can be postponed for a few
months.
2. Withdrawal of PRM–8 may avoid a minor disaster, but it pro-
vides no positive answer to the need for serious inter-Agency consider-
ation of North-South issues.
3. Perhaps, despite the lead role of State in PRM–8 preparation,
other agencies will object so strongly to State drafts that the exercise can
be saved.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
RECOMMENDATIONS
(1) Do not accept Option No. 1 (The Straight Approach).
(2) Do not accept Option No. 2 (The Two-PRM Approach) unless
you find it preferable to Option No. 3 (Radical Surgery), Option No. 4
(Radical Alternative), or a combination thereof.
(3) Accept Option No. 3 unless you feel that the potential conflict
this might create between the NSC and some major Departments is a
risk you are not prepared to accept at this point in time.
(4) If you feel that the system is not ready for the risks entailed in
Option No. 3, approve Option No. 4. If you do so, we (Hormats,
Thornton and Hansen) can explore the relative merits of a new PRM
versus the “study group” approach.
My apologies to both you and Bob Hormats for not consulting with
him on the actual wording of this memorandum. I have discussed it in
general with him, but he has been so busy I have not consulted him on it
in any real detail. And perhaps I am acting too hastily, but right or
wrong my personal judgment is that you may have to make a decision
on this issue by early next week at the latest, or lose the flexibility you
still retain at this time.
256.
Memorandum From Roger Hansen of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, February 16, 1977
SUBJECT
Suggested Approach to the “Second Track” of the PRM–8 Process
As I interpreted the results of this morning’s meeting,2 the fol-
lowing scenario will unfold over the coming 2–3 months:
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 25,
memorandum of conversation was found. Hansen described the conclusions reached at
the meeting in a February 17 memorandum to Thornton. (Carter Library, National Secu-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
(1) Work on the EPG track will continue as planned, and as sched-
uled. The only change is that I will have access to all the draft papers,
will attend the Group’s meetings with Bob Hormats, and will suggest
just enough reservations about the short-term nature of the work being
done by the EPG (valuable as it is as a CIEC preparation exercise) to
open the door to the “second track.”
(2) The “second track” will begin with the assembling of a “Study
Group”3 (I don’t know what to call it, and welcome any suggestions)
which I will pull together and chair. (In putting the group together I
will work closely with Hormats, and will be in close enough touch with
people like Nye, Lake and Maynes that the group’s membership and
freedom to examine North-South problems within a broader and
longer-term frame of reference should be assured. Tom Thornton will,
of course, be included and closely consulted.) The Group will work to a
schedule which looks about as follows:
1. Group named and officially notified of first meeting by the end
of next week (Feb. 25).4
2. Group will meet for first time early the following week (by
March 2) to discuss:
a) work of the EPG;
b) raison d’etre of this “second track” procedure;
c) what the group will attempt to accomplish, a schedule of
meetings, and a target date for an “options paper” which will allow for
the expression of a relevant range of views on U.S. policy regarding the
conceptualization and management of “North-South” issues. In order
to free the Group from the constraint of Agency clearance of views,
unless you direct otherwise, I would set up the Group on the ground-
rule that no individual or agency positions would be identified. I don’t
see any other way of moving with the speed needed to develop a paper
to raise questions for PRC and Presidential consideration prior to the
Summit meeting.
3. The Group would have its first substantive meeting the fol-
lowing week (March 7–11). The subject would be an initial draft paper
prepared by me and circulated at least three days prior to the meeting.
EPG papers would also be available to the Group so that it would un-
derstand the probable “starting point” for the economic aspects of
North-South relations.
4. A series of weekly meetings would be held in order to identify
areas of agreement and disagreement—conceptual and substantive.
Papers for these meetings would be written in order to add substance to
the argumentation for or against various options. By the end of the
3 Aaron crossed out the word “Study” and replaced it with “PRC working.”
4 Aaron underlined the date “(Feb. 25).”

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
process (eight weekly meetings?) a paper should have emerged which
would accomplish at minimum the following objective:
a) Alert the Administration to the weaknesses as well as the strengths
of the CIEC “creeping incrementalist” approach to dealing with the
Group of 77.5
b) Analyze the tradeoffs within the strictly economic realm itself as the
U.S. deals with responses to LDC demands.6 Right now the Adminis-
tration, having inherited CIEC from the past, is letting G–77 demands set
the parameters of our response; the G–77 asks for concessions in four
major areas, and we are struggling to produce modest concessions in
each area without asking the prior question, to wit, shouldn’t our re-
sponses in some areas be “nothing doing,” and be quite responsive in
others?
c) Analyze the degree to which a more integrated approach to policy-
making vis-a-vis the LDCs is desirable and feasible. The G–77 plays
“Linkage politics;” shouldn’t we? Since we face them in almost every
international negotiating forum—LOS III, Environmental Conferences,
Food Conferences, Population Conferences, Human Rights Confer-
ences, etc.—shouldn’t we begin a much more integrated look at trade-
offs across different issues within the so-called North-South agenda?
Example: What if a U.S. (better, an OECD) commitment to reach a 0.7%
GNP official aid target by 1980 could have a substantial positive influ-
ence on the spread of population control programs, agreements on re-
gional nuclear fuel reprocessing facilities, etc.? The obvious difficulty
with an integrated approach is that you may find that you don’t try it at
all, or you must carry it very far. One of the major purposes of the
Group’s exercise would be to attempt to analyze in some detail the po-
tential consequences of such an approach, positive and negative.7
d) Address much more specifically than ever before the potential
gains to general U.S. policy goals in the area of security aims (economic
as well as physical); humanitarian aims (human rights, the provision of
basic human needs, and the building of institutions to support these
goals); ecological aims (population, pollution, resource constraints, etc.);
and international institutional aims (the strengthening of existing institu-
tions and the building of new ones—e.g., the recent International Fund
for Agricultural Development funded by OECD and OPEC,8 with
voting power divided among OECD, OPEC and the LDCs on an “equal
shares” basis)—which will see that we have the appropriate institu-
tional structure with which to manage today’s and tomorrow’s so-
called “global agenda” problems (food production, nuclear prolifera-
tion, population control, etc.).9
5 Aaron wrote “ok” in the margin adjacent to this section.
6 Aaron drew a line to this sentence and wrote “EPG + [illegible]” in the margin ad-
jacent to the sentence.
7 Aaron wrote “ok” in the margin adjacent to this section.
8 The International Fund for Agricultural Development was founded in 1977.
9 Aaron twice wrote “ok” in the margin adjacent to this section, once in the upper
half of the section and once in the lower half of the section.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
David, I suddenly find that I have outlined the process I envisage
and the questions which the “second track” will seek to explore for a
PRC without directly responding to your immediate question: what
issues would I put forward in my own initial draft paper? While they
are implicit in much of the above description of the “Study Group’s”
activities, let me append in outline form a brief sample of questions (or
options) which would be fleshed out in first draft and grow from there
(or be deleted entirely) in the course of the Study Group’s responses
and the process of weekly interaction.
1. How does the U.S. presently “conceptualize” its relations with
the “South?” Does it really believe there is a “South?” If the LDCs do
have at least a weak unity for certain bargaining purposes, is it in the
U.S. interest to encourage or discourage that unity? What is the cost/ben-
efit analysis of continued attempts to drive a wedge between OPEC
and the remaining LDCs?10
2. How much validity is there to the widely-held academic view
that the growing list of “global agenda” items requires the U.S. (prob-
ably in concert with the OECD) to “accommodate” many LDC de-
mands? The view assumes that a) problems whose solutions require
the active cooperation of the LDCs are growing; and b) that “accommo-
dation” will win that cooperation. Is either half of the equation so weak
as to make the “accommodation” strategy indefensible?
3. Does the “global equity” theme sounded with increasing fre-
quency by statesmen and academics alike survive careful scrutiny?
a) Problems with the definition of “global equity.”
b) Is it a fashion, or a secular trend in international relations which
the U.S. must take seriously?
c) If it does require serious policy consideration, what is the range
of relevant U.S. options in not simply responding to a problem, but
perhaps taking an initiative? (Also, examination of domestic, OECD,
and LDC constraints on policy initiatives in the area.)
4. The U.S. Congress, the Scandinavian countries, the World Bank,
the ILO and many private but influential private sector groups (the
Club of Rome, the Aspen Institute, etc.) are now pushing for a global
“basic human needs” strategy to raise standards of living for McNa-
mara’s so-called “forgotten forty percent.” Again,11 is this a cyclical fad,
or a secular trend of growing concern? Even George Ball,12 who refuses
to take “the South” seriously, takes this strategy seriously.
10 Aaron wrote “ok” in the margin adjacent to this point and the one below.
11 Aaron underlined the phrase “raise standards of living for McNamara’s so-called
‘forgotten forty percent.’ Again,” and wrote “What would we [illegible]?” in the adjacent
margin.
12 George Ball was Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs from February
until December 1961, and thereafter Under Secretary of State until September 1966. He
was the U.S. Representative to the United Nations from June until December 1968.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
a) Is a U.S. initiative in support of such a strategy feasible or not? Is
it an initiative which might engage LDCs in a far more fundamental
and productive set of discussions and negotiations than five years of
CIECs? Or is it an initiative which would expose the Administration to
too many domestic and international dangers to warrant the effort?13
Finally, for each set of questions and judgments, the programmatic
implications for the U.S. (domestic and international) would be spelled
out. Therefore, the reader would be able to choose one option (or some
combination of the options discussed) in full recognition of the alterna-
tives (with both their costs and benefits) forgone.
To simplify things for you I’ll let you mark approve or see me
below. If you choose the latter, I’ll call your office and set up a short
appointment.14
13 Aaron wrote “Substance?” in the margin adjacent to this section.
14 Aaron indicated his approval of the “See Me” option, writing “Call Tues” below;
presumably Tuesday, February 22.
257.
Memorandum From Robert Hormats and Roger Hansen of
the National Security Council Staff to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the
President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Aaron)1
Washington, February 25, 1977
SUBJECT
Roosevelt Room
This meeting will be the first Cabinet-level look at North-South
strategy, particularly with respect to the issues with commodities.2 At
the meeting you will have the opportunity to:
—Ensure that the various options are discussed within the proper
foreign policy framework—which has tended to be overcome at times
by the nuances of various economic options at the Deputies level.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 25,
2 No memorandum of conversation of this meeting was found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—To establish at the outset that you personally view international
economic issues—and North-South issues—as major ingredients in US
foreign policy and will ensure that they are integrated with other
elements.
—To underline the need for formation of a PRC working group
to carry out the longer-term political/conceptual effort called for in
PRM–8.
Political/Economic Framework
US economic interests in the developing world have changed rad-
ically over the last ten years. Among the ranks of the nations who count
themselves as part of the Third World are the oil-rich nations, vigorous
new trading nations, nations facing the pressures of unmanageable
rates of population growth, desperately poor nations, nations wanting
to get into the nuclear game and to accumulate conventional arms, na-
tions anxious to reap the benefits of the oceans, and nations demanding
a larger share of the world’s economic pie.
The US is likely to become increasingly dependent upon devel-
oping nations for raw materials, much as it is now upon their oil. The
Commission on Supplies and Shortages estimates that in 1985 the US
will import 100% of its tin, bauxite, manganese, cobalt, chromium and
platinum, and more than 75% of its nickel, potassium, tungsten and
lead. Developing countries account for 40% of US world trade, 26% of
its direct investment abroad and 60% of the overseas loans it has pro-
vided. A number of semi-industrialized developing nations such as
Brazil, Mexico, Iran, Korea and Venezuela make up the largest portions
of these figures. A number of developing countries with large balance
of payments deficits have the capability of disrupting severely the in-
ternational financial system. And all of these countries are of great im-
portance in dealing with such “global agenda” issues as the Law of the
Sea, non-proliferation and arms control.
Of late, the developing countries have approached an increasing
number of issues with extraordinary solidarity. This stems partly from
a deep conviction by nearly all of them that in cohesion there is
strength. Just as OPEC worked together, so they believe they can like-
wise achieve positive results by common pressure—and implicitly, the
potential use of oil as leverage—on developed nations for more finan-
cial resources, for greater control over the institutions of the interna-
tional economy and for a variety of benefits in various negotiations.
It is important to recognize, however, the major differences which
exist among the developing countries and the variety of interests we
have in the Third World. Our interests in Africa do not arise from its
trade or financial importance but from the potential of its natural re-
source base and the danger of violent conflict. Our interests in Latin
America derive both from its natural resource potential and its growing
importance in world trade and finance; our strategic concerns, for the

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
moment, appear to be less compelling, except in the Caribbean area.
Our interests in Asia come not so much from its natural resource poten-
tial as from its trade, finance and strategic importance.
There are, in addition, divisions resulting from disparate growth
performance and natural resources endowments. A dozen or so devel-
oping countries, including much of South America, Mexico, Korea,
Hong Kong, Saudi Arabia and Iran have experienced remarkable eco-
nomic growth in the post-war period, surpassing the weaker industri-
alized countries of Europe. Each of these nations has significant eco-
nomic interests to defend that are far more important than any benefits
they expect to receive from the general LDC call for more concessional
aid, preferential treatment and commodity agreements. The very poor
countries of Asia and Africa would gain from more aid but, lacking
substantial amounts of raw materials, very little from commodity
agreements. A number of commodity exporting countries could gain
from commodity agreements, but have little real interest in more aid
(which would go to poorer nations).
US Interests
The US has a fundamental interest in securing the support for or,
failing that, acquiescence in an open multilateral economic system, and
orderly change within that system. Further, we have an interest in
avoidance and containment of regional disputes and in maximizing lo-
gistic support capabilities of our forces. Finally, we have a major in-
terest in constructing new global system in such areas as nuclear prolif-
eration, conventional arms sales, the controlling of terrorism, the use of
“global commons” like the oceans, population control and global food
production.
Stringent challenges by the poorer countries to the economic
system’s equity and legitimacy could undermine the world economy,
global political stability and the potential to cope successfully with the
new “global order” issue you have written so eloquently about for the
last five years.
We are not at present experiencing the same tensions as we did in
1974—with growing radical tactics of the developing countries, a tight
alliance between the OPEC cartel and the developing countries. In fact,
the developing countries appear, for the time being, to be convinced
that they may after all have a place in US foreign policy. Kissinger’s UN
and UNCTAD speeches3 made some progress in re-establishing a rea-
3 For the text of Kissinger’s speech to the Seventh Special Session of the UN General
Assembly, which he was unable to deliver but Moynihan read in his stead on September
Kissinger’s address at UNCTAD IV in Nairobi on May 6, 1976, is in the Department of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
sonable relationship with these countries at the multilateral level; they
are now waiting to see if Carter delivers on what he implied would be a
more forthcoming position.
The Commodity Issue
The only specific North-South issue to be discussed is the US ap-
proach to commodities.4 The developing countries see commodities as
one of the fundamental issues of the New International Economic
Order. In particular, they are pressing for direct government interven-
tion in markets and indirect resource transfer through such means as
indexation of commodity prices and LDC-controlled Common Fund to
finance buffer stocks for a range of commodities. The Group of 77—
supported by the UNCTAD Secretariat—has made the Common Fund
a major political objective.
The US objective is to redirect the substance of the North-South di-
alogue into areas that will improve the international economic struc-
ture to the benefit of all countries, rather than fundamentally change
it—especially because most economists believe that the demands of the
developing countries in the commodity area are extreme, and would
ultimately redound to the disadvantage of most of them. We have,
therefore, rejected direct regulation of commodity markets and
stressed instead case-by-case improvement of existing markets, liberal-
ized trade, stabilization of LDC export earnings and more orderly con-
ditions for investment in developing countries. While from an eco-
nomic point of view this is the soundest approach, we also want to be
politically sensitive in this area in order to prevent commodity issues
from becoming an obstacle to improved relations with the developing
countries—thus we wish to avoid a new confrontation over this issue.
There are five separate aspects to the commodity issue:
—With respect to how many commodities will the US agree to,
and participate in, price stabilization arrangements, including buffer
stocks, as well as other measures to improve the functioning of the
market.
—Should the US support further liberalization of arrangements to
ensure the stability of export earnings of developing countries heavily
dependent on commodity exports?
—Should the US support measures to improve the availability of
financing of buffer stocks?
—Should the US encourage or guarantee any investment in com-
modity production in LDCs?
—Should any new institutional arrangements for dealing with
commodities be proposed?
ities Options” is in the Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
There are four options which touch on these issues:
Option 1: Oppose any significant movement in the commodity
field (i.e. continue our case-by-case policy in individual commodities,
reflect a disinclination to agree to any international stabilization meas-
ures, including any buffer stocks, and oppose all versions of common
funding). This would reflect the low priority we attach to commodities
as opposed to other aspects of North-South relations, and may induce a
greater sense of realism in other countries; but it runs a strong risk of
provoking a major blow-up in North-South relations, will be opposed
by our developed country allies and get the Administration off on a
sour international note.
Option 2: Continue case-by-case approach combined with initia-
tives on several selective commodities, including a clearing-house ar-
rangement to allow one commodity buffer stock to lend to another.
This demonstrates a bit more flexibility and avoids the need to seek
Congressional appropriation of funds prior to, and in the absence of,
agreement on individual buffer stocks, but it falls far short of the LDC
desires, and will probably produce a blow-up.5
Option 3: A more integrated approach involving the establishment
of a “central depository” into which individual buffer stocks could de-
posit funds and borrow money, along with a more active effort to
identify possibilities for negotiating commodity agreements, including
buffer stocks. (This could also include the variant of putting the “cen-
tral depository” within the IMF-World Bank framework.) This would
be a more integrated program than Options 1 and 2, provide a
Common Fund type feature by allowing individual buffer stock facil-
ities to borrow from the IMF if funds were required and would thus be
reasonably well received by the developing countries and would still
enable the US to exercise control over individual commodity negotia-
tions; but it would be criticized as inadequate by the more militant de-
veloping nations, be criticized in the Congress as turning the IMF into a
development institution, and would be non-negotiable in UNCTAD.
Option 4: Accept the Common Fund and its “anti-market” ap-
proach. This would be well received by the developing countries, ease
pressure on the US and enable us to make trade-offs in other areas of
North-South relations; but by reducing financing constraints, it in-
creases the possibility of ill-conceived buffer stock arrangements, re-
duces our negotiating leverage with respect to individual commodities,
and will be strongly opposed in the Congress.6
“unites radicals/moderates.”
comprehensive long-term N–S strategy.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
We recommend that you avoid entering into the debate among
these various proposals although you may wish to question whether:
—Each of the options has the correct balance between political and
economic considerations.
—Whether by doing more in other (non-commodity) areas of the
North-South relationship, we can buy more support among the LDCs
for a less forthcoming US position on commodities; how we can gain
support from the moderates for an economically reasonable package.
—Whether our indicating in advance our willingness to be forth-
coming with respect to negotiation in certain individual commodities
(e.g. copper and rubber) would buy support among important coun-
tries enough to moderate demands for more extreme generalized
measures.
The Broader North-South Issue
The second paper to be discussed at the meeting is the State draft
(not yet received by us) of an “overview” to North-South relations7
which, at last writing, was almost totally lacking in longer-term con-
ceptualization of North-South relations. It is a source of distress to
many bureaus in State and representatives of OMB who are looking for
a longer-term analysis and orientation.
Perhaps one exchange—between Dick Cooper and Jules Katz—
captures the issue at stake and the need for your presence on Saturday.8
When examining all the papers prepared for the EPG early this week,
Cooper expressed his mild surprise that there was no paper on Law of
the Sea problems, to which Katz responded, “But Dick, that’s not a
North-South issue”. This exchange suggests how seriously an integra-
tive and conceptual track—focusing on longer-term political, security,
humanitarian and organizational aspects of North-South relations—is
needed as a fundamental part of the PRM–8 study, and how appro-
priate your presence to express this message would be on Saturday
morning.
7 Cooper circulated an undated summary of a paper entitled “PRM–8: Institutional,
Political and Conceptual Aspects of North/South Strategy” to EPG members under cover
of a February 25 memorandum. (Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional
8 February 26.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
258.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs-Designate (Bergsten) to Secretary of
the Treasury Blumenthal1
Washington, February 28, 1977
SUBJECT
My IDA V Negotiations in Paris
There were five noteworthy results of my negotiations in Paris last
Friday:2
1. The technical details surrounding the IDA V replenishment were re-
solved to the satisfaction of most, but not all, of the other donor countries. The
meeting was proposed by McNamara because of our decision to seek
Congressional authorizations of future U.S. contributions “subject to
appropriations,”3 and the resulting uneasiness of some other donor
countries that the U.S. pledge would hence be “conditional”. Most of
the group accepted our proposal to leave the IDA resolution un-
changed, with clear language in the accompanying report which recog-
nizes the “new” U.S. practice. However, the Germans have not yet
committed themselves to the proposed approach—and the Japanese,
French and Swedes are hiding behind the Germans. It still seems likely
that the agreement can be finalized at Vienna on March 14–15, as scheduled,
but it is not certain.4
2. We agreed that the IDA V replenishment would become active only
upon appropriation of the first annual U.S. tranche (as well as the
three-year authorization); the donors would meet to reconsider the sit-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
velopment Association (IDA). No classification marking. Reviewed by Godley on March
2 and Hessler on March 3. Copies were sent to Solomon and Deputy Assistant Secretary
of State for Economic and Business Affairs Paul Boeker. A stamped notation at the top of
the page reads: “Noted by W.M.B.”
2 February 25.
3 In a February 24 memorandum to Blumenthal on his upcoming meeting with the
IDA Deputies, Bergsten noted this decision was “required by the Budget Act. My posi-
tion, and that of the World Bank, is that this ‘change’ is simply an explicit recognition of
the de facto situation and that existing Bank practices can continue, unaltered.” (National
Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs
4 On March 15 in Vienna, the IDA Deputies agreed on the terms of the fifth IDA re-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
uation if there is any slippage.5 This will place maximum pressure on
the Congress to come through, but is fully consistent with all of our un-
derstandings with them. In addition, any cuts in the IDA appropriation
can be attributed to our (delayed) contribution to IDA IV—so the Ad-
ministration maintains great flexibility domestically. (Needless to say, this
latter possibility must be held extremely closely.)
3. For its part, the IDA management agreed—for the first time—to
stop committing U.S. capital before it is appropriated. I regard this as a major
step forward. Current IDA practice is both fiscally imprudent and ex-
tremely damaging to our position with the Congress, which is just get-
ting on to the fact that its appropriation prerogatives have been badly
undermined by such advance commitments.
4. The other donors, with varying degrees of enthusiasm, appeared to ac-
cept our call for a thorough review of the future allocation of IDA lending—
hopefully leading to a much lower share for India (now getting 40 per-
cent) with more going to Egypt, Africa and perhaps others.6 They rec-
ognized that there has been no such review since mid-1973, despite
massive changes in the world economic situation. We should pursue
this initiative through the Executive Board at the World Bank, and I
raised the issue with McNamara today. DELIVERY ON THIS ISSUE
WILL, IN MY JUDGMENT, GO FARTHER THAN ANY OTHER
SINGLE STEP TO RESTORE CONGRESSIONAL SUPPORT FOR OUR
IDA, AND PERHAPS OVERALL IFI, REQUESTS—and it makes sense
in both economic and international political terms as well.
5. Most important of all, the session began a process—which will nec-
essarily be slow—of restoring others’ faith in U.S. policy in this area. Several
speakers candidly said that they distrusted the last Administration, or
at least did not know where it stood. They believe that we are sincere,
are working hard, and may be able to deliver. Last Wednesday’s7
approval by the House Appropriations Subcommittee of our long-
5 The terms of the replenishment included “a procedure whereby the United States
in signing up for IDA V must make an unqualified commitment for the first installment
of $800 million and may make a qualified commitment (subject to appropriations from
the Congress) for the second and third installments.” The rules governing the activation
of the second and third installments were structured so as “to require a full appropriation
of the US share each year for the replenishment to proceed as planned.” If need be, the
IDA Deputies could convene in order “to consider what steps to take to obtain the neces-
sary commitments.” (Ibid.)
noted that he intended “to begin the process of seeking support from other donors for
cutting India’s share of IDA lending (now 40 percent) and raising the share of Egypt, sev-
eral African countries and perhaps several in the Far East. Such a shift is necessary on eq-
uity and economic grounds, as well [as] in response to intense Congressional pressure.
State fully agrees with us, and indeed is calling in the Indians today to inform them of our
new posture.”
7 February 23.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
outstanding $55 million contribution to the first (FY 1976) tranche of
IDA IV was of great help. But there is still much skepticism, and our policies
will have to be credible at every step of the way if we are to restore full
confidence.
259.
Memorandum From Robert Hormats of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 4, 1977
SUBJECT
Presidential Message on Foreign Assistance
Attached at Tab B is a memo from Christopher and Blumenthal
requesting a Presidential statement on foreign assistance and a Presi-
dential meeting with Congressmen who play critical roles in this
legislation.2
I agree. If anything, the memo understates the need for forceful
Presidential involvement. This is critical if we are to obtain the full re-
quests for multilateral and bilateral assistance, which are vital to our
position in the North-South dialogue. The President will have to make
a particularly strong pitch in the case of the International Development
authorization and an $800 million appropriation for 1978. (Inouye was
skeptical of multilateral assistance during Vance’s testimony last
week,3 and the House Appropriations Subcommittee cut the Asian De-
velopment Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank.)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
action. Hansen and Thornton concurred.
2 Tab B, attached but not printed, is a February 19 memorandum from Blumenthal
and Christopher to Carter entitled “Congressional Hearings on Foreign Assistance.”
Lake discussed Congress and the foreign aid program in a March 4 memorandum to
Christopher. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Official Working
3 Vance testified before the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Foreign Oper-
ations on February 24. (Bernard Gwertzman, “Security Links Cited,” The New York Times,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
At Tab A is a Presidential message based on a draft by State and
Treasury; OMB has approved those portions relating to the budget.4
The message focuses on the need for international cooperation in
dealing not only with the issues of economic development but also
with matters of critical concern to the developed nations, such as the
evolution of a stable world economy.
We have discussed the message at length with the speech writers;
they wish to limit such messages to straightforward descriptions of the
legislation. Fallows would like to drop the first three paragraphs of for-
eign policy context—already cut down from two pages—but is willing
to put the decision to the President. I believe strongly that we need this
language to emphasize to Congress the importance of these programs
and the President’s commitment to them.
Regarding a scenario for the Congressional meeting with the Presi-
dent, I suggest the following, which I have discussed with the Congres-
sional relations people:
—Obtain Presidential approval of the aid message (Tab A) and of a
meeting with the Congressmen. The message could be released on
Monday, or after the Wednesday meeting.5
—President would discuss the message at the Tuesday leadership
meeting,6 summarize his approach to aid, and indicate his desire for a
Congressional meeting on Wednesday.
—Because Inouye’s Senate Appropriations Subcommittee may
mark up the FY–77 supplemental on Tuesday, a Presidential call on
Monday (or a call from Frank Moore) would be important both to in-
form Inouye of the Wednesday meeting with the President and to en-
courage him to be forthcoming in his workup.7
RECOMMENDATION
That you sign the memo to the President at Tab I recommending
that he approve the message at Tab A and agree to meet with key
Congressmen.8
4 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Presidential Mes-
sage on Foreign Assistance.”
6 On Tuesday, March 8, Carter met with Democratic Congressional leaders for a
a.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No memorandum
of conversation of the meeting was found.
7 Carter did not speak to Inouye by telephone on March 7. (Ibid.)
8 Tab I, attached but not printed, is a March 7 memorandum from Brzezinski to
Carter entitled “Your Tuesday Leadership Meeting (Foreign Assistance).” On March 17,
Carter sent Congress a message on foreign assistance; for the text of the message, see

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
260.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Foreign Assistance
PARTICIPANTS
The President
Secretary Vance
Secretary Blumenthal
Secretary Bergland
Director-designate Gilligan
Senator Sparkman
Senator Inouye
Senator Humphrey
Senator Long
Senator Case
Senator Young
Speaker O’Neill
Congressman Mahon
Congressman Zablocki
Congressman Harrington
Congressman Long
Congressman Cederberg
Congressman Stanton
Congressman Foley
Congressman Reuss
Congressman C.W. Young
Douglas J. Bennet, Jr.
The President opened by stating that he was willing to take a large
share of the political heat for this year’s foreign aid bill because of its
importance to our foreign policy at a critical moment. We have new op-
portunities for gains in Africa and Latin America if we have the flexi-
bility to deal with them. OPEC is willing to help. We must back up our
human rights commitment.
Secretary Vance then outlined the components of the $1.7 billion in-
appropriated for the first time.
The President then acknowledged difficulties with the aid program
in the past which have become important symbols: World Bank sal-
aries, the fact that 40 per cent of IDA funds go to India alone, the
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
rials, President’s Daily Diary)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
over-concentration of administrators who live in relative opulence in
Washington and other capitals. The Administration is seeking to ad-
dress each of these issues.
Congressman Reuss agreed on the need to support IFI’s. He volun-
teered the desirability of a “Congressional declaration supporting the
Administration view that human rights are important and that we will
use our vote and any other leverage in the IFI’s to advance human
rights.” The Administration faces a moment of truth tomorrow on two
multilateral loans to Argentina.
The President replied that the Administration would “err on the
side of human rights” decisions involving multilateral loans. He stated,
however, that there can be no absolute standards as the Korean case
shows.2 A declaration by Congress with regard to human rights in the
IFI’s would be fine, the President said, as long as it left the Administra-
tion some flexibility.3
The President noted that the IFI’s have exerted “conservative
lending pressure” on borrowers which has been healthy for inflation
control.
Senator Humphrey noted that while India gets 40 per cent of IDA
loans, it is not at the top of the list on a per capita basis. The President
stated that India had made remarkable progress recently not only be-
cause of good crops, but in human rights as Mrs. Gandhi has taken
steps away from totalitarianism.
Senator Case switched the discussion to his concern that foreign
assistance decisions should not be contingent upon any U.S. domestic
pressures. It has been argued, he said, that U.S. assistance is actually
spent in the U.S. and benefits American industries, that P.L. 480 helps
2 Speaking before the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Foreign Operations
on February 24, Vance announced reductions in U.S. assistance to Argentina, Uruguay,
and Ethiopia on the grounds of their poor human rights records; Vance noted, however,
that assistance to strategically important countries like South Korea would not be cut.
(Bernard Gwertzman, “Security Links Cited,” The New York Times, February 25, 1977,
p. 1)
3 In a March 11 memorandum to Carter, Blumenthal noted that after Carter’s March
9 meeting with Congressional leaders, “Henry Reuss agreed informally with Treasury and
State on a draft of legislation directing the U.S. to advance the cause of human rights in its partici-
pation in the international financial institutions. The draft would leave intact the legislative
requirements (the Harkin amendment) that already exist for the Inter-American Devel-
opment Bank, which we feel is necessary if Harkin and other proponents of mandatory
voting provisions are to be brought along. We feel that the Reuss draft is the best obtain-
able in the circumstances.” Carter initialed Blumenthal’s memorandum. (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, Box 21, Treasury Depart-
erning U.S. participation in the IDB and ADF. The amendment authorized the U.S. IDB
Executive Director and the U.S. ADF Governor to vote against loans for countries whose
governments violated human rights.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
American agriculture, and so forth. In the long run, it would be better
to separate our parochial interests from our foreign policy objectives to
achieve flexibility in meeting the latter. Congressman Long nodded ap-
proval throughout Case’s remarks. Senator Humphrey subsequently
noted that Case’s position was not realistic politically because much of
the support for our aid program came from farmers, for example, who
perceived the benefits of P.L. 480.
Senator Inouye noted that the Senate had supported foreign aid vig-
orously for the last four years but expressed several concerns of his
own:
—U.S. IFI contributions should be no more than 25 per cent. The
President subsequently agreed that this was a desirable policy objec-
tive, but as Secretary Blumenthal concurred, it would take several years
to achieve.
—We are picking up 70 per cent of the cost of the U.N. drug agency
whose work is largely devoted to Europe and which has a very small
impact on heroin imports to the United States.
—While others charge that we contribute only .26 per cent of our
gross national product to aid, that figure covers development assist-
ance alone, does not include military assistance (including aid to Is-
rael), callable capital, Ex-Im Bank loans, P.L. 480, etc. Nor does it in-
clude the fact that we spend 6 per cent of our GNP for defense while
nations like Japan, whom we in fact defend, are spending less than 1
per cent. Senator Humphrey observed that the figures can hardly be to-
talled since the Ex-Im Bank is a money maker, the callable capital hasn’t
been called, and P.L. 480 does as much good for our farmers as its
beneficiaries.
Chairman Mahon stated that foreign aid in general was highly un-
popular in Congress and that it passed only because of the Middle East
package. The House will not approve a $7 billion package, he predicts.
Chairman Zablocki, Congressman Cederberg and Congressman Long
agreed. The President reiterated the Administration’s intention to deal
with Congressional concern, but also stated that the public will support
a cleaned up program adequately focused on human needs.
Congressman Long expressed concern about contradictions he per-
ceives within the Administration’s position. The same Administration
which preaches openness wishes to turn over a larger share of aid
dollars to international institutions which escape Congressional con-
trol, whose operations are secret, and for which no adequate audit is
available. This is why he opposed the 40 per cent increase in aid to
multilaterals.
Secondly, he said we preach reduction in conventional arms avail-
ability at the same time we give countries (who are spending their own
resources for arms) IDA loans which are virtually free.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
From these contradictions, Congressman Long concludes that our
best option is to improve our own already excellent bilateral aid pro-
gram and reduce emphasis on IFI’s.
Congressman Cederberg supported Reuss’s initiative to retain the
President’s flexibility on IFI’s. Congressman Stanton emphasized the
need to reach new members of the affected committees to build up
support.
Secretary Blumenthal stated that we are appointing strong new di-
rectors to the IFI’s who, he hoped, would be able to deal with many of
the concerns that had been raised. Achieving the 25 per cent limit
would require time, and he hoped it could be done by getting contribu-
tions increased from others.4
4 On March 16, Hormats forwarded this memorandum of conversation to Brze-
zinski, noting that it “essentially square[d] with” his notes on the meeting. Hormats as-
serted: “The tone of this meeting demonstrated the importance of the President putting a
significant amount of political capital behind the aid program if appropriation requests
are to be passed by the Congress. As I have noted before, foreign assistance is the area in
which we can do the most for the developing countries. Without a strong aid per-
formance by the US, our credibility as a nation concerned with poverty will be eroded,
our influence in other areas of the North-South dialogue will be jeopardized, and our
ability to resist some of the more extreme demands of the developing nations will be
weakened.” (Memorandum from Hormats to Brzezinski, March 16; Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 34, Memcons: President:

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
261.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 9, 1977
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
ALSO
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Secretary of Agriculture
The Secretary of Commerce
The Secretary of Labor
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Chairman, Council of Economic Advisers
The United States Representative to the United Nations
The Special Representative for Trade Negotiations
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Assistant to the President for Energy Policy
The Administrator, Agency for International Development
SUBJECT
Second Stage of PRM 8 Preparation
The work of the Economic Policy Group on PRM 8 (North-South
Relations) is close to completion. It will provide the necessary analysis,
options and recommendations to complete preparations for the March
“Common Fund” negotiations2 and the CIEC negotiations which will
follow in May. Since the negotiating calendar has of necessity forced
the EPG to concentrate virtually all its attention on short-term eco-
nomic issues, a decision has been made to constitute a PRC Working
Group to examine the longer term and essentially political aspects of
North-South relations concerning which the President requested
analysis and the presentation of options in the initial PRM 8
instructions.3
The PRC Working Group will fulfill that original assignment
through an analysis and presentation of options which focus upon the
broad political, security, humanitarian and organizational/institutional
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 26,
Aaron under cover of a March 9 memorandum; Aaron wrote on Hansen’s memorandum:
“ZB—Expect some blowback by State that they are not chairing it.” (Ibid.)
2 The first session of the UN Negotiating Conference on the Common Fund took
place March 7–April 3 under the auspices of UNCTAD. For more information, see Year-
book of the United Nations, 1977, p. 472.
3 See Document 254.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
aspects of North-South relations seen in a 4–8 year time frame. The
Group will use the basic analysis of the EPG as a starting point in re-
lating the economic to the political aspects of North-South relations.
The Working Group will be chaired by Roger Hansen of the NSC. I
would appreciate your designation of a representative with whom Mr.
Hansen can consult in constituting the Working Group, bearing in
mind that the task of the group is to examine the essentially political
and overall diplomatic aspects of the North-South relationships, not to
repeat the economic exercise already performed by the EPG.4
Zbigniew Brzezinski
4 Hansen noted that, in an earlier draft of this memorandum, his intention in the
final paragraph was “to find wording which will give us the flexibility to make sure that
we get the people we want on the Group, not simply those assigned by ‘the system’.”
Hansen suggested that “[i]f the NSC retains the right to ‘negotiate’ on the constitution of
the Group it should be much easier (1) to limit its size (some agencies may not even insist
on being represented, and I would hope they don’t), and (2) to assure the presence of the
people most qualified to participate fruitfully in this kind of exercise.” The goal, sug-
gested Hansen, was “to produce a document with some provocative and novel options
which are still ‘sound’ enough to assure the exercise a serious hearing.” (Memorandum
from Hansen to Brzezinski and Aaron, undated; Carter Library, National Security
262.
Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Christopher to
President Carter1
Washington, April 1, 1977
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Reuss Amendment.]
The Reuss Amendment. You raised a question about the implications
of the Reuss Amendment (attached)2 to authorizing legislation for the
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
cc Zbig. J.C.”
2 Not attached. The Reuss Amendment (H.R. 5262), which was to apply to U.S. par-
ticipation in international financial institutions, directed “that the United States, ‘in con-
nection with its voice and vote, shall advance the cause of human rights, including by
seeking to channel assistance toward countries other than those whose governments en-
gage in a consistent pattern of gross violation of internationally recognized human rights,
such as torture, or cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment or punishment.’” (Bernard
Gwertzman, “U.S. Backs a Move For a Rights Curb On Overseas Loans,” The New York

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
international financial institutions (IFI’s).3 We have supported the
Reuss approach as preferable to the extension of the more restrictive
Harkin Amendment4 adopted in the last session to all of the IFI’s. The
Harkin Amendment requires us to vote against loans from the Inter-
American Bank and the African Development Fund to countries which
are gross human rights violators, unless the loans benefit the needy.
This approach grew out of Congressional frustration with the lack of
action on human rights in the previous Administration. We regard the
Harkin Amendment as a very awkward tool, which tends to politicize
the IFI’s and divide recipients and donors into two camps.
Our support of the Reuss Amendment may be paying off. In the
House, the Banking Committee agreed to repeal the Harkin Amend-
ment in favor of the Reuss approach. It is likely that the Committee will
be able to sustain its action on the floor although the going will be diffi-
cult. Senate Foreign Relations is also in the process of replacing Harkin
with a Humphrey Amendment similar to the Reuss Amendment.5
Congress is almost certain to enact human rights provisions in au-
thorizing legislation for the IFI’s. But the current trend in the Congress
is away from the rigid positions of the past and toward giving the
Administration greater flexibility. We, in turn, must work quietly in
the IFI’s to ensure that they are more sensitive to the human rights
concerns.6
3 In a March 23 Evening Report to Carter, Vance noted that during his appearance
that day before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, there had been a prolonged dis-
cussion of human rights and foreign aid. Vance reported: “When asked about our posi-
tion on how to handle human rights in the international financial institutions, I said that
we supported the human rights provision in Reuss’ bill authorizing our contributions to
the IFIs.” Carter wrote in the margin below this sentence: “This concerns me. Please
briefly assess ultimate consequences.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brze-
of The New York Times contains a report on Vance’s March 23 appearance before
Congress. (Bernard Gwertzman, “U.S. Backs a Move For a Rights Curb On Overseas
5 Carter wrote “ok” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
6 On April 6, the House of Representatives rejected the approach of the Reuss
Amendment in favor of directing U.S. IFI representatives to vote against loans for coun-
tries whose governments violated human rights. (“Carter is Rebuffed by House on
into law. The act, which regulated U.S. participation in a number of international finan-
cial institutions, directed U.S. representatives in the IBRD, IDA, IFC, IDB, ADF, and ADB
to vote against loans for countries whose governments violated human rights. For addi-
tional documentation on human rights and U.S. participation in international financial
institutions, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian
Affairs.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
263.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, April 14, 1977
SUBJECT
Completion of EPG Work on PRM–8—North-South Issues
Mike Blumenthal’s memo (Tab A) reports on the EPG review of the
economic aspects of North-South policy. It identifies four major issues
requiring your decision prior to the Summit and the Conference on In-
ternational Economic Cooperation (CIEC). Following your decision, we
will promptly seek Congressional support and build support among
our allies and key LDCs.
In sum, your affirmative decisions on the most important of these
four issues, coupled with the more forthcoming position already
agreed upon by the EPG in a number of other areas—including soft-
ening aid terms, improved procedures for assessing LDC debt
problems and a willingness to negotiate an international grains re-
serve—will represent a positive, but not dramatic, movement in the US
position toward the LDCs.
The LDCs will doubtless want more; and a number of smaller in-
dustrialized countries may sympathize with the LDC demands. How-
ever, it is the view of your advisors that our proposals achieve the
proper balance between being politically forthcoming and econom-
ically sound, and are important steps in a positive direction. The larger
developed countries (Germany, Japan and probably the UK) will be
highly supportive; and a number of LDCs will also regard them as
constructive.
The key to how our position is received by the LDCs as a group,
and whether CIEC will be seen as a “success” or “failure,” will be
whether we can convince influential LDCs that (a) our proposals repre-
sent a positive first step by the Carter Administration, and that (b) al-
though the proposals do not meet their every expectation, the LDCs do
have more to gain by accepting them as a sincere effort, pointing to the
CIEC as a positive step, and continuing the cooperative process than by
decrying them as unacceptable and returning to the confrontation of
1974. (We believe that our proposals, and others developed in CIEC,
will be adequate to avoid a new confrontation, but there is no cer-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 26,
Brzezinski’s behalf. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Don’t announce our position
until I approve. J.”

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
tainty.) In order to encourage the LDCs toward the more constructive
of these two outcomes, we will consult actively with them prior to the
next meeting of the CIEC at official level (April 26–27).
With regard to the specific issues:
Issue 1. All agencies agree that the US should support a common fund
which permits a pooling of the funds of various buffer stocks and includes a
provision for World Bank lending to supplement these funds. This will be
seen as a demonstration of US flexibility, although it will not meet all
the demands of the LDCs.2
Issue 2. All agencies recommend that the US negotiate a substantial
World Bank general capital increase—which is important to many of the
medium-income LDCs, particularly in Latin America—and indicate our
willingness to do so at the Summit and/or at the CIEC Ministerial.3
Issue 3. The agencies agree on the desirability of a public pledge by the US
to seek major increases in foreign aid, but they differ on specifics—whether to
announce our intention to seek a five-year doubling of aid appropria-
tions (from the FY 77 base) or only to signal an intention to seek sub-
stantial increases. State, AID, HUD and Labor support the “doubling”
option. Treasury, OMB, CEA and Commerce prefer the “substantial in-
crease” option.
There is a risk in offending Congress by an implied pre-
commitment to double aid, which could endanger aid increases we are
now seeking for FY 78, and there would be advantages to avoiding
such an announcement before completing our aid review. However, a
“doubling” announcement would demonstrate a sustained multi-year
Administration commitment which might help deter annual piece-
meal, Congressional cuts, and it might help stimulate similar efforts
from Germany, Japan and OPEC.
A pledge to seek major increases in foreign assistance is highly im-
portant and I recommend that you approve it. A “doubling” announce-
ment, although beneficial from a foreign policy perspective, is not as
critical; a commitment to a “substantial increase” would also be quite
useful.
Approve pledge to seek a “substantial increase in foreign aid”
Announce intent to seek a “doubling of aid appropriations”
Disapprove4
2 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation.
3 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation, writing in the adjacent
margin “for hard loans.”
4 Carter indicated his disapproval of this recommendation, writing in the margin
“‘more effective aid’ ok.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Issue 4. The Europeans believe that a $1 billion increase in industrialized
country aid to the poorest LDCs, with similar action from OPEC, is critical to
the success of CIEC. The point is tactical, although the poorest countries
certainly need the money. Such a commitment could, by demonstrating
support for the lowest income developing nations, enable CIEC to
claim a major success. By supporting this European proposal, we
would be better able to convince the Europeans to support our initia-
tives; our failure to support the Europeans might cause a split.
Our agreeing on this proposal would entail seeking in our regular
the poorest countries. All agencies except OMB, which prefers to wait
until this can be examined in the FY 79 budget context, support this rec-
ommendation. This proposal could well be a key swing factor in en-
suring a “successful” CIEC; I recommend that you approve it.5
Tab A
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Economic Policy
Group (Blumenthal) to President Carter6
Washington, April 9, 1977
SUBJECT
North/South Economic Strategy: Major Decisions Issues
The EPG has reviewed the economic aspects of North-South
policy. Tab 1 summarizes the EPG’s discussions/recommendations on
various elements of our overall strategy. This memorandum covers four
major issues highlighted by the EPG review which require your early deci-
sion in view of pressures arising from the Summit and CIEC. In each
case, if you approve our recommendations we will seek Congressional support
prior to consulting with our OECD partners.
Decision Issue 1—Common Fund for Buffer Stocks
Issue: The developing nations have placed a great political priority on the
establishment of a common fund for financing commodity buffer stocks.
We are now being pressed to further specify our policy and should be
prepared to take a clear position by the Summit or CIEC Ministerial.
Background: The less developed countries (LDCs) are backing a $6 bil-
lion common fund which they could control. They want to establish the
5 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation.
6 Confidential. Sent through Brzezinski who did not initial the memorandum.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
fund prior to concluding new individual commodity agreements. In
current negotiations we have expressed willingness to consider a
common funding arrangement for financing buffer stocks where they
are part of commodity agreements. The European Community has just
gone one step further by stating unconditionally that it will support the
establishment of a common fund—but clearly not the one proposed by
the LDCs.
We do not recommend a commitment by the US to a common fund
now, but need to lay the groundwork with the Congress in coming
weeks.
The common fund arrangement we believe we could eventually support is
a pooling of buffer stock funds supported by some lending to the pool, prefer-
ably by the World Bank. Aside from any contributions which we would
make to individual commodity agreements, we plan no budgetary
outlays. While this position responds to the real problems in financing
buffer stocks, the developing countries will find it wanting. If we have
a positive US approach on aid, trade and individual commodity agree-
ments, however, we believe our approach to a common fund will fur-
ther an overall constructive U.S. stance in North-South relations.
Recommendation:
The EPG unanimously recommends that you agree to the following
approach as a basis for our consultations with Congress:
1. We will consider participating in financing individual buffer stocks
where direct government contributions are necessary.
2. We could support a common fund arrangement consisting of a) a
pooling of the funds of various buffer stocks—preferably linked institution-
ally to the World Bank; and b) provision for the World Bank, on decision of
its own board, to lend some supplementary funds to the pool, should ex-
traordinary circumstances such as a severe recession cause most buffer
stocks to draw all their funds from the pool. (Such World Bank loans
would be financed from its regular capital resources.)
3. We are prepared to negotiate toward establishment of a common fund
arrangement, parallel with specific commodity negotiations, but we believe
one or more commodity agreements beyond the existing arrangements for
cocoa and tin should be in place before a common fund arrangement is
implemented.7
Decision Issue 2—World Bank Capital Increase
Issue: The World Bank will inevitably need an increase in its general cap-
ital to support a lending level beyond the current one. Should we partici-
pate, to what extent, and when?
Background: McNamara is pressing for an early decision on a large
general capital increase for the World Bank. Politically we see great ad-
7 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
vantage in responding now to such an increase as part of a forthcoming
overall U.S. position on aid at the Summit and CIEC Ministerial. In-
creased World Bank resources would enable the Bank to expand
lending in its normal programs. Also, it would enable us to propose new
departures in its lending to promote energy development in non-OPEC
LDCs, to increase production of minerals in short supply, and to aid diversi-
fication in LDCs dependent on commodities with bleak long-term
prospects.
We believe an ultimate U.S. contribution to a World Bank capital
senting cash outlays.
Recommendation:
The EPG unanimously recommends that we agree at the Summit and/or
CIEC Ministerial to negotiate a substantial World Bank general capital in-
crease but leave the amounts and timing to be worked out in the Bank Board.8
Decision Issue 3—Strategy on Future Aid Levels
Issue: A forthcoming position on future aid levels is essential to meet
long-term development needs. A commitment by the US now would pay
major political dividends at the CIEC Ministerial. Should the US publicly
pledge this spring to seek major increases in our aid, and if so, should we
specify our plans in general or quantitative terms?
Background: The EPG unanimously agrees that our present aid levels
need to increase to respond to the legitimate development needs of LDCs
as well as to sustain our objective of a constructive US position in
North-South relations. A key element of our Summit and CIEC strategy
should, therefore, be a general undertaking with other major donor
countries to increase substantially our foreign assistance over the
coming years.
A significant increase in development assistance levels might take the
form of doubling U.S. appropriations over the five years FYs 78–82 (from the
lion we are seeking for FY ’78. A World Bank general capital increase
(as described in the previous issue) would account for about $1.5 billion
of the increase. The remaining $2.5 billion might be utilized in our bilat-
eral development and food aid programs and in other multilateral pro-
8 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
grams. Attached are some illustrative tables, but the program mix is
very flexible (Tab 2).9
Alternatively, you could announce a pledge to seek a substantial increase
in future aid levels, but with no quantitative target. Specific levels would
continue to be decided on the basis of annual budget submissions.
If you agree to increasing aid levels, then the issue is how we ex-
press our pledge.
Factors favoring an announcement to double our appropriations:
—It could help to stimulate similar efforts of West Germany, Japan
and other donors.
—It could provide a firmer basis for engaging the recipient coun-
tries in the policy and institutional reforms required for more effective
use of development assistance.
—It would enable us to demonstrate a sustained commitment to
development and thus might help deter the annual piecemeal Congres-
sional cuts in our requests by placing them in a more appropriate
multi-year context.
—It would provide a constructive US stance in the North-South di-
alogue in this critical first year of your Administration.
Factors favoring a non-quantitative announcement:
—The announcement of specific increases over coming years
could offend Congress through the implied pre-commitment of its ac-
tion, and this could endanger aid increases we are seeking now for FY
1978.
—We would be committing ourselves to specific levels before
completing an overall review of our foreign assistance programs.
—It would not accord with the stated intent to conduct zero based
budgetary reviews of all programs.
—A failure of Congress in future years to go along with quantita-
tive targets would damage our relations with LDCs and other OECD
countries.
Recommendation:
The EPG unanimously recommends that you approve in principle a
public pledge by the U.S. this Spring to seek major increases in foreign
assistance.10
If you approve there are two options:
Option 1: Announce this Spring an Administration intention to seek a
five-year doubling of U.S. foreign aid appropriations from the 1977 base.
(State, AID, NSC, HUD, and Labor support this option.)
9 Attached but not printed is an undated table entitled “A Doubling of U.S. Foreign
Aid Appropriations FY-77–FY-82: An Illustrative Breakdown by Program.”
10 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Option 2: Announce our intent to seek substantial increases in US aid
over coming years. (Treasury, OMB, CEA, and Commerce support this
option.)11
Decision Issue 4: Immediate Action on Additional Aid for the Poorest LDCs
Issue: The European Community (EC) places great importance on its
plan to propose at CIEC a $1 billion increase in industrial countries’ aid to
low-income LDCs to be complemented by similar action from OPEC
countries. What should be our response?
Background: The EC believes that its proposal is critical to a successful
CIEC outcome. We believe it is less important to the Ministerial, but would
have serious coordination problems with the EC if we flatly refused to join in.
Even if we did participate, however, we could not accept three features
of the present EC plan: that the money come from 1978 appropriations,
that it go to IDA, and that it be used for balance of payments support as
opposed to specific projects. Compromises in these areas would have
to be negotiated with the EC.
The advantages of joining the EC plan would be to improve our stance
on North-South issues, bolster the final CIEC package, and improve OECD
coordination. The principal disadvantage is that your FY ’79 budget flexibility
would be constrained. Moreover, it would be difficult to sell to the Congress,
and as it now stands is of questionable substantive merit.
Recommendation:
That we inform the EC that we can participate in a special effort for the
low income LDCs subject to the caveats noted above by declaring our intent
to seek Congressional approval in FY ’79 for $300 million additional
(over FY ’77) for these countries in our regular bilateral aid programs.
(We would also cite our requested FY ’78 increase of $100 million for
these countries.)
State, Treasury, AID, NSC, Labor, HUD, and CEA support this recom-
mendation. OMB believes a decision on FY ’79 aid requests for these coun-
tries should await our examination of the entire FY ’79 foreign assistance
budget.12
12 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
Tab 1
Paper Prepared by the Economic Policy Group13
Washington, April 8, 1977
Review and Recommendations of Economic Issues
in North/South Relations
1. Should the U.S. improve the “quality” of its aid by softening terms, un-
tying procurement, making multi-year appropriations, and enhancing the de-
velopmental focus of food assistance programs?
Recommendation (1): Provide assistance including food aid to the
least developed countries (29 countries identified by UNCTAD) pri-
marily on a grant basis; (2) provided other donors take similar steps,
untie bilateral assistance except security supporting assistance to the
Middle East, food aid, and technical cooperation grants; (3) earmark
minimum regular quantity of grain for multi-year food aid program-
ming according to development criteria.
LDC Position: Developed countries should: provide all assistance
for the poorest or least developed countries (LLDC’s) by grants; untie
all development assistance; increase the dependability of food aid; and
commit to multi-year aid appropriations.
Industrial Countries Position: Despite some reluctance on the part of
France and Canada, industrial countries are likely to support U.S.
initiatives.
Summit Action: Inform our allies of what aid quality improvements
we plan to adopt and seek assurances that our approach is consistent
with their plans. Perhaps the Summit could recommend improving the
quality of aid by donor countries.
CIEC Action: Seek: a uniform developed country commitment to
U.S. proposals on the “quality” of aid; and an agreement that OECD ne-
gotiations on aid untying be accelerated to permit agreement in prin-
ciple so that the results could be mentioned in the CIEC ministerial
communique. We would seek comparable commitments from OPEC
countries.
Options Considered and Rejected: TERMS. Adopt terms to individual
debt servicing capacity and project characteristics while continuing to
provide all development assistance as grants to LLDCs; give all bilat-
eral assistance in grant form; provide AID development assistance to
LDCs with per capita annual income under $300 base essentially
13 Confidential.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
through grants. UNTYING. Untie all development loans, except SSA;
untie all AID bilateral assistance provided other donors untie their
loans. MULTI-YEAR COMMITMENTS/PL 480 PROGRAMMING. Op-
pose multi-year programming; continue PL 480 program as it presently
exists; abolish PL 480 Title I and appropriate equivalent dollar amount
for additional official development assistance (ODA).
2. Should some form of generalized debt relief be provided LDCs? They
desire additional resource transfers, and believe debt relief is more
readily obtainable than additional foreign assistance. The issue has
taken on disproportionate significance relative to its economic impact
because of the importance accorded it by certain LDCs in terms of their
political leadership among developing countries.
Recommendation: Continue to oppose all proposals for generalized
debt rescheduling because: (a) the distribution of debt accumulation
markedly mismatches current need of LDCs; (b) the U.S. would bear a
disproportionate share of cost; (c) incentives for efficient LDC resource
management would be reduced; (d) LDC creditworthiness in world
capital markets could be undercut; and (e) there would be little devel-
opment payout.
LDC Position: ODA loans outstanding to LLDCs should be con-
verted to grants; ODA loans to the other poor countries should be re-
written on IDA terms or better; and debt relief (on unspecified terms)
should be granted any other LDC requesting it.
Industrial Countries Position: Although the weight of industrial
countries’ opinion is against generalized debt relief, the industrial
countries are not united. Strongest opponents of debt relief are the U.S.,
France, Germany and Japan; advocates are Sweden and the Benelux
countries. EC unity is not easy to maintain because some regard debt
relief as a low-cost pacifier of the LDCs (important because the EC de-
pends heavily on trade with LDCs).
Summit Action: Be silent on this issue.
CIEC Action: Support existing U.S./EC proposals that: improve
functioning of “Creditor Clubs”; provide a new mechanism for speedy
assessment of LDCs with serious balance of payments difficulties (in-
cluding debt service problems); and coordinate donor responses.
Options Considered and Rejected: Use debt relief as a normal means
of transferring aid resources to LDCs; provide generalized debt relief
on a one-time basis and limit the cost by controlling the number of re-
cipients, terms of relief and the consolidation period.
3. To what extent should the developed countries commit themselves to
provide increased market access to developing country exports and how do we
respond to domestic requests for increased protection against imports from
LDCs?

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
Recommendation: That the substance of the Tokyo Declaration be
reaffirmed at the Summit,14 while we try to make significant progress in
the multilateral trade negotiations (MTN) on issues of interest to LDCs.
LDC Position: LDCs want DCs to remove restrictions on imports of
LDC goods with no or very limited reciprocity on their part.
Industrial Countries Position: These countries generally favor a
moderate and preferential liberalization of tariffs affecting LDCs, al-
though with sufficient U.S. effort they might support a substantial but
non-preferential reduction in tariffs.
Summit Action: The Summit declaration would reaffirm the general
principles of the Tokyo declaration regarding LDCs.
CIEC Action: The industrial countries should commit themselves to
make reductions in the MTN to barriers to LDC trade with a view to en-
abling LDCs to increase their share in world trade over time. LDCs
would be expected to reciprocate in ways consistent with their
development.
4. Should the United States support international grain reserves that em-
phasize price stabilization?
Recommendation: There should be speedily negotiated an interna-
tional grain reserves system within the context of a general agreement
on grains. Leave open the possibility of simultaneous inter-related bar-
gaining in Geneva and London and the issue of whether to use a quan-
tity or price trigger mechanism in the reserve.
LDC Position: Developed countries should bear the major burden
of financing an international system of nationally-held grain reserves to
provide food security in times of world crop shortfalls. These reserves
should be made available to LDC’s at concessional prices.
Industrialized Countries Position: Most other countries support the
concept of price stabilization scheme for grains. They oppose further
concessions for LDCs on prices of grain during periods of shortage.
Summit Action: Seek support in the Summit declaration for the con-
cept of an international system of nationally-held reserves, without ex-
plicit agreement on details and endorse negotiations to this end,
without prejudging the relation to the MTN.
CIEC Action: Seek G–8 agreement for a unified announcement that
there should be negotiated an international grains reserve within the
context of a general agreement on grains.
Options Considered and Rejected: United States has proposed a grain
reserves system based on solely quantity triggers; other countries have
suggested a price-trigger system.
14 For the text of the Tokyo Declaration, issued at the end of the September 1973
GATT Ministerial meeting, see the Department of State Bulletin, October 8, 1973,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
5. Should the IMF Compensatory Financing Facility (CFF) be further lib-
eralized? Drawings from the CFF played a significant role in meeting
the financing needs of the LDCs in 1976. The chief advantage of ex-
panding compensatory financing to offset downward fluctuations in
LDC export is that it operates through income mechanisms rather than
market intervention.
Recommendation: That we would sympathetically consider, with-
out a prior commitment, liberalization of the IMF’s CFF if quota limits
become a binding constraint and IMF resources have been expanded.
LDC Position: The CFF should be liberalized by: (a) calculating
shortfalls in real terms, (b) relaxing or abolishing quota limits, (c) re-
quiring repayments only from export earnings above norm, just as
drawings are now based on “shortfalls” in export earnings, (d) al-
lowing LDCs to draw without “basing claims entirely on balance of
payments criteria,” (e) compensating for increased import volumes due
to climatic or other factors beyond a country’s own control, and (f) pro-
viding drawings in the form of grants in some cases.
Industrial Countries Position: This issue has not been actively dis-
cussed since the 1975 liberalization. The Germans are reported to be
considering recommending a liberalization of the CFF in the Interim
Committee.
CIEC Action: Let it be known that the U.S. would sympathetically
consider, without prior commitment, increased compensatory fi-
nancing once the two conditions outlined in the recommendation are
met.
Options Considered and Rejected: Liberalize the CFF at this time.
6. Should there be an expanded STABEX15 Facility outside the IMF? We
could consider globalization of an European STABEX-type scheme and
expand its coverage to more commodities.
Recommendation: That we not pursue a globalized expanded
STABEX on the grounds that it would: (1) require additional Congres-
sional appropriations; (2) lead to recurring LDCs’ pressure for replen-
ishment; (3) work outside the IMF framework—thus avoiding balance
of payments need, IMF quota limits and mandatory repayment
schedules.
LDC Position: The LDCs want compensation on highly conces-
sional terms based on shortfalls in all commodity export earnings.
They have expressed interest in CIEC in a Swedish proposal for a
15 An EC facility which lends money to countries when commodity earnings are
below normal. It contains a highly concessional element for the low income countries.
[Footnote in the original.]

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
global, highly concessional income stabilization scheme in the U.N.
framework.
Industrial Countries Position: The EC, particularly Germany,16
favors a globalized STABEX-type scheme, as does Sweden. Some ele-
ments in Germany believe such a scheme can substitute for the
Common Fund and individual commodity agreements, a view we do
not share.
Summit Action: Chancellor Schmidt has said he will raise the issue
of a global STABEX. We should be prepared to explain our opposition
to this approach.
CIEC Action: Same as the Summit.
7. Should we take new initiatives towards Saudi Arabia to obtain Saudi
cooperation in ensuring adequate quantities of energy at manageable prices?
The Saudis have expressed a concern over the safety and value of the
surplus financial assets they are accumulating although this concern
does not appear to have been an important factor affecting Saudi pro-
duction policy thus far, and it is unclear whether it will become a con-
straining factor with regard to future production policy.
Recommendation: That, while we should be willing to discuss the
OPEC assets issue if raised, we should not get out in front on the issue,
and we should continue to oppose providing special treatment. Con-
siderable further study is needed of the likely determinates of future
Saudi production and pricing policy and of possible options for af-
fecting Saudi policies. State and Dr. Schlesinger should work together
to devise a U.S. position on overall international energy policies.
LDC Position: The non-OPEC members have only grudgingly sup-
ported the Saudi demands for special treatment of OPEC assets. They
presumably would welcome an agreement which resulted in OPEC
price moderation. Aside from the several other OPEC surplus countries
(Kuwait and the UAE) the other OPEC members do not feel strongly
about the OPEC asset issue but surely would be against any Saudi
agreement to increase production or moderate prices. While the Saudis
have asked for special treatment of their assets they, to date, have not
aggressively pursued this request. The Saudi position on the possible
contingency options is unknown.
Industrial Countries Positions: Other developed countries agree with
the U.S. position on OPEC assets. Their position on the possible contin-
16 On April 20, Owen forwarded to Carter a “non-paper” from Schmidt on stabi-
lizing LDC commodity export earnings. (Memorandum from Owen to Carter, April 20;
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspon-
dence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 6, Germany, Federal Republic of: Chancellor

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
gency options is unknown although they clearly recognize the impor-
tance of ensuring adequate Saudi production and price moderation.
Summit Action: Reaffirm U.S. opposition to providing special treat-
ment to OPEC assets or remain silent on the issue.
CIEC Action: Continue to support developed country position for
calling for fair nondiscriminatory treatment of OPEC assets but not
preferential treatment.
Options Examined on a contingency basis: Offer preferential treat-
ment for OPEC (Saudi) assets in return for (1) a Saudi commitment to
progressively increase production levels, to continue to moderate price
decisions within OPEC and to produce enough oil to prevent future
tight market conditions, or (2) a Saudi commitment to enforce within
OPEC an oil price agreement that provides for small price increases
over a limited time period.
8. Should the U.S. consider changes in its policy on the transfer of tech-
nology in order to accommodate the demands of the LDCs? Present USG
policy is to work towards a voluntary Code of Conduct for Technology
Transfer in the UNCTAD and to engage in various development pro-
grams to increase effective utilization of technology in LDCs.
Recommendation: That the U.S. (a) continue to oppose binding inter-
national obligations on corporations while emphasizing the impor-
tance of private sources of technology and, (b) increase technological
assistance through existing or new government programs in the LDCs.
LDC Position: Developed nations should pressure their companies
through binding codes of conduct into (a) transferring more technology
(b) transferring it under more favorable terms and (c) transferring re-
sources for development of indigenous technological development.
LDCs also want more government resources to spur local research and
technology.
Industrial Countries Position: Opposed to a binding code of conduct,
however, opinion differs on the levels of governmental assistance to
LDCs.
Summit Action: NONE
CIEC Action: Reaffirm the benefits from private transfers of tech-
nology and our continued interest in assisting LDCs in developing
their capacity to utilize technology effectively.
Options Considered and Rejected: Accede to LDCs’ demands for
more regulation of technology transfers.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
264.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, May 20, 1977
SUBJECT
Aid Assessment
During the campaign, you pledged an outside assessment of U.S.
foreign aid. I believe that the time is at hand to carry out this pledge.
We need a concerted foreign aid strategy and efficient means of car-
rying it out. This requires rigorous analysis of U.S. aid purposes and
programs, to see how they should be reshaped in the coming period.
That analysis should focus on both bilateral and multilateral aid; it
should include capital assistance, technical assistance, P.L. 480, and
guarantees of private investment. It should address not only develop-
ment aid but also security assistance, insofar as it affects our develop-
ment objectives. It should take into account broad political and security
factors, including our concern for human rights, as well as economic
considerations.
The assessment should be carried out by persons outside the exec-
utive branch not only because of your campaign pledge but also be-
cause this would ensure—and would make clear to the Congress and
the public—that the assessment was not shaped by executive branch
preconceptions. The study should, however, take account of on-going
studies of aid in the executive branch, including the study of multi-
lateral aid now underway in the Treasury Department.
There are various ways of commissioning an outside assessment.
One individual might be asked to take on the job; I doubt any single
person could accomplish such a large task. A commission of distin-
guished citizens might be created; the trouble is that there have been
too many of these in the aid field in the past, and one more might not be
well received. I would suggest, therefore, that an independent research
institution be asked to take on the task. Brookings is a natural candi-
date, in view of its strength and experience in this field. There is a prec-
edent of sorts: In 1948, when President Truman proposed the Marshall
Plan to Congress, Senator Vandenberg, as Chairman of the Foreign Re-
lations Committee, asked Brookings to study the question and the re-
sulting study played a significant role in decisions as to how to orga-
nize the European Recovery Program.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
The assessment should be completed in time to influence next
year’s aid budget requests.
The assessment should involve close consultation with members
of the Congress to ensure that their concerns are taken fully into ac-
count. Brookings’ close links with people on the Hill should facilitate
this.
The assessment might be assisted by an advisory committee of dis-
tinguished private citizens both to ensure that a wide variety of views
are brought to bear and to lend its conclusions added weight.
The State Department’s Office of External Research may be able to
make a contribution to funding the study, which I am told would cost
less than $100,000. If this contribution is not feasible or not sufficient,
we could support Brookings’ requests for funding from the National
Science Foundation and private foundations.
Since it would address the operations of several U.S. agencies, the
request for this study should come from the President. Contract rela-
tionships and coordination of governmental support activities can be
handled through the Department of State.
I attach a draft letter from you to Mr. MacLaury, President of
Brookings.2
2 The draft letter to Bruce MacLauray, President of the Brookings Institution, is not
attached. In a June 3 memorandum to Vance, Brzezinski wrote: “Further to your memo-
randum to the President of May 20, and our subsequent conversations concerning the de-
sirability of the Brookings Institution carrying out a study of U.S. foreign aid strategies, it
would be preferable for you to request the study on behalf of the President. In my view it
is unnecessary and undesirable for the President or members of the White House Staff to
become directly involved in arranging a contractual relationship with Brookings. Though
the choice of Brookings is the Department’s decision, there should be no doubt that the
President initiated the idea of the proposed study. To this end, you may wish to note in
your letter to Bruce MacLaury that the President wants the project to be undertaken.”
(Ibid.) No letter from Vance to MacLaury was found.
265.
Editorial Note
The Conference on International Economic Cooperation (CIEC),
which began meeting in December 1975, held its final meeting at the
the meeting approached, officials at the Department of State revisited
the issue of announcing a doubling of U.S. foreign aid over 8 years. (See
Document 263.) On May 25, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance met with

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
several members of Congress to discuss the CIEC. He later reported to
President Jimmy Carter: “Most of the discussion centered around our
proposal to seek from the Congress authority to double our bilateral
aid over the next five years. A large majority of the group said that if we
made such a statement in Paris now we might prejudice the current aid
bill. They suggested we make a general statement about increases and
work to develop support for doubling our aid later on the basis of the
results of the CIEC meeting.” (Memorandum from Vance to Carter,
May 25; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
May 30 address to the CIEC, Vance announced that “President Carter
will seek from the Congress a substantial increase in the volume of our
bilateral and multilateral aid programs over the coming five years.” For
the text of Vance’s address, see the Department of State Bulletin, June
frequent reports on the status of the negotiations; these reports are in
the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Sub-
tional Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 18, Eve-
ning Reports (State): 6/77.
Telegram 16350 from Paris, June 3, summarized the conclusion of
the Conference on International Economic Cooperation thus: “CIEC
came to a satisfactory conclusion during the early morning hours on
June 3. The two sides reached agreement on a number of issues in the
four areas of CIEC: energy, raw materials, development, and financial
affairs. Gap in package was lack of agreement on on-going energy con-
sultation process. While the areas of agreement fell short of G–19 aspi-
rations, the substantive outcome was generally favorable. The tone and
atmosphere of the CIEC conclusion should have a positive impact on
future North/South relations.” The telegram noted that the Conference
communique´ announced agreement “on guidelines for energy supply
and cooperation, on the principle of a common fund, for increased and
more effective official development assistance, for enhanced public fi-
nancing for energy and raw materials development, on the special ac-
tion program of one billion dollars to assist the poorest countries on a
relatively fast-disbursing basis, as well as other subjects related to
transfer of technology, industrialization, and food and agriculture. The
key disappointment was failure to get conference agreement on an
on-going energy dialogue.” According to the telegram, “an integral ele-
ment in the final CIEC compromise, which the G–19 reluctantly ac-
cepted was that the results of CIEC could not be pocketed by the G–19
and then condemned in a unilateral declaration.” As a result, the com-
munique´ balanced reference to the lack of progress on certain devel-
oping country goals with reference to the belief that the negotiations
had increased mutual understanding. (Telegram 16350 from Paris, June

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
The text of the final communique´ of the Conference on International
Economic Cooperation is printed in the Department of State Bulletin,
In the June 4 Evening Report to Carter, Acting Secretary of State
Warren Christopher suggested that the United States could “be reason-
ably satisfied with the results of the CIEC,” which he summarized thus:
“a common text was agreed upon; the developing countries did not
issue a unilateral declaration; both sides expressed disappointment
that only limited agreement had proved possible; but both sides also
pronounced themselves satisfied that the dialogue had been compre-
hensive and that a positive tone had prevailed.” Christopher asserted
that the “CIEC represents a form of diplomacy that is growing in im-
portance. In the UN and elsewhere, the developing countries continue
to demand action to reduce the asymmetry they perceive in the interna-
tional economic system. The developed countries have responded with
concessions calibrated to continue the dialogue and keep it nonacrimo-
nious. The state of bilateral relations between the US and particular de-
veloping countries has had only a rough bearing on their conduct in
this kind of multilateral discussion. Bloc politics has produced a cohe-
sion that survives in the face of widely divergent national economic in-
terests. To take four countries with whom we have relatively good rela-
tions, Iran and Saudi Arabia were both helpful to us at CIEC, but
Mexico and Venezuela were not. We need to reflect on the implications
of this kind of diplomacy and consider how we can deal with it more
effectively.” Carter directed that Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs Terence Todman and First Lady Rosalynn Carter be
apprised of the stances of Mexico and Venezuela. (Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 18, Eve-
ning Reports (State): 6/77)

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
266.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Cooper) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, June 11, 1977
Post-Mortem on CIEC
The US team to CIEC met for an hour and a half yesterday to re-
flect on what lessons we might learn from the CIEC experience. We dis-
cussed coordination within the US Government among the industrial
countries and with developing countries. We also tried to assess the
value of CIEC and to draw what lessons we could for multilateral di-
plomacy in the future.
With some self-satisfaction, we concluded that coordination
within the US Government had been very good on CIEC matters. The
agencies worked well with one another. There were a few areas where
those working on CIEC matters were not as cognizant as they might
have been of other related activities—the main problem here being our
desire to commit to aid doubling at a time that was extremely awkward
in terms of the legislative calendar on current aid appropriations. Coor-
dination among the industrial countries was also very good, although
there were a few slippages. The desire to place a high priority on close
coordination means, of course, that we were somewhat more rigid on
some issues than the US acting alone would have been. But, on balance,
we certainly gained more than we lost from close coordination with the
other industrial countries. The coordination was not in such lock-step
that from time to time independent action was not possible. The main
slippage came in early April when I thought we should make a coordi-
nated approach to the key developing countries on how we viewed the
prospects and outcome of CIEC. Michael Butler (UK),2 speaking for the
European Presidency, agreed with this, but somehow the European
Council of Ministers torpedoed it. We went ahead with our bilateral
anyway, with Butler’s tacit approval, but without formal coordination
with the other countries.
It is difficult to assess the value of the bilaterals we had with the
developing countries. They took place mainly in April with your
follow-up letter to Ministers delivered by our Ambassadors in
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot
tialed “CV” at the bottom of the page.
2 Michael Butler was Deputy Under Secretary for Economic Matters at the British
Foreign and Commonwealth Office.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
mid-May.3 The Mexicans disappointed us at CIEC, and played a far less
constructive role than we had hoped on the basis of my bilateral con-
versations in Mexico City in mid-April.4 They apologized privately for
this—Solomon chided Roel for the unconstructive role that they were
playing in Paris—but explained, somewhat sheepishly, that for them
G–77 diplomacy is different from bilateral diplomacy. We cannot make
separation so clearly and should emphasize to other countries that only
a certain degree of inconsistency between their bilateral and multi-
lateral stance is tolerable for us. Our bilateral approach may have
helped with the Indonesians and Algerians, and it certainly did with
the Saudi Arabians. I come away from the experience with the convic-
tion that we were right in going ahead with our bilateral discussions
and that, if anything, on future occasions we should intensify them, al-
though I admit it is difficult to be certain that they are helpful.
It is difficult to assess CIEC as a whole. It ended with meager re-
sults, but with a very good tone. I believe we came out about as well as
we could reasonably have expected to do. Certainly, the dialogue
lacked the acrimony and even hostility that accompanied the
North-South dialogue two years ago. It would be nice to credit CIEC
with (1) having exerted a calming influence on North-South relations
would represent a plausible but not wholly persuasive assessment, and
we will never really be sure. We will learn more about CIEC’s effect on
the tone of North-South relations when the outcome is taken up in the
UNGA. Perez-Guerrero is again out on the hustings for a New Interna-
tional Economic Order, which, he concedes, is necessarily a long
process, with the threat that oil prices will be used as the instrument to
attain it, albeit “reasonably and advisedly”. This is an instrument
which is not at Venezuela’s disposal, and its actual use depends on how
much pressure OPEC countries can bring on Saudi Arabia on NIEO
and other grounds.
As to the implications for multilateral diplomacy, we agreed that it
would be desirable in the future to avoid negotiating on such a broad
agenda as CIEC had. We will, of course, continue to have general dis-
cussions in the UN and elsewhere, but we should strive to drive actual
negotiation into specialized forums where directly interested countries
dominate on any particular issue, and where they are represented by
from Vance to G–19 Ministers. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
4 No memoranda of conversation of these discussions were found. According to
telegram 6763 from Mexico City, May 6, Cooper conveyed the U.S. position on CIEC to
Mexican officials when he was in Mexico City on April 14. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D770162–0409)

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
persons with expert knowledge, who will be more pragmatic and more
desirous of achieving real results, rather than rhetorical victories.
Standing back from the North-South dialogue as a whole, I believe
we have been in a predominantly defensive posture, and we have al-
lowed the developing countries to seize the moral ground. I believe we
have to regain the initiative in two respects:
1. Whenever developing countries propose an area for negotiation,
we should quickly address the issue with a proposal that we find ac-
ceptable, rather than simply responding negatively to proposals—or
broad suggestions—put forward by the developing countries.5 At
CIEC, we were in a strong position on external debt, even though the
developing countries did not accept our proposal. We showed them we
took the issue seriously by seizing it and responding to it. The US
stance is also very good on sugar, where it is widely recognized that we
made a constructive proposal even though it has not yet achieved gen-
eral agreement.
2. We must find a number of areas to take the offensive. The Presi-
dent’s position on human rights represents an example outside the eco-
nomic area. Our proposal on illicit payments is another example. Still
other possible examples where we might take the offensive is in urging
developing countries, in their own interests as well as ours,6 to reduce
their very high levels of tariff production and to take visible and
effective domestic actions to help correct the extraordinary mal-
distribution of income within developing countries. I will try to de-
velop an analysis of possible areas where the US and other industrial
countries can take the offensive in multilateral discussions. The pur-
pose is not to be strident or acrimonious, but rather to show that we
also care how the world system operates and to make clear that we con-
sider developing countries to be part of it, not a privileged group out-
side it. The purpose will also be to regain the moral ground in interna-
tional debate that has been captured by leaders in developing
countries—sometimes with genuine commitment, but often with cyn-
ical opportunism—but that is historically and philosophically ours.
5 Vance highlighted this sentence and wrote “OK” in the adjacent margin.
6 Vance highlighted the portion of this paragraph that begins with “Our proposal
on illicit payments” and ends with “in their own.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
267.
Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Lake) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, June 17, 1977
Prospects for Expanded Soviet Bloc Role in North-South Problems
Summary and Conclusions
There are two contrasting motives for encouraging the Soviet Bloc
to play a more active role in North-South problems,2 particularly in
various measures for economic development, as you suggested at
CIEC:3
a) to elicit a genuinely cooperative effort on the part of the Soviet
Union, with the aim of maximizing the positive role they have to play
in Third World development and dampening East-West political com-
petition; or
b) to silhouette Soviet inadequacies in contributing to Third World
needs, with the aim of revealing the gap between Soviet rhetoric and
reality and exposing the Soviets to criticism on the part of the devel-
oping countries.
The relative weight to be accorded these motives shows up when
the complex of North-South issues is broken down into its components:
negotiations focusing on the International Wheat Agreement,4 other indi-
vidual commodity agreements (except coffee), aid for basic human needs,
and the producer-consumer dialogue in energy offer some promise of
success in integrating the Soviet bloc into the North-South dialogue in a
constructive way.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside
Jenonne Walker (S/P) and concurred in in EB, IO, INR (draft), and EUR/SOV (draft).
Vance forwarded this memorandum to Carter as an attachment to a June 26 “Memo-
randum on Some Possible Measures for Stabilizing US-Soviet Relations.” (Ibid.) Carter
wrote at the top of the page: “Some good ideas. J.”
2 In a May 31 memorandum to Carter on “Patterns of Communist Aid,” Brzezinski
discussed the provision of military and economic assistance by Communist countries to
non-Communist LDCs. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
Subject File, Box 12, unlabeled folder)
3 In his May 30 address to the CIEC, Vance asserted: “We believe the industrialized
Communist countries also should increase their development assistance. We are pre-
pared to join with them in such assistance, when and where they are willing to do it.”
cluding the United States, regulated wheat prices and sales among its wheat-exporting
and wheat-importing signatories. In 1971, the United States signed a later iteration of the
agreement.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
On the Food Aid Convention,5 IFAD, general bilateral aid, multi-
lateral development efforts via the UN, trade, and technology, in con-
trast, it will be extraordinarily hard to move the Soviets into a pattern of
positive contribution. But it should be relatively easy to expose the
dismal Soviet performance to Third World criticism, without our ap-
pearing to conduct an anti-Soviet campaign.
The United States need not choose definitively, between the two
approaches. Rather, it can explore both options without foreclosing
either.
But there are limits to how much we can expect from this effort.
While some Soviet officials have recently been throwing out hints of
greater interest, Moscow’s official position is that it wants no part of the
“North-South” dialogue as such; that it is a false way of looking at the
world and that the real division—between capitalist and socialist coun-
tries—puts them squarely on the side of the developing states.
Beyond rhetoric and ideology, the Soviets have not wanted to di-
lute the political impact of their assistance by subsuming it within
broader efforts by the industrialized (read Western) nations. And they
focus more on arms and military equipment than on economic aid. This
gives them a short-run political impact disproportionate to their
outlays, and leaves Western countries shouldering the more important,
longer-term economic aid burden.
Finally, we should be under no illusion that LDC pressure on the
West springs from a notion that the Soviets wear white hats and we
black. It reflects, instead, a realistic assessment that we have most of
what the LDCs need, and are more likely to give at least some of it.
Thus, whether we get the Soviets to cooperate in the North-South
dialogue or merely score propaganda points off them, we should not
expect it to lessen LDC pressure on ourselves.
The Issues
1. Agriculture
(a) International Grain Agreement
This fall the United States wants to begin negotiations on a new In-
ternational Grain Agreement. The Soviets want an agreement that will
produce stable prices, but have been reluctant to sign an accord that re-
quires reserve stocks. To ensure food security for the Third World there
must be grain stocks. The Soviet Union must bear central responsi-
bility: variations in Soviet grain production currently account for about
80% of worldwide production variations. And if history is a guide, the
5 The Food Aid Convention, which was concluded in 1967, set guidelines for the
granting of food assistance.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Soviet Union will probably encounter serious weather problems in at
least one or two of the next five years. They have an interest in getting
an agreement to give them some security on price. Pressing them on the
need to contribute to protection against starvation in the Third World
might push them over the top toward making a commitment on re-
serves. Probability of success: moderate.6
(b) Food Aid Convention
This fall we shall start negotiations for a new Food Aid Conven-
tion, which will consist of pledges by member countries to donate an
annual minimum amount of food aid. The Soviets have not been a
member in the past. This year we could seek Soviet membership. Prob-
ability of success: extremely low. Prospects for shaming the Soviets:
good.
(c) IFAD
IFAD is a fund to finance agricultural development in the Third
World via projects carried out by the World Bank, regional banks, or
FAO. The Soviets have not promised to contribute. We could press
them. Probability of success: almost none. Prospects for shaming the
Soviets: moderate.
2. Commodity Agreements
The Soviets are already a member of commodity agreements—
cocoa, tin, rubber, and sugar (now defunct). To have successful agree-
ments on sugar, copper, and eventually other materials, we shall have
to insist that they make their bilateral agreements public (e.g., Cuban
sugar) and that they include intra-bloc trade as part of the world trade
for purposes of market control (e.g., copper shipments in Eastern Eu-
rope). Probability of success: moderate.
3. Development Assistance
(a) Basic Human Needs
There are some specific areas in which the Soviets might be able to
make a productive contribution to development assistance in coopera-
tion with American aid programs. One is the training of paramedical
personnel, where the Soviets have a comparative advantage and the
South has a great need. Other areas for US-Soviet bloc cooperative aid
programs in the “human needs” category might include: a) water treat-
ment; b) waste disposal; c) joint research in host countries on tropical
diseases; d) responses to protein deficiency; e) immunization; f) clinics
and low-cost health delivery systems. (Note: Cuba has an outstanding
record in organizing and managing programs, especially rural pro-
grams, in many of these areas.)
6 Carter wrote “Let them know the consequences of not cooperating also” in the
margin adjacent to this paragraph.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
The US Congress might not like the notion of joint ventures, espe-
cially with Cubans. It might be well to begin by adding LDC needs to
the agenda of ongoing US-Soviet exchanges on, for instance, agricul-
ture, housing, and medical subjects. Probability of success: unknown.
(b) Bilateral Aid
The process of assisting developing nations to higher levels of eco-
nomic and social development has been and still remains primarily a
task undertaken by the industrial West. Assistance from the Commu-
Eastern Europe); repayment terms are frequently stiffer than those
asked by the West; there are fewer outright grants; most of the poorest
countries are not included; the emphasis is on showcase heavy indus-
trial projects at the expense of light industry and agricultural programs;
all aid is totally tied to procurement from the communist states; and aid
is highly concentrated in a few countries in which communist nations
have strong political interests. It should not be hard to heighten Third
World consciousness of the fact that the Eastern impact on the funda-
mental development process has been negligible, or to stimulate Third
World spokesmen to make demands upon the Soviet bloc that will only
be met with rejection. Probability of expanding Soviet bilateral aid in a
way harmonious with US interests: nil. Prospects for exposing Soviet
shortcomings: moderate.
(c) Participation in Multilateral Development Efforts
Soviet contributions to the South via the UN system have almost
invariably been in non-convertible rubles. A major part of the recent
UNDP funding crisis was due to the unusable supply of rubles held by
the organization (a point successfully exploited by the US delegation).
We could give strong public encouragement of greater Communist
contributions to those UN multilateral assistance programs such as the
UNDP and UNIDO where the Bloc wields influence not commensurate
with their financial participation. Probability of success: low. Prospects
for exposing Soviet shortcomings: moderate.
(d) Membership in the IMF
While the IMF plays a large and rapidly growing role in lending to
the LDCs, the question of Soviet participation goes well beyond the
North-South dialogue (conditionality of loans to Great Britain and
Italy, stability of the international financial system). Unless one were to
relax the conditions of membership drastically, the possibility of Soviet
membership would seem remote: members of IMF are generally re-
quired to refrain from imposing restrictions on international payments,
to avoid discriminatory currency practices, to make their currency con-
vertible, and to furnish the Fund with information on international re-
serves, trade, payments, exchange rates, domestic production and price
of goods and services, and the production and import and export of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
gold. Moreover, membership in the IMF should require a large Soviet
capital outlay. To make the exceptions required would be a large task,
with few if any positive implications for the North-South dialogue in
return. (Romania is the only bloc country that currently is a member of
the IMF. Poland is considering joining.)7
At least as important as Soviet willingness to join the IMF is our
willingness to have them. They might well work from inside the Fund
to change its rules and generally create obstacles to its operation.
(e) Membership in the World Bank
IMF membership is a precondition for joining the Bank. One could,
however, make some major exceptions (see above) to get the bloc coun-
tries in. This would be a great leap forward for the Soviets into the
North-South dialogue. They would gain the prestige derived from “as-
sociation” with all of the Bank’s projects and relieve themselves from
much potential Third World criticism for their stinginess toward the
South. What they could contribute to the development of the South
other than (perhaps) a small capital subscription to the Bank is unclear.
Moreover, in general, the Soviets have not wanted to “dilute” the im-
pact of their own aid by channeling it through multilateral institutions.
(Romania is the only bloc country that currently is a member of the
Bank.)
Prospects that Soviets will join IMF and IBRD in the foreseeable fu-
ture: remote.
4. Trade
Soviet trade with the Third World is small, accounting (even prior
to the 1973 rise in oil prices) for less than 5% of the LDC’s total trade
turnover. The composition of trade—Soviet manufactured goods in re-
turn for Third World food stuffs and raw materials—has the effect, in
the words of a non-government specialist, “of perpetuating a trade pat-
tern which in another context the communists label ‘imperialistic’.”
The United States could easily be more vocal in linking G–77 demands
about opening industrial markets for manufactured goods to Southern
exporters, and about untying commercial credit to finance trade, to
poor Soviet bloc performance on these issues. Probability of success:
nil. Prospects for exposing Soviets to criticism: moderate.
5. Technology
In those countries where the Soviet Bloc does have active aid pro-
grams, the technology offered tends to be both capital intensive and ob-
solete, that is, “inappropriate”, by the standards of the Third World.
We could exploit this point more vigorously in those North-South
7 Carter wrote “Let’s concentrate on satellite & other socialist countries first” in the
margin adjacent to this paragraph.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
forums (UNCTAD, UN Center for Transnational Enterprises) where
appropriate technology is discussed. Probability of inducing change in
Soviet behavior: zero. Prospects for criticism of Soviets: unknown.
6. Energy
It has traditionally been assumed that the Soviets could only make
mischief over energy, favoring higher prices to benefit their own oil
and gas exports and giving rhetorical support to the demands of the
for example).8 Although the CIA predicts a drop off in Soviet oil pro-
duction by 1985, it is not certain how this, if it occurs, will affect Soviet
energy policy. There might eventually be an opportunity to bring them
into a producer-consumer energy dialogue on the side of the moderates
(and in opposition to Iraq and Algeria.) Probability of success: wholly
unknown.9
8 Not found.
9 In a June 27 memorandum to Brzezinski, Thornton characterized Lake’s memo-
randum to Vance as “a sensible and basically negative piece, not very imaginative” and
stated that his “main criticism is the persistent concern to use North-South fora to ‘show
the Soviets up’. We should not get involved in this. They are doing a fine job on their own
in this regard and we will unnecessarily cheapen ourselves if we start making propa-
ganda shots. It is also likely to deflect us from more serious matters.” (Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South, Thornton, Subject File, Box 101,
268.
Memorandum From President Carter1
Washington, June 27, 1977
MEMORANDUM FOR
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Treasury
The Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of Agriculture
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Administrator, Agency for International Development
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 26,
tive version that incorporated changes proposed by Lance, to Carter under cover of an
undated note. Lance’s changes included removing military assistance from the study, as
well as a separate study on official and private assistance. (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
SUBJECT
Analysis of the Effectiveness of United States Foreign Assistance
On several occasions, including my foreign assistance message to
Congress and the London Summit,2 I have pledged a more effective
U.S. development assistance performance. This commitment was fur-
ther reinforced at the CIEC Ministerial, for which I also approved an-
nouncement of our intention to seek from Congress substantial in-
creases in future aid levels.
I am now directing the Economic Policy Group and the National
Security Council jointly to undertake a full examination of our foreign
assistance programs prior to my making major budget decisions this
fall. The study should address bilateral assistance including food aid,
security supporting assistance, and military aid insofar as it bears on
the effectiveness of our over-all assistance; and multilateral assistance
provided through international financial institutions and other organi-
zations. It should draw on work in progress, including PRM 8. New
analysis and consultations with non-governmental organizations and
individuals should be initiated where necessary.
The study should be carried out through the Development Coordi-
nation Committee,3 chaired by Governor Gilligan, with participation
by other agencies as necessary. Three broad questions should be
addressed:
—Within the context of our evolving North-South relationships,
what should be the basic orientation of our foreign economic and mili-
tary assistance over the next five years and beyond? How should they
complement other ingredients of U.S. policies toward the developing
countries?
—What should be the relationship among the components of our
assistance effort?
—In the context of substantial aid increase over the next five years,
what are the alternative effective program mixes? And what kind of
programs are most likely to evoke the required degree of public and
Congressional support?
More specific issues are listed in the attachment.
A final report should be ready for cabinet level review not later
than September 1, 1977.
Jimmy Carter
minutes of the first session of the London G–7 Summit, see Document 27.
tion Committee to “advise the President with respect to coordination of United States
policies and programs affecting the development of the developing countries, including
programs of bilateral and multilateral development assistance.”

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
Attachment
Paper4
Washington, undated
ADDITIONAL ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
—What basic objectives should guide our foreign assistance
efforts?
—What set of techniques and guidelines can we devise to measure
the effectiveness of our programs?
—Which programs have been most effective in meeting their as-
signed objectives? Which have been least effective? Which, if any,
should be phased out or discontinued?
—Are there new types of programs or approaches which should
be undertaken to better relate our efforts to changing circumstances in
developing countries?
—To what extent does military assistance contribute to our overall
objectives?
—In which programs does our aid dollar have the most develop-
ment impact? Which most directly improve the welfare of the poor ma-
jority? How can multilateral and bilateral programs be changed to
better reach the poor?
—Which programs could be managed at reduced cost without sac-
rificing our objectives? Where can waste and mismanagement be elimi-
nated? Where can the planning, implementation, and reporting proc-
esses be streamlined to reduce cost, personnel, and needless work?
—In which programs could additional assistance be absorbed in
ways that would improve the programs’ efficiency, i.e., in which the
marginal utility of additional funds would be substantial?
—Are we taking adequate measures to insure that host countries
pursue policies which magnify or otherwise support the impact of our
bilateral assistance and multilateral aid? Should the conditionality of
our assistance be made stronger?
—How can the U.S. effectively involve itself in pre-project plan-
ning and post-project assessment of multilateral assistance programs?
—How can we best control salaries and living styles of U.S.
Government employees and personnel of international financial
institutions?
4 Confidential.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—What kind of programs and approaches are the most effective in
producing additional commitments from other donors, including
OPEC; which lend themselves best to cooperation with other nations,
including COMECON?
—How can coordination between bilateral and multilateral pro-
grams be improved within the U.S. Government, among donors, and
within host countries? How can coordination between official and pri-
vate assistance programs be improved?
269.
Briefing Memorandum From Richard Feinberg of the Policy
Planning Staff to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, June 30, 1977
Basic Human Needs Strategy: Some Caveats
At CIEC and the OECD, you supported a development strategy
emphasizing the basic human needs of the world’s poor majority.2
While such an approach commands wide support, it also faces many
pitfalls. The purpose of this memo is to alert you to these potential
problems before they become real. Some will be resolved through fur-
ther study, and others can probably be finessed. None needs prove
fatal.
IDENTIFYING NEEDS: Needs have a strong subjective component
and vary culturally. The mud hut which maintains moderate tempera-
tures year-round may seem less impressive than a more modern (and
more expensive) brick home with a pre-fab aluminum-sheet roofing—
which boils in the summer and fails to insulate in the winter. Nutri-
tional needs, even for the same sex, age and activity, vary among dif-
ferent people and different environments. Whatever programs are de-
veloped must be clearly designed as situation-specific.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Official Working
through Lake.
2 Regarding Vance’s May 30 address at the CIEC Ministerial meeting, see Docu-
Vance’s intervention at the meeting, see the Department of State Bulletin, July 25, 1977,

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
IDENTIFYING THE POOR: This task is not as easy as might appear
at first glance. Because the poor often inhabit a non-monetary,
non-recorded world, their exact living conditions are not known. Sec-
ondly, poverty is relative: a person with a $500 income in the slums of
Rio may feel poorer than someone with a $75 income in rural India.
Cross-cultural definitions of poverty must be viewed skeptically. It will
be essential to involve local organizations that are in close touch with—
if not composed of—people from poverty backgrounds; such groups
can help identify the needy and assist social scientists in devising
surveys to reflect indigenous concerns.
THE MONETARY COST: Developmentalists now cite specific esti-
mates for the budgetary costs of boosting global living standards be-
yond a minimum level—one common figure is $125 billion in foreign
assistance (IFI’s plus OECD bilateral), to be disbursed to the poor coun-
tries over a ten-to-fifteen-year period. The models these figures are de-
rived from are so crude as to be considered worthless by many. Starting
at the individual country level in order to calculate the amount of re-
sources required to satisfy basic human needs is a more promising ap-
proach, since one at least can take into account specific political and
cultural factors, and an economic environment can be posited.
DELIVERING SERVICES: In most LDC’s the benefits accruing
from social services flow to the privileged groups, as does the distribu-
tion of income. One cannot assume that aid programs categorized as,
say, health, agriculture, or education necessarily benefit the poor. Con-
tinued vigilance will be necessary to “audit” the strategy.
PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT: Designing—and implementing—
programs that will reach the poor are relatively untried tasks. Progress,
therefore, will have to proceed at a modest pace, and those hoping for
the quick fix will be disappointed. The ultimate impact of a particular
program may not be apparent. For example, raising the price of food
produced by the rural poor can result in pressure for higher urban
wages which are passed on in higher prices for industrial products, in-
cluding those purchased by the poor farmers: the net income effect may
be negligible. Higher wages may benefit some workers but prevent
others from being hired. Projects cannot be implemented in isolation:
their side effects must be carefully traced through the individual
country’s economic and institutional structures.
RAISING PRODUCTIVITY: The peasant cannot be productive
without land, nor can the industrial worker produce without a job. So-
cial restraints on productivity are often monumental. The basic-human-
needs agenda, therefore, raises the tough issues of land reform, insuffi-
cient land and uneconomic holdings in the country, and restrictive
union practices, massive educated unemployment and social inhibi-
tions on manual labor by the educated in the cities. The Alliance for

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Progress initially pressed hard for land reform, only to beat a hasty
political retreat. A combination of caste, insufficient land and local
political pressures are pervasive restraints in India. Moreover, even
land-reform advocates must admit that, in the short run, the produc-
tivity of the new land-owners often drops, and they often sell their land
off quickly. Productivity gains must be viewed from a long-run
perspective.
INTERDEPENDENCE OF BASIC HUMAN NEEDS: Good health
depends on good nutrition, potable water, adequate housing, and edu-
cation, not only on access to medical facilities. This means a level of
planning and coordination that outdistances the administrative capa-
bility of many LDCs. Delivery procedures must be developed that
eliminate red tape, perhaps through decentralization or increased
decision-making by the poor themselves.
POLITICAL CONSTRAINTS: Some leading analysts, including the
World Bank, argue that in some LDCs a major restructuring of political
and economic power relations has to be a pre-requisite to serious im-
plementation of a basic human needs strategy. The implication is that,
for governments such as those in Chile or Uruguay, not only must they
be pressured to halt torture and summary executions, but they must
abandon their “trickle-down” model of development. This is tanta-
mount to asking for their abdications: in these two countries, as in
others, the military seized power in order to crush political forces fa-
voring more equitable income distribution. In other countries with
more democratic structures, such as India, the tenacity of conservative
social forces makes an effective grass-roots restructuring of political
and economic power extremely difficult, given the local pressures.
Many southern elites will view the basic human needs strategy as a Ma-
chiavellian maneuver to divert attention away from the international
distribution of income, and will cry “interventionism”. Even further,
they may perceive it as a way of inhibiting them from “catching up”
with the West technologically. These negative reactions can be diluted
by our being reasonably forthcoming on development assistance and
other NIEO issues.
SELECTION CRITERIA: If the aid agencies decide to concentrate
on governments indicating a serious commitment to basic human
needs, what criteria will be used as proof of this commitment? State-
ments of intent are only words. The existing income distribution might
have evolved in spite of, rather than because of, government policies.
Moreover, income distribution figures are notoriously inadequate.
(Even in the US they have been found wanting and are currently being
revised to take into account, for example, non-market items like
home-grown foods as well as corporation “perks”.) Whatever criteria
are chosen, those countries that are de-selected will raise a political

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
storm. Nevertheless, such disaffections will be outweighed by the
higher rate of return that aid will produce in those countries in agree-
ment with the donor’s objectives.
US DOMESTIC OPPOSITION: The AFL–CIO would raise eye-
brows over a development scenario that, in effect, advocates allocating
labor-intensive industries to the LDCs. And capital goods industries
prefer that the IFIs continue to finance their exports. While the products
of some multinationals fit neatly into a basic human needs strategy,
others do not: a strategy emphasizing the basic needs of the poor is im-
plicitly critical of stimulation, through advertizing or demonstration, of
non-basic needs. Finally, there may of necessity be implied criticism of
traditional allies who are less concerned with meeting the basic human
needs of their population. We will have to make a persuasive case that
the US will be well served by a successful basic human needs approach.
None of these problems means that a basic human needs approach
will not work. We believe it can and that it is right. But awareness of the
potential difficulties—as we also examine the benefits—will help us
minimize them.
270.
Memorandum From Roger Hansen of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, July 20, 1977
SUBJECT
A Summary Analysis of PRM–8 Second Stage Process and
the Issues for Resolution
A. Process of Work Group
1. You will recall that the Second Stage was constituted after the
EPG had focused quite narrowly on several key North-South economic
issues for which the Administration needed to take a position at the
UNCTAD-sponsored Common Fund meetings (March), the London
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 63, PRC

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Summit (May), and the CIEC Ministerial (May 29–June 2). The two
PRMs themselves are attached for your convenience under Tab C.2
2. The crucial wording of the PRM 8 Second Stage instructions is
the following: “Since the negotiating calendar has of necessity forced
the EPG to concentrate virtually all its attention on short-term eco-
nomic issues, a decision has been made to constitute a PRC Working
Group to examine the longer term and essentially political aspects of
North-South relations concerning which the President requested
analysis and the presentation of options in the initial PRM 8
instructions.”
3. The working Group (membership listed in Tab D)3 consisted in
great part of officials at the assistant secretary and deputy assistant sec-
retary level; the official membership was kept at no more than twenty;
and the Group held only six 2-hour meetings. The conscious trade-off was:
fewer meetings and less demanding paper work in exchange for high
level representation. The rationale, throughout the entire process, ran as
follows in my mind:
a) The numbers of bureaucratic actors involved in key decisions on
North-South relations is very small, and consists almost entirely of line
economic officers.
b) These economic officers’ major concerns are short-term “system
maintenance”. Therefore, except in the case of an OPEC, they will never
focus on North-South issues because in general developing countries
cannot cause major systemic problems. Even when they might, as in the
case of massive debt default, the economic line officers will look for
short-term solutions with a major focus on the most-developed LDCs,
since they are the LDCs strong enough (in sheer economic terms) to cause
systemic problems. Therefore little serious attention is paid to economic
development per se, or the “lower tier” LDCs.
c) The North-South issues, while most often cast in economic
terms, are far more complex. They are issues of status, identity, au-
tonomy, relative deprivation, etc. These issues in turn present
problems and possibilities for the achievement of all US foreign policy
goals—economic, political, security, humanitarian, etc.
d) Finally, the North-South agenda is loaded with “global agenda”
or “world order” problems, e.g., food production, population growth,
the food/population balance, global “commons” issue, ecological
problems, proliferation, etc. All these issues in turn raise the funda-
mental question of international institutional innovation for global
management.
3 Not attached.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
e) Therefore, the most important single advancement which could be
made by the PRM 8 Second Stage process was to widen the group of
key bureaucratic actors who would be involved from the start in the
“making” of North-South policy defined in this broader sense.
4. The attendance of people like Tony Lake, Bill Maynes, Joe Nye
and several others went far to accomplish this purpose. If the President
approves PRM Issue #1, a group representative of this broad range of
concerns and now familiar with the issues which are central to
North-South relations want and will have a legitimate role in the for-
mulation of a North-South strategy and policies for as long as you find
them helpful in the process of broadening our understanding of the
necessities of North-South relations (and capacity to respond in policy
terms with appropriate insights).
5. As you read parts IV and V of the PRM response,4 the general
level at which they are cast and the lack of hard “either/or” options for
the President may well disappoint you. Right or wrong, this was the
price I had to pay to “legitimize” a broader inter-agency group and key
set of individuals on these issues, and to give you and the President far
more room to make and implement policies in this arena without the
bureaucracy (read Treasury, E Bureau, etc.) fighting you subtly every
step of the way. Now Secretary Vance is aware of his own Depart-
mental problems; Lake, Maynes and Nye have access to all North-
South issues, and the E Bureau is on the defensive. Less has been
accomplished at Treasury. With absolutely no pejorative connotation
intended, Bergsten and crew remain, I fear, very much “system mainte-
nance” oriented, and unwilling to think very far ahead about
North-South issues. The CIA has proved a surprising and articulate
ally; US/UN is an ally without intellectual ammunition on this set of
issues.
6. I remind you that DOD was given four out of some 20 seats on
the Group, and all were encouraged to comment in detail on the
Agenda and all papers, and submit their own papers when they
deemed it helpful. DOD (ISA and JCS) contributed nothing, and only
the two alternates showed up for the bulk of the meetings. Davis made
1½, and General Winger made two meetings.5
7. A summary of PRM 8 findings can be found in Part IV of the
4 Dodson forwarded the response to the second stage of the PRM–8 process, an un-
dated paper entitled “North/South Strategy,” to Mondale, Vance, Blumenthal, Brown,
Turner, Young, Lance, and Gilligan under cover of a July 18 memorandum. (Carter Li-
5 Neither Davis nor General Winger has been identified.
6 Not attached; see footnote 4 above.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
“Conceptually, our overall strategy will be composed of four cate-
gories of policies:
1. Those dynamic changes to which the Administration has al-
ready committed itself in the areas of trade, aid, international monetary
arrangements, international food reserves, and increased support for
international development institutions.
2. Policies which relate more directly to the politically, econom-
ically and militarily strong LDCs, where our immediate economic and
security interests are most obvious.
3. Basic human needs policies which directly attack the problem of
“absolute poverty” throughout the world.
4. Policies which analyze, advocate and implement systemic
changes in those international arrangements which reveal increasingly
limited capacity to manage old problems or cope with new ones.
“There is little argument that efforts should be devoted to each category
of policies. The difficult choices are the degree to which each is pursued relative
to other US goals (e.g., human rights, non-proliferation), and relative to one
another; and the mechanisms to be used in implementing each set of policies.
“In short, an appropriate US strategy will be one which starts from the
Administration policies already adopted and incorporates the insights of each
of the three focuses on North-South relations examined by this Working
Group. It will need the bilateral finesse suggested by the focus on the
‘upper tier’ of developing countries; it will need a program to rapidly
increase the standards of living of the world’s poorest people—a pro-
gram incorporating many ideas relevant to the fulfillment of basic
human needs; and it will need to build upon some of the most sugges-
tive insights which the global systemic reform approach brings to the
linkages between major problems on the ‘global politics’ agenda for the
coming eight years. The leadtime needed to make progress on a
problem like population control is so extensive that the United States
can no longer afford to relegate such problems to the lower echelons
typical in past Administrations.
“Finally, and fundamentally, an appropriate US strategy will be
one which continues movement toward trade liberalization; a global
food reserve program; substantially increased foreign assistance; aug-
mented resources for such crucial international organizations as the
IMF and the IBRD; and altered norms for the operation of and repre-
sentation in these key organizations that meet Southern desires in ways
that gradually strengthen the operation of the international economic
system. It is difficult to overestimate the importance of progress along these
lines to which the Administration is already committed. Indeed, one of the
major reasons that this PRM response has not focused on the so-called
‘middle-tier’ developing countries in any discrete way is that these countries
in the aggregate should find the economic policies already enunciated by the
Administration very congenial to their economic aims and development pol-

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
icies. Without crucial progress in these areas where the US is already
committed, the problems analyzed in this PRM 8 response will be im-
measurably more difficult to manage, and new initiatives will be un-
dermined by a continuing Southern bitterness over ‘unfulfilled pledges
of good faith.’”
The remainder of the Summary and Section V will give you the
flavor of the analysis and argumentation which was accepted by almost
the entire group.
B. Issues for Resolution
This section of the PRM (pp. 40–54) contains five major issues, for
Presidential guidance, and five follow-up issues attached to specific
major issues.
I will list the issues in the order they appear, explaining briefly my
view of the importance of the issue and adding comments on other di-
vergent views which seem predictable at this time.
Issue #1—The Bureaucratic Framework for Consideration of North-
South Issues
Earlier parts of this memo indicate why I give so much importance
to this issue, and why I strongly hope that you and the President will
support a continuation of the process begun by the PRM 8 Second Stage
Work Group. State and CIA will be strongly supportive, both seeing
this as an opportunity to overcome the singular, narrow focus brought
to North-South issues by most of the Treasury line officers and State’s E
Bureau.
The rationale for placing this issue first is that all the remaining issues
have work programs attached to them. An interagency group, along the
direct responsibility for tasking and overseeing all the follow-on work, re-
porting to the PRC, you and the President as directed on each major
issue.
My overriding concern is that if this bureaucratic framework is not
blessed here and now, all “the action” will fall back into the hands of the line
economic officers (or the EPG). That’s why this issue is placed first, and the
PRM emphasizes that we are at the beginning of a process.
One last word. Such a group is not “stacked” in any direction. Its
make-up simply forces differing bureaucratic perspectives to join issue; the
winner is the President and US foreign policy. But watch Treasury and
perhaps AID and OMB; they may try to defend “bureaucratic turf”.
Van Dyk, incidentally, feels that the DCC should get this job. He can’t
see that aid is but one very small piece of a very large puzzle. He may
make a pitch for the DCC taking over the job at the PRC meeting.
Issue #2—US Strategy and Policies Toward the “Upper-Tier” of Devel-
oping Countries
This issue was given great emphasis by Treasury and the E Bureau
of State: their reasons are very briefly summarized in both Sections IV

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
and V of the PRM response. The LDCs being considered here are two
types of Sam’s7 “regional influentials”—the oil rich (Saudi Arabia) and
the industrialized (Brazil). The concern is how to “bring them into the
system” so that they will cooperate when so many US policies are pres-
ently creating problems with many of them (proliferation, human
rights, arms sales, trade protectionism, etc.).
While some group members carried this particular concern to ex-
tremes, all recognized the validity of the policy problem posed. Since
State (IO) let us down sadly on a paper for this problem, the Group can
do no better than to call for a specific type of follow-on study (for 8–12
countries) if the President is concerned enough about the problem to
approve further review. As described on page 45 of the PRM response,
a major focus of the country studies would be how these “local Levia-
thans” can be better integrated into existing and new regional and interna-
tional institutions.
Issue #3—The “Absolute Poverty” Problem and the Concept of Ful-
filling Basic Human Needs
There have been three major ways of trying to undercut placing an
option before the President which would allow him to support a “sig-
nificant increase” in US efforts and resources consonant with a BHN
strategy, despite manifest agreement by all working group members that,
at the least, steady movement in the BHN direction was highly
desirable.
The first attempt to undercut the option takes the form (Bergsten,
Boeker, etc.) of claiming this really isn’t an issue (“we’re all for it—its a
false issue”) and at the same time requesting that no figures be discussed
and no new mechanisms to administer such a program be discussed
(“this problem can easily be handled incrementally”). My personal
view, elaborated in Appendix Paper #6, is that incremental moves and
no new institutions will quite probably lead to another Alliance for
Progress fiasco in the BHN area.
The second attempt to undercut the option is to focus on the ob-
vious opposition which an emphasis on the approach will initially
evoke from LDC elite groups which are doing just fine the way things
are. Sometimes the economic “incrementalists” use this line because
they do not want any major shifts in emphasis in present US policies;
sometimes the political analysts (CIA) press it because their concern is
that we should respond more to the demands of LDC governing groups. And
BHN surely is not at the head of any list of LDC demands.
The final attempt to undercut the BHN approach has come singu-
larly from Ted Van Dyk. It takes the form of argument that there should
7 Possibly Samuel Huntington of the NSC Staff.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
be no focus on the “absolute poverty” problem (and therefore a BHN
strategy to get at the one billion living in absolute poverty conditions);
rather the focus should be on “the poor majority”. I have not been able
to convince Ted that the entire US aid effort (save military assistance) is
already supposed to be concentrated on the “poor majority” (a term with so
many conceptual and operational problems that it is useless as a policy
guideline). I cannot get him to see that a BHN strategy has a specific
target group, and requires a specific set of policies to raise the standard of
living of this group; and would be a novel and important political/devel-
opmental ingredient of a Carter foreign policy.
Van Dyk will surely bring this issue up; I have addressed it directly
in the PRM response (p. 26, top paragraph).
In meeting these arguments I have tried to build into the PRM 8
paper (pp. 20–30) two countervailing ideas:
(1) Despite LDC elite demands for a lot of free resource transfers
via NIEO, BHN is an appropriate US counter-proposal in perfect conti-
nuity with the President’s ideas and one which will give the Human
Rights emphasis the broadening it needs.
(2) The BHN approach is not meant to substitute for other responses to
LDC needs; it is a particular policy aimed at a particular problem which the
US feels is deserving of priority attention. We are willing to take all the
nasty and predictable Argentinian speeches that may come our way for
this new emphasis.
In all, the group ranged from lukewarm (especially Treasury) to
very supportive (S/P, parts of AID—not Van Dyk, but hopefully Gil-
ligan). Cooper told me he was all for it, “but you will have trouble with
the E Bureau”. Vance, of course, is strongly on record already.
Here again my hope would be that you and the President would
strongly endorse Issue #3 (“increase significantly US support”) for a
BHN effort.
If this approval is given, the Group (proposed in Issue #1) would
owe the President a full-scale set of options on a major BHN approach by
would hope the President would approve follow-up issue b, which
would settle an awful lot of inter-agency squabbling quickly by ap-
proving the view that basic human needs as defined in this PRM Re-
sponse is “an integral element of human rights”. (S/P made this spe-
cific proposal for Presidential decision.) Finally, approval of follow-up
issue c will serve to beef up the Vance effort to get OECD endorsement
for a BHN emphasis in all DAC member programs.
Again, the opponents will argue that “this isn’t what the LDC’s are
asking for”. These people suffer from bad logic. They are the first to
scream about the need for “reciprocity” in the narrow sense, but cannot
view our placing BHN on the North-South agenda as the reciprocal of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
the LDCs placing the Common Fund on the agenda. “They” want more
Northern resources and other forms of assistance; “we” want to make
sure that some of that assistance reaches a specific strata of people
living in the LDCs. This concept is not all that difficult to grasp, if one
wants to understand it.
Secondly, those same opponents are never willing to give the
LDCs what they ask for anyway, so why the hell do they worry that
proposing BHN isn’t being “responsive”? This is the same crew that
brought you the 6th Special Session of the UNGA8 and CIEC . . .
Issue #4—The Potential Trade-off Between an “Upper Echelon” Em-
phasis and a “Basic Human Needs Emphasis”
Putting the issue somewhat cynically, Treasury wanted this option
in to make the point that BHN can easily get out of hand if anyone (like
the President or Congress) jumps on it too hard. The E Bureau wanted
it out, I suspect, because they feared that, if forced to choose between
emphases, the President might “tilt” toward BHN. At any rate, most
Group Members (including me) see little chance that a trade-off area
will ever be reached unless one pushes either a BHN or an “upper ech-
elon” set of policies very far beyond reasonable bounds. Therefore I
would suggest that you support option a under Issue #4.
Issue #5—Global Reforms and North-South Relations
I am personally very disappointed not to be able to offer more of a
concrete nature for your consideration (and the President’s consider-
ation) here. The Group simply lost its collective voice or went to sleep
when this set of issues was raised.
Yet, as pp. 51–54 demonstrate, voices from both the State Depart-
ment and the CIA spoke up in favor of doing far more systematic
thinking in a longer-term time frame once they read, in the first draft,
how little the Group had accomplished.
If you feel it will be impossible to get the bureaucracy to focus on
such issue linkage (e.g., the food/population/basic human needs/
development set of linkages), you may not even wish to bring the issue
to the President’s attention.
On the other hand, his major interest in the problem of global
hunger suggests to me that thinking systematically about some of these
crucial “global agenda” issues—most of which have deep North-South
roots—would be very appealing to the President, and would complete
the bureaucratic shake-up that the President’s “approval” of Issue #1
and its follow-up could begin: in other words, Presidential approval on
8 The focus of the Sixth Special Session of the UN General Assembly, which met in

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
with divergent (and thus healthy) focuses and value judgments on
North-South issues; (2) a BHN emphasis on which a full set of specific
options would be due by November 15; and (3) a Presidential stamp of
approval on a kind of thinking about “global issues” which would en-
courage all parts of the bureaucracy to engage in it. Without that
thinking, no matter what we do for Mexico, we will have about 120 mil-
lion Mexicans on our doorstep in 20 years, and so many of them will be
unemployed that we will need neutron bombs rather than radar along
the border.
The hyperbole is used to make a very simple point. The Phase Two
exercise of PRM 8 has made a start. It is too limited to stop here. The
message from this PRC meeting and the following PD should be “We
are not giving anything away, but we have got so many problems
which cannot be solved without Southern cooperation that we had
better change our modes of thinking about these issues in a hurry”. The
message is not what we are going to do for them, but what we have to do
together. And the first thing, whether it is popular with South elites or
not (BHN) is to indicate what we believe to be the appropriate set of
policies to start to move in the right direction.
271.
Memorandum From Roger Hansen of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, July 26, 1977
SUBJECT
A Last Attempt at a PRM–8 “Product” for the President
Zbig,
Your phone call this morning deeply saddened me. It revealed that
for five months and three weeks I have worked for you with so little
communication that I have wasted your time and mine, and it appears
that no constructive purpose has been served.
When you asked me to come on board for six months, the purpose
was specifically stated: “to get PRM 8 through the bureaucracy in a way
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 63, PRC

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
that allows us to reconceptualize North-South relations”. That is what I
have been trying to do ever since the last day of January; that is why the
Track II group was eventually set up after the failure of the EPG effort;
and that is why the PRM 8 before you now2 is not a Roger Hansen
think-piece, but the very best I could squeeze out of the bureaucracy
after three months of hard work. It is still so “out-front” that the Van
Dyks’, the Bergstens’, the Paul Boekers’, etc. are at work desperately
trying to produce a deadlock tomorrow.3
I finally thought that the best I could do for you was to start a
process for thinking about North-South relations, based on four major
elements (p. 37–38 of PRM). That is what I hoped the PRC meeting
would produce.
Now, with three days left, I find that you want a Roger Hansen
proposal, regardless of whether or not anyone in the bureaucracy
agrees with it. Had I known this earlier, I could have saved us both six
months of wasted effort, and needn’t have joined the NSC to produce
the product for you.
What follows is an attempt to set forward in less than five pages an
overall approach to North-South relations, followed by much more
specific emphasis on the “Carteresque” centerpiece, as I read the Presi-
dent’s instincts and think about the domestic and international con-
straints with which he must deal in proposing North-South initiatives.
Attachment
Paper Prepared by Roger Hansen of the National Security
Council Staff4
Washington, undated
A NORTH-SOUTH POLICY FOR THE ADMINISTRATION
A lengthy reconsideration of US policies toward the “Third
World” countries leads to the following conclusion:
I. Overall Scope
US North-South strategy should consist of four component parts,
each aimed at the accomplishment of a different set of US foreign policy
goals (with some overlap between them).
2 See Document 270.
4 No classification marking.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
1. Those changes in direction in what have in the past been thought
of as the central core of US policies vis-a-vis the developing countries:
trade liberalization; substantially increased economic assistance; a
system of global food reserves; and a strengthening of such central fi-
nancial institutions as the IMF and the World Bank. In these areas of
“traditional” North-South policy, the Administration has already made
important commitments which will be of considerable interest to the
so-called “middle tier” LDCs, neither the strongest nor the weakest.
The US goal in these policy arenas will be to keep Administration com-
mitments made already by defending them successfully before the
Congress and the American public. This job will be neither easy nor
glamorous, but nevertheless second only to a Basic Human Needs ini-
tiative described below in importance to more constructive North-
South relations.
2. A second ingredient in an appropriate North-South strategy will
entail greater flexibility needed to deal with the problems and the oppor-
tunities presented by the emergence of the so-called “upper-tier” of de-
veloping countries. Some are financial powers, e.g., Saudi Arabia; some
are industrial powers, e.g., Brazil; some are rapidly becoming potential
military powers (at the regional level), e.g., Iran.
The United States must develop a set of policies and bilateral rela-
tionships with such countries which will allow us to incorporate such
emerging local powers into all of our trilateral global systems of consul-
tation and management which are appropriate. A major element in this
set of policies will be greater flexibility in encouraging such countries to
become members of such organizations as the Group of Ten on mone-
tary affairs, particular working groups of the OECD of special interest
to them, etc.
This set of policies is of particular importance if we are to gain the
cooperation of these countries in the achievement of our policy goals in
such realms as human rights, non-proliferation, conventional arms
sales, and cooperation in such bodies as the UN, CIEC, and others
where they can sometimes act as a “bridge to the South”.
3. The third element, far less specific yet terribly important as one
looks to the longer term, concerns a concentration on the need for
global reforms where more-than-incremental approaches may well be
necessary to deal effectively with “world order” problems over the
coming decade. The vision needed in the North-South area is similar to
the Presidential mandate given to the CEQ in his May 23 Environ-
mental Message.5 Clearly a strong case can be made for systematically
studying such linked issues as food production, health facilities, popu-
5 For the text of Carter’s May 23 message to Congress on the environment, see Public

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
lation growth, and the fulfillment of basic human needs. If we do not
begin to examine these problems in their aggregate and in their
linkages to one another, we may well miss the opportunity to find “si-
multaneous” solutions which detailed study of each issue in isolation
will not produce.
4. Finally, and for reasons detailed below, the Administration
should make a major commitment to a Basic Human Needs (BHN) ap-
proach in its support of development progress bilaterally, together
with OECD associates, and through such multilateral institutions as the
World Bank and the International Development Association. This ini-
tiative would be of more benefit to the “lower tier” LDCs where the
largest numbers of the so-called “absolute poverty” population is to be
found. In this sense it would add balance to our entire package of
North-South policies. But it is recommended for far more important
reasons detailed in the next section.
II. An Initiative on Basic Human Needs: Rationale
An initiative on a Basic Human Needs (BHN) approach should be-
come the centerpiece of our North-South strategy for the following
reasons:
1. The time is right. Development economists throughout the world,
North and South, are stressing the fact that older approaches to devel-
opment have failed to spread the benefits of growth. The result is that
approximately one billion people within the LDCs today are living in
what is described as “absolute poverty” (as measured by infant mor-
tality, caloric intake, longevity, health and sanitary facilities, etc.).
Many economists are turning to the concept of the fulfillment of basic
human needs by which they mean assured levels of food, health and ed-
ucational facilities, clean water, etc. Measurements and definitions
differ; all are beginning to come together.
2. The US foreign policy setting is right. Given the Administration’s
emphasis on human rights, a new and added emphasis on BHN would
not only be a natural complement but also an integral part of a global
stress on human rights. North and South have long feuded over the di-
vergent emphases in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights: the
North emphasizing personal, civil and political rights; the developing
countries, basic economic rights (needs). The US can take a major step
toward closing this “values gap” by embracing jointly the concepts of
human rights and basic human needs, and by proposing a major devel-
opment program to see that the fulfillment of basic human needs is
achieved throughout the world by the end of the century.
3. A BHN focus can help the North and South to break out of the
presently deadlocked “dialogue” last noted at CIEC. It can provide a
comprehensive framework in which general North-South agreement can

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
be reached, which would then facilitate the solution of many other spe-
cific political and economic problems between North and South. Al-
though many southern elite groups would initially oppose such a pro-
gram, this opposition is to be expected and not to be a cause of concern.
Far better than “fairness” among nation-states, a concept difficult to de-
fend philosophically or support empirically, “fairness” among people
in delivering to all a package of basic human needs can be seen as the ul-
timate purpose of all other economic policies, and a global norm to
which all countries can subscribe.
4. BHN is also an integrating concept which has great potential for
producing greater coherence and sense of direction to the entire UN
system in the development field. Already the embryonic notion is be-
ginning to provide an integrating framework for mutually supporting
efforts at increasing food production (in FAO, the WFC, and IFAD); at
developing integrated basic services to reach the billion poorest people
of the world (UNICEF, WHO, etc.); and at formulating more sensible
and integrated strategies of so called “self-reliant” development
(UNESCO, UNIDO, ILO, etc.).
5. BHN could produce the same result for the development efforts
of the OECD countries. That is, it could give the aid programs of the
OECD countries a common purpose and a shared methodology in ap-
proaching the problem of the world’s poorest people. It would not inter-
fere with other aspects of development assistance serving different
goals (e.g., infrastructure projects in “middle tier” countries not related
to BHN).
6. Finally, it could also become (and is already becoming) an orga-
nizing principle within the international community’s International Fi-
nancial Institutions. Again it would infuse these heterogeneous
agencies with a common purpose, program, and methodology for ap-
proaching the problems of the poorest.
III. Outline of a Specific Proposal on BHN
1. It has been very roughly estimated that a BHN program which
would make available to the “absolute poverty” population minimum
acceptable diets, drinking water, sewage facilities, minimum public
health standards and basic education might cost about $10 billion a
year over a twenty year period (1975 dollars and prices). If housing
were included, the figure would rise somewhere between $2–6 billion.
(While the comparison is not relevant, it is still somewhat unsettling to
note that the estimated annual investment cost of a BHN program is
about 3% of annual global defense spending.)
2. The United States, which has already requested that the OECD
countries mount a serious study of the BHN concept and the problem
of making it operational, should develop a set of proposals to provide a

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
minimum of $10 billion (1975 dollars) per year for the financing of a
global BHN program. The money should be contributed by the US, as
many other OECD countries as we can engage in the effort, and by the
OPEC countries.
3. The program would need a great deal of technical work before it
could be presented in detail. Among the most difficult problems would
be:
a) The raising of the minimum $10 billion per annum contribution.
(Not all would be “new” money. The DAC countries now give close to
$14 billion in assistance. The more of these funds that were allocated
toward a BHN set of programs, the less “additionality” over present
levels.)
b) The “conditionality” problem. Northern countries would insist
on oversight mechanism which assured that the money was being
spent on projects agreed upon. But the LDCs will resist any overt “in-
tervention”. Thus the problem; how to develop a new (or old) mecha-
nism which can receive the funds from the North and distribute them
to the South in accordance with agreed-upon ground-rules.
c) To work best, Southern countries must be assured that the funds
will be available for lengthy periods of years. So the North must be pre-
pared to pledge lengthy automatic commitments just as the South
pledges to undertake serious policy reforms to become eligible for the
funds.
d) In sum, there is the difficulty of striking a major North-South
bargain, and of developing a mechanism to receive and allocate funds
and monitor expenditures. All of this could be done bilaterally, but, far
less effectively.
e) Finally, there is the problem of operationalization of such a pro-
gram. How much does one count on the market system? How much on
administrative decision? What kind of “delivery” systems will actually
get food, medical care, etc., to the target population?
4. In light of the international political, financial and institutional
issues, and the very technical issues about the mounting of a BHN pro-
gram in any particular country, any US proposal will need to be care-
fully constructed. Therefore, it is urged that an inter-agency group be
assembled immediately under the chairmanship of
to develop
the appropriate range of options for a major US BHN initiative within
the coming six weeks.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
272.
Memorandum From Robert Pastor of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, July 27, 1977
SUBJECT
I think the paper2 is superb in sorting out conceptually the three
goals which we will want to pursue in our North-South policy: (1) basic
human needs; (2) reform of global institutions; and (3) bringing the re-
gional influentials into our system. But, conversely, I think the paper is
weakest in failing to show how these three goals can be and should be
integrated into a comprehensive policy. The materials for developing
such a policy are all there; the problem is that we view the co-optation
of regional influentials as a goal when it is actually the best of all means
for pursuing a comprehensive North-South strategy.
Ironically, we continue to carry some of the baggage of the Kissin-
ger era of “confrontation politics,” when Kissinger’s goal was to break
the bloc, and he used ostensibly positive proposals as a vehicle to do
that. His insincerity was clearly perceived, and the result was that he
failed. We are, of course, all sympathetic to Roger’s premise that a posi-
tive and sincere effort by the U.S. will invite greater flexibility by the
LDCs and thus progress. If we are truly concerned about breaking up
bloc politics, the best way to do that is not to worry about it but just to
negotiate seriously. When the LDCs begin to realize we have an
end-picture in mind, they will get into the details of a proposal and dif-
fering interests will divide countries.
Similarly, if we set our goals as contributing to a global basic
human needs strategy and to reforming the Bretton Woods institutions
to take into account the need for greater participation for all developing
countries but particularly the regional influentials (REGINFs), then one
sees that our natural allies in pursuit of such goals should be the
REGINFs. We will consult with them more often, but we need not
structure the final package (bilateral or multilateral assistance or what-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 63, PRC
ence Profile, Brzezinski noted the memorandum. (Ibid.)
2 Apparently a reference either to the paper entitled “North/South Strategy” pre-
pared in response to the second stage of the PRM–8 process (see footnote 4, Document
270) or the July 26 memorandum from Hansen to Brzezinski and Aaron printed as Docu-
ment 271.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
ever) just to attract them; they are now so much a part of the system,
that they will benefit by overall reforms. (This is recognized by the fact
that the reforms and programs are improvements in the current—
our—system, rather than aimed at replacing old institutions.) More-
over, I don’t think we should follow any strategy which in any way im-
plies that our purpose is to divide the developing world.
The key to a comprehensive strategy is to connect Roger’s three ele-
ments of a North-South policy with a single overlapping concept: par-
ticipation. Basic human needs is intended to increase the capabilities of
the poor people of all countries to participate more fully in the social
and economic lives of their nations. The purpose of reforming global
institutions is to increase the participation of developing countries and
thus the responsiveness of the institutions to their needs. Finally,
bringing the REGINF’s into our system is intended to give them a voice
and a vote commensurate with their growing power.
The attraction of participation as an over-arching goal is that it not
only relates to the developing world in a comprehensive way, but also
to our own country and to the entire world. The civil rights struggle,
the intention of the President to help the poor in the US, the voting
rights laws—all provide a natural link between the domestic and the
foreign policy objectives of tackling the problems of the poor. In a
world in which the line between domestic and foreign policy is be-
coming less relevant, the idea of promoting participation can provide an
easy handle for the American people to relate US problems to the world’s
problems.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
273.
Summary of Discussion and Conclusions of a Policy Review
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
North-South Strategy
PARTICIPANTS
State
CIA
Secretary Vance
Dr. Robert Bowie
Anthony Lake
[name not declassified]
Richard Cooper
NSC
Jeffrey Garten
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Defense
David Aaron
Charles W. Duncan
Roger Hansen
Brig. Gen. James M. Thompson
Thomas Thornton
Gen. George S. Brown
Robert Hormats
Gen. William Y. Smith
OMB
Treasury
Bowman Cutter
C. Fred Bergsten
AID
US/UN
John Gilligan
Dr. Charles Frank
Ted Van Dyk
SUMMARY OF DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
I. The principal issues for discussion were:
(1) The need to institutionalize an interagency mechanism for fur-
ther refinement of the North-South strategy outlined in the PRM 8 re-
sponse, and to flesh out a specific set of policy options for the President.
(2) The growing complexities of US relations with the so-called
“upper-tier” developing countries such as Brazil, Saudi Arabia and
Iran, and the need to develop a set of US policies toward these coun-
tries which increasingly incorporate them into the leading international
institutions in ways that strengthen US capacity to achieve its foreign
policy goals.
(3) The primary focus which the US should place on the develop-
ment of a global strategy of meeting the basic human needs of the
world’s poorest people.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 63, PRC
House Situation Room. Brzezinski forwarded the summary to Carter under cover of a
July 30 memorandum; Carter initialed Brzezinski’s memorandum and indicated his ap-
proval of the summary. (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
(4) The mutually supporting relationship between a US human
rights strategy and US efforts to place basic human needs at the center
of our development policies.
II. The principal conclusions were:
(1) An interagency group chaired by the State Department and re-
porting to the PRC, would become the central bureaucratic mechanism
for the elaboration of the ideas contained in PRM 8 and for the develop-
ment of specific policy options in the field of North-South relations.
(2) The fulfillment of basic human needs should be considered as
an integral element of the fulfillment of human rights. The two closely
related concepts can and should form a central core of US foreign
policy.
(3) While the fulfillment of basic human needs is but one of several
elements of the North-South strategy outlined in PRM 8, it should be a
primary focus of the overall strategy and a central component of the re-
source transfer aspect of US North-South policies.
(4) The core elements of a basic human needs program should be the
provision of minimum levels of food/nutrition, health services and
basic education.
(5) US relations with the “middle” and “upper-tier” developing
countries require an emphasis on a broad range of policy tools which
need further investigation. A basic human needs strategy will be far
less central to their needs, and its role in these countries needs further
study.
III. The following actions are to be taken:
(1) The new North-South Working Group will immediately under-
take the analysis and development of policy options considered neces-
sary for the President’s September address to the United Nations.2
Drawing on the work done in preparing PRM 8 and being done in the
present DCC study of foreign aid3 where appropriate, the Group will
present specific options to the PRC during the first week in September.
(2) Beyond this initial assignment, the Group will flesh out in detail
the four-part strategy for North-South relations outlined and proposed
in PRM 8. It will attempt further refinement by disaggregating
North-South problems into (a) issues; (b) countries; (c) venues; and
(d) policy instruments.
2 Carter addressed the UN General Assembly on October 4; for the text of his ad-
dress, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1977, Book II,
3 See Document 268.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
On the basis of this analytical exercise, the Group will produce a
series of action/decision papers for consideration by the PRC throughout
the coming six months.
274.
Memorandum From Guy Erb of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
US Relations with the Developing Countries: The Next 12 Months—Report by
the PRM 8 Working Group
a good review and analysis of the North/South relationship as it affects
the US. The report also identifies “key specific issues” on which US ac-
tions will be required over the next year. These issues are discussed in
an annex (Tab B).3 However, the report does not request immediate
PRC guidance on many of the problems which are identified as critical.
Presidential guidance will have to be sought on trade policy, commod-
ities and common fund issues, foreign assistance, and agriculture, to
North/South environment could deteriorate if negotiations bog down
on trade, a common5 fund, etc. I concur. Yet, only one6 of the issues for
immediate PRC decision is directly relevant to sustaining, in the
short-run, the relatively constructive North/South environment: The
request for a PRC meeting on common fund issues. Hence, I attach
great importance to eventual PRC consideration of the annex at Tab B,
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 65, PRC
memorandum.
with the Developing Countries, The Next Twelve Months,” is ibid.
3 Tab B, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Key Issues for the
Next Year.”
4 Brzezinski underlined the words “trade policy, commodities and common” and
“issues, foreign assistance, and agriculture” in this sentence.
5 Brzezinski underlined the words “on trade, a common.”
6 Brzezinski underlined the words “only one.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
and to the development of policy guidelines on the key issues set out
there.
CIA has also prepared an annex (Tab A)7 on key LDCs and security
relationships. This material is of some interest in assessing LDC partici-
pation in North/South negotiations, but it is not critical for the PRC
meeting.
AGENDA ITEM 1
Rather than asking the PRC to tackle the key issues immediately,
the report requests guidance on the “basic policy framework for
North/South relations” (see pp. 9–11). I recommend that you endorse
the basic approach, with the caveat that the “community of interest and
objectives” should take full account of the differences between devel-
oped and developing countries; moreover, for tactical reasons, the di-
verse situations and varied positions on international economic issues
within the developing countries should also be kept in mind (see pp.
3–5 of the report).
If the basic policy framework is accepted, I recommend that you
refer to the annex (Tab B) to place the key issues in the agreed North/
South policy framework.
AGENDA ITEM 2
The PRM working group could not agree on the role which quanti-
tative targets can play in US policies. In my view, targets for the per-
formance of developing countries and international goals, such as ac-
ceptance of doubling food production or greatly reducing infant
mortality, should be a part of the US approach to overall North/South
negotiations. Carefully defined quantitative goals for development
achievements should be part of the US response to developing-country
demands for international changes. I recommend that you approve an
investigation of appropriate targets directed by the DCC. I recommend
against a PRC discussion at this time of types of targets since the neces-
sary material is not available.8
AGENDA ITEM 3
Discussion of the role of an “overview mechanism” on North/
South issues in the UN revealed significant differences of opinion
within the working group. Treasury, for example, felt that not only is
an “overview mechanism” undesirable, but it is probably avoidable. I
7 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an August 31 CIA memorandum entitled “Key
LDCs in the North/South Dialogue: Issues and Forums.”
8 Brzezinski highlighted the final two sentences of this paragraph.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
do not agree. A UN oversight9 role is inevitable, either as a result of the
32nd UNGA or of the restructuring of the UN. An overview mecha-
nism could be prejudicial to US interests if we do not take an active role
in moving the General Assembly away from negotiations on specific
issues and timetables, and toward general considerations of North/
South problems. Moreover, the President reviewed this issue in con-
nection with the Latin American bilaterals and expressed a preference
for: a) steering UN General Assembly North/South discussions toward
broad issues; b) the avoidance of negotiations within the General As-
sembly, c) negotiations on specific issues in functional bodies. I there-
fore recommend that Option 1, favoring an overview mechanism be
approved.
AGENDA ITEM 4
Acceptance of greater participation of LDCs in the international
system will flow from PRC agreement on the basic policy framework. I
recommend that you approve the PRM 8 working group’s recommen-
dations that the USG make a major effort to enlarge the group of coun-
tries which manages the international system.10
AGENDA ITEM 5
The basic human needs section of PRM 8–III is far superior to what
is now found in the drafts of the Development Coordination Com-
mittee or the Brookings Report.11 No final decisions need be taken on
the issues presented at this time. In the preliminary discussions on
basic human needs, I recommend (1) that you explore the possibility of
approving the working group’s recommendation that its basic human
needs approach12 be endorsed; (2) that you express a preference for bi-
lateral programs that are flexible enough to be directed toward13
middle income countries, as appropriate; (3) that you express a cau-
tious approach to the conditionality which will be required of devel-
oping countries (on US leverage and conditionality the PRM 8–III, the
DCC and the Brookings study are quite divergent); (4) that you express
support for the working group’s recommendations that the US support
the basic human needs policies of international development lending
institutions; and (5) that you endorse the working group’s cautious ap-
proach to expanding the basic human needs concept to other areas.
9 Brzezinski underlined the words “A UN oversight.”
10 Brzezinski highlighted the last sentence of this paragraph and underlined the
words “group of countries which manages the international.”
12 Brzezinski underlined the words “basic human” and “approach.”
13 Brzezinski underlined the word “toward” and wrote “who” in the margin adja-
cent to this sentence.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
AGENDA ITEM 6
PRM 8 working group has requested a PRC meeting on the
common fund. I recommend acceptance of this recommendation.
The working group also requests an assignment to prepare an-
other general report on North/South relations early next year. I do not
object to the preparation of another report. But I do recommend that
you request an expanded treatment of the key issues in Tab B rather
than another general overview.
Deal, Pastor, and Thornton concur with this memorandum.
275.
Paper Prepared in the Department of State for
President Carter1
Washington, undated
PRIORITY NORTH/SOUTH ISSUES AT
THE UN GENERAL ASSEMBLY
ISSUES FOR DECISION
At the 32nd United Nations General Assembly,2 we want to ad-
vance the Administration’s commitment to constructive and mutually
beneficial treatment of North/South issues. We hope thereby to sustain
the generally pragmatic cooperation which characterized the Paris
Conference on International Economic Cooperation3 (CIEC).
We require two policy decisions regarding the appropriate means
for seeking to achieve these objectives:
1) how we should try to manage UN General Assembly treatment
of the numerous economic issues addressed in CIEC, and
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 65, PRC
Brzezinski that reads: “Perez recommended a working group (OECD, OPEC, and asst.
states) of some 35 states at the UN to give greater focus to North-South issues. State—if I
understand the paper—recommends ‘a low profile.’ I feel that some cooperative but
manageable mechanism is needed (like CIEC), and I would be inclined to encourage
Perez to develop his idea further—and it do so sympathetically.”
3 Carter underlined
the
words
“Conference”
and
“International
Economic
Cooperation.”

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
2) how active we should be in attempting to influence the selection
of a specific UN mechanism to serve the overview function of the
North/South dialogue in the post-CIEC period.
ESSENTIAL FACTORS
The Administration has clearly demonstrated its concern for the
real problems of developing countries. In CIEC, the US, along with the
other industrialized countries, agreed to increase substantially its
development assistance to developing countries and to negotiate a
financially-viable common fund to stabilize commodity prices; along
with the EC, the US proposed a comprehensive procedure for dealing
with LDC debt problems, on which agreement was not reached in
CIEC. At this summer’s ECOSOC conference, Ambassador Young an-
nounced that, in contrast to earlier positions, the US now accepts the
New International Economic Order as an evolving concept, while
maintaining our reservations on certain specific measures proposed by
the developing countries.4
We believe the focus of the North/South dialogue in the post-
CIEC period should be in the existing functional fora where negotia-
tions on the complex individual issues are conducted among countries
with an economic stake in the outcome and by persons who are experts
on the issue. Trade issues should be negotiated in the GATT; com-
modity issues in UNCTAD; and financial and monetary issues in the
International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and their joint Develop-
ment Committee. Negotiations in general fora, such as CIEC and the
UN General Assembly, have the major disadvantage of linking all
issues so that political success requires concessions on most or all of
them. They thus encourage a bloc-to-bloc approach to the issues and
tend to increase political pressure on the industrialized countries.
On the other hand, it is inevitable that UNGA will have some sub-
stantive discussions on the specific issues addressed in CIEC. The G–77
members as a group will continue to demand a major restructuring of
the international economic system through large, automatic, and often
economically inefficient resource transfers (e.g., commodity price in-
dexation, generalized debt relief). We want to begin the process of
turning UN General Assembly discussions toward 1) the broader eco-
nomic issues of global economic interdependence and the responsi-
bility of all countries for the future world economy and 2) moral and
political issues, in particular, human rights, basic human needs, and eq-
uitable distribution of income within countries.
4 The 63rd session of the Economic and Social Council took place in Geneva July

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Since the conclusion of CIEC, several G–77 members have advo-
cated the establishment of a UN mechanism to conduct a general over-
view of progress on North/South issues along CIEC lines. No con-
sensus
has
emerged
on
the
location
of
this
mechanism.
The
Venezuelans have advocated a new, restricted-membership committee
attached to the UN General Assembly for this purpose, and the Presi-
dent has indicated our support for this concept.5 However, Venezuela
has not been able to garner substantial LDC support for this idea and
has stopped pushing it. Developing countries are considering other al-
ternatives, including assigning the overview function to the current
Second Committee of the UN General Assembly6 or the UN Economic
and Social Council (ECOSOC).
THE OPTIONS
A. UN General Assembly treatment of specific North/South
issues.
1. Seek to begin steering UN General Assembly North/South dis-
cussions toward broad issues of global economic interdependence and
responsibility and gaining greater international support for human
rights, basic human needs, equity in income distribution, and the im-
portance to all of global growth. Avoid negotiations though not general
discussion of the specific issues being treated in functional fora.
This option would not prejudice negotiations on the specific issues
in fora most conducive to progress. It would mobilize support for our
positions on human rights and other global development issues and
allow us to regain to some degree the moral offensive in the North/
South dialogue. It could contribute to a more pragmatic and mutually
cooperative dialogue in the future. The developing countries may not
favor this approach because they hope to use the General Assembly to
impose guidelines and timetables on the negotiations in the functional
fora. Some developing countries will resent and question our motiva-
tions for raising the broader issues of human rights and human needs.
2. Permit UN General Assembly either to reopen the CIEC negotia-
tions on the individual issues or help pre-determine the results in the
5 During a June 29 meeting with Pe´rez, Carter stated “that he was willing to accept
Venezuela’s proposal to set up a group of representatives from 30–35 nations, including the Soviet
Union and the People’s Republic of China, as well as industrialized and developing countries, to
work within the U.N. on North-South economic issues.” Carter also expressed his hope “that
the US and Venezuela would work closely in this forum to develop proposals, but it was
President Carter’s preference, in general, not to set up new organizations if one already
existed to do the job.” (Memorandum of conversation, June 29; Carter Library, National
6 The Economic and Financial Committee of the UN General Assembly was also
known as the Second Committee.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
functional fora by adopting prejudicial guidance and timetables for
them.
While the developing countries may favor elements of this option,
it would hamper mutually satisfactory negotiations in the functional
fora and could encourage a return to the more confrontational at-
mosphere of the past. It tends to “front load” political benefits by set-
ting ambitious deadlines and goals at the cost of later castigation for
inadequate fulfillment. Other industrialized countries support min-
imizing the actual negotiating role of the UN General Assembly and
other general fora.
RECOMMENDATION
That we seek to manage UN General Assembly discussions along
the lines of option 1.7
B. How active should we be in selecting which UN body will have
the North/South overview function.
1. To affirm publicly our support for the Venezuelan concept of a
special, restricted-membership committee attached to the UN General
Assembly in an effort to mobilize support for this concept.
If there is to be an overview mechanism, we consider this idea the
best of the various alternatives. But it is unclear whether sufficient de-
veloping country support can be generated for it. Furthermore, our
open support of the initiative would not necessarily help garner sup-
port for it.
2. Maintain our current low public profile on this issue and wait
and see if the developing countries can agree on the concept of an over-
view mechanism and the question of where it should be located.
This option would permit us to avoid committing ourselves until
the fate of the Venezuelan proposal in developing country circles is
clear. While there are relative advantages and disadvantages to the
Second Committee and ECOSOC alternatives, one is not sufficiently
preferable to prompt an active role for the US in support of it if the Ven-
ezuelan idea is not supported by developing countries. Should circum-
stances later warrant, we could then assume a more active position. On
the other hand, developing country failure to agree on an overview
mechanism would not necessarily be contrary to our interests.
RECOMMENDATION
That we maintain a low profile as in option 2.8
7 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation.
8 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
North/South Discussions with Latin American Leaders
We believe the most productive exchange on North/South issues
would be with leaders of Venezuela, Brazil, Jamaica, Peru, Mexico, and
Argentina. These leaders represent countries that were most directly
involved in CIEC, are more active in North/South matters generally,
and represent the most influential countries in the region.9
9 Carter made a checkmark in the margin adjacent to this paragraph and ini-
tialed “J.”
276.
Summary of Conclusions of a Policy Review Committee
Meeting1
SUBJECT
PRM 8–Track III (North-South)
PARTICIPANTS
State
AID
Warren Christopher
Governor John J. Gilligan
Richard Cooper
Philip Birnbaum
Anthony Lake
USUN
Defense
Ambassador Andrew Young
David McGiffert
Ambassador Melissa Wells
Dr. Ellen Frost
OSTP
JCS
Frank Press
Lt. Gen. William Y. Smith
White House
CIA
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Dr. Robert Bowie
David Aaron
[name not declassified]
NSC
OMB
Guy Erb
Bowman Cutter
Thomas Thornton
Randy Jayne
Treasury
C. Fred Bergsten
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 65, PRC
White House Situation Room. Brzezinski initialed at the end of the summary.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
The PRC met on September 22 to consider PRM 8-Track III, the
PRM 8 working group’s report on US relations with the developing
countries over the next twelve months. The working group’s report re-
quested PRC decisions on six points.2
1. Basic Policy Framework. The PRC decided that the US approach to
North-South issues set out in PRM 8-Track III is sound. (It was pointed
out that strategic issues would have to be taken into account in a com-
prehensive framework for North-South relations.) The importance of
delivering on US commitments was emphasized as was the likelihood
that US capacity to deliver would fall short of expectations in the devel-
oping world. Developing-country reactions to what they perceive as in-
adequate US initiatives may create tensions toward the end of the next
twelve months.
2. Quantitative Targets. After a review of the issues posed by the use
of targets, the PRC decided to ask the Development Coordination Com-
mittee to undertake a study of specific, achievable targets which could
be appropriately used by the US for internal planning as well as in in-
ternational discussions, for example, during the preparations for the
Third Development Decade.
3. Role of the UN in the North-South Dialogue. The PRC was informed
of the President’s directive to (a) steer UNGA North-South discussions
toward broad issues, (b) avoid negotiations within the General As-
sembly, and (c) negotiate on specific issues within functional bodies.3
On the question of a review mechanism within the UN, it was
pointed out that the circumstances had changed since the President
had discussed the issue of CIEC follow-up with President Perez. Dis-
cussions at the 32nd UNGA were focusing on two possibilities for a UN
review of the North-South dialogue: (1) the Second Committee of the
UNGA, and (2) the ECOSOC, if it were made more effective as a result
of a UN restructuring exercise. The PRC agreed that it might be neces-
sary to reconsider this issue according to developments during the
32nd UNGA.
4. Participation of LDCs in the International System. The PRC agreed
to ask the PRM 8 working group to explore means of increasing LDC
involvement in international organizations.
5. Basic Human Needs (BHN). The PRC reviewed the issues posed
by PRM 8-Track III and decided to defer the discussion of BHN until
October 11 when PRM 8-Track III, the DCC report, and the Brookings
study could be examined simultaneously.
2 See Document 274.
3 See Document 275.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
6. Follow-up. The PRC agreed to hold a meeting in October on a US
policy toward negotiations on a common fund.
The PRC agreed to ask the working group to make another report
early in 1978. That report will contain the working group’s findings on
participation of LDCs in international organizations. It will also ana-
lyze the most important of key issues identified at Tab B to PRM
8-Track III.4
277.
Paper Prepared by the National Security Council Staff1
Washington, undated
ISSUES PAPER
PRC MEETING
Situation Room
SUBJECT
The PRC meets on October 11 to consider the foreign assistance
issues presented by PRM 8-Track III (the section on basic human
needs), the DCC study, and the Brookings Institution report. An Issues
Paper (Tab III)2 contains the main policy options which emerge from
the reports and summarizes the DCC and Brookings studies.
Our objectives for this meeting are two-fold:
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Deputy, Meetings
tion. Copies were sent to Aaron, Owen, the North-South Cluster of the NSC Staff, and
Tuchman.
2 Printed as Document 277.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
(1) We seek PRC comment and guidance regarding the five prin-
cipal options as outlined in the Issues Paper. Note: The Issues Paper’s op-
tions differ from those contained in the DCC’s summarization of issues.
(2) The PRC should approve a White House-chaired working
group to prepare an options paper for the President by October 31. That
paper should analyze the implications of the principal aid strategies for
funding levels, the organization of US foreign assistance programs, and
other issues. The working group’s report would define issues for Presi-
dential decision and assist OMB in its preparations of the FY 1979
budget review.
The following points are relevant to the PRC meeting:
(1) The strategic options for foreign assistance. The attached Issues
Paper’s five options for foreign assistance appear broad, but the choice
among them could have a serious impact on (a) the direction of US for-
eign assistance programs and (b) their relation to US foreign policy
objectives.
To illustrate, Option 5, “Multiple Objectives”, could most easily in-
corporate assistance programs in support of a variety of US foreign
policy objectives; for example, an initiative for Caribbean countries.
Option 3, a “poor country” strategy, if narrowly defined, would make
initiatives in middle-income developing countries relatively difficult.
(2) The effectiveness of US assistance: The President requested the
DCC to examine the overall effectiveness of US assistance programs
(see Presidential Memorandum of June 27, Tab IIA).3 The DCC could
not agree on an assessment of the multilateral and bilateral components
of US assistance programs. In contrast, the Brookings report contains a
sharp critique of the bilateral programs’s current effectiveness.
The DCC and Brookings reports call for improvement in US assist-
ance programs and both, as well as PRM 8-Track III, accept a strong US
focus on meeting basic human needs (BHN). Taken together, these
findings indicate that we must design programs that (a) reach poor
people more directly, and (b) will be more effectively administered by
the US.
(3) Relations with Congress. An expansion of US assistance will re-
quire improved understanding on Capitol Hill of the Administration’s
objectives. The imbroglio over the appropriations bill4 illustrates the
need for an Administration initiative seeking broader Congressional
and public support for US foreign economic policies.
3 Printed as Document 268.
4 Apparently a reference to the Carter administration’s effort to secure the removal
of country-based restrictions on the provision of direct or indirect foreign assistance by
the United States.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
The Treasury representative at the PRC meeting may refer in this
context to the study on multilateral institutions which emerged as part
of the compromise on the appropriations bill. Treasury first indicated
that a joint Administration/Congress study of multilateral institutions
would be undertaken. In concert with other agencies and the US Execu-
tive Directors of the IDB and the World Bank, I have insisted that the
study be in consultation with the Congress. Moreover, that study should
be seen as one part of the Administration’s response to Congressional
concern, not as a device to delay PRC consideration of the options for
an overall approach to US bilateral and multilateral concessional
assistance.
(4) Funding levels. Both the DCC and Brookings reports contain il-
lustrative tables on alternative funding levels (see Tabs A and B to the
Issues Paper).5 Note: DCC figures are in nominal terms and Brookings
figures are in real terms; to make a rough comparison between the two
tables, add one-fifth to the Brookings figures.
We do not want PRC determination of funding levels at the Oc-
tober 11 meeting. However, it would be useful to have a PRC discus-
sion of the prospects for low, moderate, or high levels of US conces-
sional assistance.
(5) The Organization of US Assistance. The DCC study advocates ad-
ministrative reforms in AID and a simplification of legislative require-
ments for bilateral assistance programs. The Brookings report calls for a
complete overhaul of AID and the establishment of two new institu-
tions. As in the case of funding levels, we do not seek final PRC pro-
nouncements on organizational questions. Nevertheless, preliminary
indications of agency views would be useful to the working group.
(6) Other Issues: Only a brief and general consideration of security
assistance or PL 480 should take place at this PRC meeting.
Tom Thornton concurs with this memorandum.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
279.
Summary of Conclusions of a Policy Review Committee
Meeting1
SUBJECT
Foreign Aid
PARTICIPANTS
White House
State
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Warren Christopher
Peter Bourne
Richard Cooper
Henry Owen
Anthony Lake
Robert Ginsburgh
CIA
Defense
Dr. Robert Bowie
Charles Duncan
[name not declassified]
Dr. Ellen L. Frost
JCS
Treasury
Lt. Gen. William Y. Smith
C. Fred Bergsten
Agriculture
OSTP
Robert Bergland
Frank Press
Harry Wilhelm
Anne Keatley
OMB
AID
Bowman Cutter
John J. Gilligan
Randy Jayne
Philip Birnbaum
NSC
Commerce
Thomas Thornton
Stanley Katz
Guy Erb
Frank Weil
USUN
Melissa Wells
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
On October 11, 1977, the PRC met to consider US foreign assist-
ance. Three reports had been submitted to the PRC: (1) the Foreign As-
sistance Study of the Development Coordination Committee (DCC);
(2) An Assessment of Development Assistance Strategies, an Interim
Report by the Brookings Institution; (3) PRM–8-Track III, US Relations
with Developing Countries: The Next Twelve Months.
The PRC considered the principal options for foreign assistance
strategies, taking into account the relationship between foreign assist-
ance and other elements of US foreign economic policy, such as trade
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files,
Box 238, NSC (National Security Council) (C/F, O/A 724). Confidential. The meeting
took place in the White House Situation Room. Brzezinski initialed at the end of the
summary.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
policy and the transfer of technology. There was a consensus that an in-
termediate approach to Basic Human Needs (as defined in PRM 8-
Track III, pp. 17a–17b) would be an essential element of any US foreign
assistance strategy.
The PRC requested an interagency working group, chaired by the
NSC, to prepare a paper for the President on the main strategic options
for foreign assistance by October 31. The paper should pay particular
attention to the implications of each option and to the relationship of
the options to possible funding levels for foreign assistance.
Following the completion of the paper on options for assistance
strategies, the working group should address in more detail the organi-
zational issues which arise in the DCC study and the Brookings Institu-
tion report. The PRC decided that the second report of the working
group and its recommendations should be submitted to the President
by December 1, 1977.
280.
Memorandum From Guy Erb of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 3, 1977
SUBJECT
PRC Meeting on the Negotiations on a Common Fund, 4 November 1977,
Summary of Main Issues
The US is involved in a complicated negotiation with developing
countries on a common fund for commodity price stabilization. The
PRC meets to consider these negotiations on 4 November 1977. The
main question before the PRC will be: (1) is the US prepared to continue
the negotiations and contemplate compromises which may be neces-
sary to bring them to a successful conclusion? If the answer to (1) is yes,
other important questions are: (2) can possible changes in the US nego-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 66, PRC
to Owen and Thornton. In a November 3 note to Brzezinski, Thornton indicated his con-
currence in Erb’s memorandum. (Ibid.) In another note to Brzezinski, also dated No-
vember 3, Owen wrote that he had “not followed this as closely as Guy. In general he
seems to me to be on the right track.” (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
tiating position be examined during November, (a) on foreign policy
grounds (given the importance of the negotiation to the overall North-
South relationship) and (b) in relation to the credibility of the OECD
proposals and the viability of a common fund itself; and (3) should con-
sultations with the Congress be undertaken on US objectives and pro-
posals within the negotiations.
If the PRC answers question (1) negatively we will have to con-
sider urgently a series of steps that might minimize the damage to US
relationships with other OECD members and the LDCs.
Background
The PRC has received a discussion paper on the negotiations on a
common fund (Tab A). The negotiations, which will take place from 7
November through 2 December,2 are the fourth major North-South en-
counter on the common fund: previous meeting occurred at UNCTAD
IV in Nairobi in 1976, at an UNCTAD meeting in March of this year;
and at the CIEC meeting last June when it was decided that a common
fund “should be established.”
President Carter has referred twice to the US intent to negotiate a
common fund. The proposed mechanism has become, for better or
worse, the touchstone of the UNCTAD commodity proposals and a
critical factor in the overall North-South relationship.
Since April 1977 the USG has worked with other OECD countries
to develop an OECD proposal to make to the Group of 77 developing
countries. The US approach has been guided by an April 1977 EPG sub-
mission of recommendations on common fund issues (Tab B).3 At that
time, the President approved the following paragraph in which you
summarized the EPG recommendations:
Issue 1. All agencies agree that the US should support a common fund
which permits pooling of the fund of various buffer stocks and includes a provi-
sion for World Bank lending to supplement these funds. This will be seen as
a demonstration of US flexibility, although it will not meet all the de-
mands of the LDCs. (See your memorandum to the President, April 14,
With considerable ingenuity, US officials have followed up that
Presidential guideline by crafting a proposal for a pooling arrangement
which has become the basis for an OECD opening position for the
negotiations.
2 For more information on this second session of the UN Negotiating Conference on
a Common Fund, see Yearbook of the United Nations, 1977, p. 472.
3 Tab B was not attached. For more information, see Tab A to Document 263.
4 Printed as Document 263.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
The US Proposal
The US proposal is summarized on pp. 1–3 of the discussion paper.
In my view, the pooling concept on which it is based has serious tech-
nical and political shortcomings:
My critique of the financial viability of the pooling proposal in-
cludes the following points:
—a pooling arrangement without a back-up facility based on di-
rect government contributions or guarantees would not offer a signifi-
cant incentive to producer/consumer commodity agreements to join
the pool;
—a common fund without its own financial resources would not
be able to convince private bankers of its credit-worthiness and conse-
quently would have a weak borrowing capacity on private capital
markets. Note: The World Bank lending proposed by the EPG was an
attempt to respond to this issue.
—the pooling mechanism envisages a complex way of using the
callable capital of commodity agreements and some existing agree-
ments might not be able to participate in the pool as presently defined.
On political grounds the pooling proposal:
—risks splitting the group of developed countries in November
since some of the smaller European countries are not satisfied with the
proposal as it stands.
—may well provoke a confrontation with developing countries be-
cause it falls far short of the Group of 77 proposals.
The Proposal of the Developing Countries
The common fund proposals of the Group of 77 now include:
(1) creation of a central source of funds for international commodity
price stabilization agreements between producers and consumers;
(2) support by a common fund for “other measures” which would in-
clude improvements in productivity, marketing and diversification;
(3) financing for stocks and other measures for commodities not cov-
ered by international commodity agreements.
Only the first of the above proposals offers us a reasonable pros-
pect for compromise. This is so because the US cannot at this time re-
sponsibly support a new institution for financing “other measures”
when we must still deliver on commitments of $800 million to existing
international development lending institutions. Moreover, support by
a common fund for commodities not covered by agreements would
only be possible if the US and other developed countries had agreed
with producers to international guidelines which were comparable to
those in formal international agreements.
The Group of 77 is not united solidly behind their proposals, a
factor which lends considerable uncertainty to interpretations of their
possible reaction to the OECD proposal. My best guess is that the LDC

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
moderates will not be able to contain sharply critical LDC statements
during the early stages of the November meeting. The ability of the US
to respond constructively to that criticism may determine whether or
not we will be able to channel the common fund negotiations toward
technical working groups following the November meeting. Such
groups would be preferable to another high-level, highly politicized
negotiating session.
The major European countries have been informed of the possi-
bility that the US might have to revise its position in the light of events
during the November meeting. An improved US response might:
—force the Group of 77 to react to a constructive proposal rather
than maintain their maximum demands in a confrontational manner.
—enable the US to resist pressure to make more changes in its
proposals.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The following are my recommendations related to the main ques-
tions posed at the beginning of this memo:
Question 1:
Is the US prepared to continue the negotiations and contemplate
compromises which may be necessary to bring them to a successful
conclusion?
The President has approved your suggestion of a US approach to
the LDCs based on cooperation and shared responsibility. That ap-
proach justifies a serious US intent to negotiate a common fund.5
Question 2:
Can possible changes in the US negotiation position be examined
during November, (a) on foreign policy grounds (given the importance
of the negotiation to the overall North-South relationship) and (b) in re-
lation to the credibility of the OECD proposals and the viability of a
common fund itself?
We should seek from the PRC policy guidelines which authorize
the serious exploration of improvements in the US position, for ex-
ample those found in paragraphs 9–15 of the discussion paper. A PRC
request to explore urgently those, and other, possible changes in the US
position could aim at providing our representatives in Geneva with the
negotiating flexibility that they may use as needed.6
5 Brzezinski did not indicate his preference with respect to any of the recommenda-
tions. On Question 1, the Disapprove option includes the action to “Prepare steps to con-
tain damage to US relations with OECD countries and LDCs.”
6 The Disapprove option under Question 2 includes the query “other action?”

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
Question 3:
Should consultation with the Congress be undertaken on US objec-
tives and proposals within the negotiations?
As we determine the substance of possible changes in the US posi-
tion, the Congress should be consulted on the evolving US position. In
our consultations on Capitol Hill the objective of price stabilization (not
price rigging, not more foreign aid) must be continually borne in mind.
Tab A
Discussion Paper Prepared for the Policy Review Committee7
Washington, undated
THE COMMON FUND
November 4, 1977 The Situation Room
The Setting
1. The UNCTAD negotiations on a common fund have become a
principal focal point in the North/South dialogue. The March 1977 ne-
gotiating conference made little progress in bridging the major differ-
ences seen at the Fourth UNCTAD in Nairobi in 1976. At CIEC the in-
dustrialized and developing countries agreed in principle to establish a
common fund. It was clear on both sides, however, that the type of
common fund the major industrialized countries were willing to con-
sider was a much more limited and modest mechanism than that
sought by the LDCs.
2. Since CIEC the US has led an effort in the OECD to develop a
common fund proposal for the 4-week negotiating conference that
begins November 7. The US has proposed a common fund that would
facilitate the financing of commodity buffer stock operations by
pooling the cash resources of International Commodity Agreements
(ICAs) and borrowing in the market against commodity stock warrants
and callable capital pledged by governments through the ICAs. The
proposed fund would not receive direct contributions from gov-
ernments and would not have financial resources independent of the
participating ICAs. Latest indications are that this approach is accept-
able to other OECD countries as an opening position.
3. The LDCs want the common fund to be a global commodity in-
stitution that would act as a central source of financing for ICAs with
7 Confidential.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
financial contributions made directly to it by national governments.
Many of them also want the fund to finance non-stabilization meas-
ures—diversification, infrastructure investment, research and develop-
ment, product improvement and market promotion. Inclusion of
“other measures” is basic to LDC cohesion because it offers benefits to
LDCs who would not gain from buffer stocking. We and most other in-
dustrialized countries believe these non-stabilization needs are in large
part already being addressed or could be addressed through existing fi-
nancial institutions (IBRD, UNDP, regional banks), bilateral assistance
programs, and ICAs themselves. Finally, the LDCs want the fund to be
a new international institution with its own resources under their con-
trol. We seek to limit the scope of the fund’s activities, prevent control
by the LDCs as a bloc, and preserve the autonomy of ICAs.
4. We cannot be sure how the LDCs will react to our current pro-
posal in November. In view of the distance we have come, in the last
year, the LDC moderates may be willing to work with our approach
and attempt to move us along in November and further negotiating
sessions next year. On the other hand, given the fundamental differ-
ences between our concept of a common fund and that demanded by
the LDCs, we must be prepared for a contentious and politicized ses-
sion that could end in a stalemate and sour the general negotiating en-
vironment on North/South issues. The common fund negotiations
occur at an important moment in the dialogue, being the first major
“economic” event after CIEC; preceding an upcoming series of difficult
North/South negotiations; and coming before and during the Presi-
use the opportunity provided by the trip to increase pressure on the
US.
The U.S. Proposal
5. We have argued in the OECD that our proposal would offer the
following benefits:
a. it would provide economies from the pooling of substantial cash
resources;
b. it would substantially reduce the financial outlays of gov-
ernment for each ICA by relying on commercial borrowing to enable
participating ICAs to obtain financing up to 100% of their negotiated fi-
nancial requirements;
c. it would be able to borrow more effectively and at lower costs
than individual ICAs by consolidating their financial operations;
the trip was postponed in early November. (Charles Mohr, “Carter Postpones Foreign

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
d. it would enhance the fund’s standing on the market over time
through the financial solidarity derived from the participation of major
industrialized countries.
6. In advancing our arguments in the OECD we have brought
along the major industrialized countries to the point where—despite
some misgivings on the part of the UK and France—they are now
willing to support our approach as a credible opening position, al-
though LDC pressure could result in a breakdown of OECD cohesion
during the course of the November session.
7. The scheme has been criticized, even within the USG, on the
grounds that its credit worthiness could be strengthened; that—aside
from the economies derived from pooling cash resources under ICAs—
the fund would not provide any benefits beyond those the ICAs could
obtain on their own; and that since it would have no resources of its
own, it is no more than a useless financial intermediary. In this view,
tabling of such a proposal would be viewed by the LDCs as a failure by
the industrialized countries to live up to their commitment at CIEC and
could, therefore, lead to a major confrontation.
Negotiating Strategy
8. An immediate issue is whether a common fund of the sort out-
lined above is of sufficient scope to be a valid basis for negotiations
throughout November and beyond. The basic conceptual difference be-
tween the US and G–77 centers on the provision of direct financial con-
tributions to the common fund and whether such contributions can be
used for purposes other than price stabilization through international
buffer stocks. The following paragraphs discuss a number of proposals
that have been put forward as possible additions to our current
proposal:
Producer/Consumer Co-financing of ICA Buffer Stocks
9. Link the proposal to an explicit statement by industrialized
countries accepting the principle of consumer participation in the fi-
nancing of buffer stocks negotiated by producers and consumers. Al-
though The Executive Branch has already accepted this principle, fur-
ther consultations with the Congress will be necessary. The Germans,
in a major policy reversal, have endorsed this principle as well. The
British are referring it to Ministers and the Japanese have not yet ac-
cepted it. A joint industrialized country statement on this issue would
represent a genuine step forward in assuring adequate financing of
buffer stocks. It would also significantly enhance the credibility of a
pooling arrangement.
Support for Backup Mechanisms
10. Provide government contribution(s) to the fund as a backup re-
serve, either directly or through each ICA for the purpose of enhancing

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
the fund’s ability to borrow. Such funds could not be withdrawn by in-
dividual ICAs. From a financial point of view the desirability of such
contributions is related to the deposit ratio issue discussed below. The
lower this ratio the greater the desirability of such contributions. This
approach has the attraction of offering a limited compromise on the
central source issue—still the major conceptual gap between our ap-
proach and that of the G–77—and providing the fund with minimal di-
rect resources to assure its continued operation in the event of default
by a participating ICA or participating members of an ICA. Unless we
could convince the Congress that such resources were essential to the
fund’s operations and would not be used for the benefit of ICAs of
which we were not a member, such support would probably not be au-
thorized. And even if we could provide such assurances, the need to
obtain Congressional support would be a major constraint in intro-
ducing the proposal. And were Congress to go along, we might expect
that these appropriations would be at the expense of other foreign
assistance programs.
11. Lower the proportion of cash ICA resources which must be de-
posited with the fund. By thus reducing initial budgetary outlays, this
step would make the fund more attractive to members of ICAs. But
there is then a risk that if support for the back-up mechanism ever
shifted from callable capital pledged through ICAs to direct contribu-
tions, we could end up with a fund that a) required substantial
amounts of direct resources and b) required participating countries to
support borrowing on behalf of ICAs of which they are not members.
To avoid this problem, we would have to seek agreement on the nature
of the back-up mechanism before settling the deposit ratio and other
basic issues.
12. Endow the fund with an overdraft within the World Bank or
IMF that would be activated in the event of an IMF-certified recession
and if the common fund had exhausted its commercial borrowing ca-
pacity. This step would be consistent with our position that there are
benefits to all countries in sustaining production and employment by
propping up commodity prices in the event of a severe decline. When
this idea was raised earlier this year with other industrialized coun-
tries, it was generally opposed and we have not discussed it further in
the OECD framework. The objections raised to the proposal were:
a) the existence of such a facility would tend to reduce the incen-
tive for ICAs to raise the appropriate amount of their own financing
when the agreements are negotiated;
b) the ICAs themselves might have to be amended in order to ob-
tain financing significantly in excess of 100% of their negotiated finan-
cial requirements;

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
c) an overdraft with the Bank or IMF would require changes in
their respective Charter and Articles of Agreement; such changes could
be difficult to obtain and would risk further undesirable amendments;
d) establishment of such an overdraft facility could result in
drawing away funds for economic development purposes in the case of
the Bank and for anti-recessionary balance of payments financing in the
case of the IMF, when the need for such financing would be greatest.
“Other Measures”
13. Seek a commitment by developed countries to support in-
creased attention by the World Bank to commodity problems in con-
nection with the proposed general capital increase. This step—together
with agreement by the developed countries that the objectives of ICAs
could include financing of product improvement and R&D pro-
grams—would be a defensible answer to LDC insistence that a
common fund finance other measures. The disadvantages are: a) we are
not in a position to “earmark” a future general capital increase; b) the
LDCs will argue they are destined to receive the benefits of a general
capital increase in any event and that there is, therefore, no addition-
ality; and c) they will view this step as a ploy to subvert their concept of
a common fund, which directly addresses “other measures” and, there-
fore, contains something of interest to virtually every LDC.
14. Provide for an advisory role for the fund on other measures.
Here, the fund’s membership would issue “recommendations” to other
institutions to undertake “other measures” where traditional price sta-
bilizing agreements are not feasible. While this might seem better than
nothing to some LDCs and innocuous to many developed countries, it
accepts a definite role for the fund on other measures, thus paving the
way for pressure to move from “advising” to “financing,” and would
almost certainly result in a new large international bureaucracy.
15. Provide for voluntary contributions to a second window for the
financing of other measures. This would provide an outlet for any vol-
untary contributions, including those from OPEC, and also perhaps
satisfy the LDCs that the fund would have a financing role on other
measures. On the other hand, in addition to the disadvantages cited in
14) above, it would be difficult for the US to resist the inevitable pres-
sure on us to contribute to the second window, which would become in
effect a new aid institution requiring periodic replenishment. A second
window is thus inconsistent with our position, and that of most OECD
countries, that there is no economic justification for common fund fi-
nancing of non-stabilization measures.
16. We should bear in mind that there is no certainty that changes
in the US approach would bridge the wide gap between the industrial-
ized countries and the LDCs. An arduous negotiation thus appears in-
evitable. Moreover, our support for consumer-country participation in

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
buffer stock financing—which is a central element in our commodity
policy—has not really been tested yet on the Hill. In determining our
position, tactics and strategy, we must weigh the desirability of a pos-
sible short-term political gain against our own preferred approach to
commodity issues and the major Congressional constraints that loom
in the background.
Timing
17. The timing of possible introduction of any of the above changes
is a matter of judgement with respect to negotiating strategy and tactics
in UNCTAD.
18. Introduction of some changes fairly early in the negotiations
could reduce the risk of our immediately being thrown on the defen-
sive and enhance our ability to make the OECD proposal the basis for
discussion in November.
19. The nature of the North/South dialogue and the entire history
of negotiations between the developed and developing countries sug-
gest that the latter quickly snatch any concessions made and then up
the ante. Given the conceptual gulf between the two sides on the
common fund—even with the US in its most forthcoming possible pos-
ture—there is every reason to suspect history will repeat itself in No-
vember. This argues for a conservative opening position with some
flexibility held in reserve and used only when absolutely necessary.
The limitations on that flexibility, however, argue for stretching out
whatever changes we may be able to make over the longest possible pe-
riod. We cannot realistically hope in November to change the nature of
negotiations in UNCTAD. Despite the obvious risks involved, we may
want to sensitize the LDCs early in the negotiations to the real limits in
our position and to the fact that, while we hope for some progress in
November, we do not expect all major issues to be resolved.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
281.
Summary of Conclusions of a Policy Review Committee
Meeting1
SUBJECT
Negotiations on a Common Fund
PARTICIPANTS
State
AID
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Governor John J. Gilligan
Mr. Richard Cooper
Mr. Constantine Michalopoulos
Mr. Julius Katz
Agriculture
Mr. Jeff Garten
Mr. Harry Wilhelm
Defense
Commerce
Mr. David McGiffert
Mr. Frank Weil
Dr. Ellen Frost
Treasury
JCS
Secretary W. Michael Blumenthal
Vice Admiral Patrick Hannifin
Mr. Anthony Solomon
CIA
USUN
Dr. Robert Bowie
Ambassador Melissa Wells
[name not declassified]
White House
OMB
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Mr. Randy Jayne
Charles Schultze
NSC
William Nordhaus
Guy Erb
Thomas Thornton
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
The PRC met on November 4, 1977 to consider the US approach to
the negotiations on a common fund (Geneva, November 7–Decem-
ber 2).
The PRC reviewed the strengths and weaknesses of the US pro-
posal which was the basis for the opening position of the OECD coun-
tries in the negotiations. The PRC also considered the various positions
of different countries within the Group of 77 developing countries and
within the OECD.
There was agreement on the necessity to consult regularly with the
Congress on the evolution of the negotiations and of the US position.
The PRC agreed that the November meeting should remand fur-
ther work on a common fund to technical inter-governmental groups
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 66, PRC
White House Situation Room.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
which would prepare issues for consideration at another negotiating
conference.
The PRC agreed that the US would adhere to the opening position
which had been drawn up within the OECD. It was also agreed that the
US negotiators could announce, at the moment they deemed appro-
priate, that the US was willing to accept financial commitments by con-
suming countries in regard to the financing of individual commodity
agreements.
The PRC called for further analysis of the pros and cons of possible
changes in the US opening position. The possible improvements in the
US approach which are set out in the PRC discussion paper of No-
should be analyzed immediately.
Decisions in Washington on possible changes in the US position
will be taken in the light of the analysis of the pros and cons of indi-
vidual measures as well as information received from US negotiators in
Geneva regarding statements and possible actions by the Group of 77
and the other OECD countries.
The PRC agreed to meet again on the common fund negotiations
on Friday, November 11, 1977.
2 See Tab A to Document 280.
282.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, November 9, 1977
SUBJECT
Economic Assistance Options
Attached is a memorandum that the PRC decided should be pre-
pared, asking you to make choices concerning the aid strategies and
long-term funding levels that will guide internal US planning. OMB is
anxious to get your decisions soonest, to help it in reviewing AID’s FY
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
1979 request. If you wish a meeting with the PRC principals before de-
ciding, please let us know.
A later memorandum will come to you by November 30 about or-
ganizational issues.
This memorandum was prepared by Guy Erb of the NSC staff and
me. It is based on the Development Coordination Committee and
Brookings studies of foreign aid, and on PRC discussion of these
studies. It has been coordinated with other agencies. The preferences of
these agencies among the indicated strategies and options are stated in
the memo.
My own views are not recorded in the memorandum. I favor
Strategy #1, focusing concessional development aid on helping poor
people in poor countries, while using Supporting Security Assistance
and such non-concessional aid as World Bank loans to help middle-
income countries; and I favor the moderate funding option, a one-third
overall increase in concessional assistance by FY 1982. I would make
implementation of whatever decision you reach about aid funding con-
ditional on your being satisfied that needed improvements in aid effec-
tiveness have been achieved. This is at least as important as funding
levels.2
If you are pressed for time, it is not necessary to read the tabs. You
may, however, want to look at Cy’s memo at Tab F, commenting on the
future of US foreign assistance.
Attachment
Memorandum for President Carter3
Washington, November 9, 1977
CONCESSIONAL ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE OPTIONS
This memorandum is to secure your guidance on US concessional
economic assistance strategy and longer-term (FY 1982) funding goals.
2 In a November 11 memorandum to Carter, Brzezinski indicated his support for
“State and AID in their preference for strategy number 2. It combines the morally desir-
able objective of focusing on the poor people with the needed political flexibility. Strategy
number 3 is too vague, while strategy number 1 does not give us the occasionally needed
flexibility for political purposes or, indeed, for the morally good objective of stimulating
some concern within middle-income nations for their own poor people.” Carter initialed
Brzezinski’s memorandum, a stamped notation at the top of which reads: “The President
has seen.” (Ibid.)
3 Confidential.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
That guidance will provide the basis for Executive Office review of
1979 aid budget requests and for the planning of later aid programs.
This memorandum draws on studies of alternative strategies,
funding levels, and organizational arrangements prepared by the De-
velopment Coordination Committee and the Brookings Institution.
Summaries of these studies are at Annexes A and B. This memorandum
deals only with concessional assistance. It does not deal with the capital
replenishment of the World Bank and other hard lending agencies—a
replenishment which, although largely without impact on federal
outlays, will require substantial appropriations under present Con-
gressional procedures. Nor does it deal with military assistance.
I. Introduction
In the last twenty-five years, considerable progress has been made
by the developing countries. With substantial external assistance, many
of these countries have achieved sufficient growth so that they no
longer fall into the category of poor countries as defined by the World
Bank, i.e., countries with less than $520 per capita annual income in
1975 dollars. These middle-income developing countries, most of
which are in Latin America and East Asia, can now rely mainly on ex-
port earnings, hard loans from the World Bank and other private and
public lending institutions, and private investment. Their growth rates
do not depend on further large-scale concessional aid.
Nonetheless, over a billion people in the developing world still
live in degrading poverty. Many of them are in the middle-income
countries; these countries often lack the technical expertise and re-
sources, and more importantly the political will, to improve the lot of
their poor. Most of the world’s poor, however, are in poor countries—
largely in South Asia and Africa. US policy should seek to help these
countries achieve faster growth with equity, so that their peoples can
overcome poverty and so that their governments can reduce their reli-
ance on concessional aid. In addition to the strong moral and humani-
tarian considerations involved, we have a powerful interest in helping
to bring about the increased food output and the reduction in rates of
population growth that would attend more rapid growth in the devel-
oping world.
The main prerequisite to achieving these goals, apart from open
markets and expanding economies in the industrial countries, is more
effective domestic policies in the LDCs. Although external resources
are only a small part of the total resources available to LDCs, they can
be important in bringing about needed policy reforms. To secure these
external resources, the poorer LDCs need increased concessional aid;
they cannot rely wholly on export proceeds.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
The United States currently provides only about 30% of total
OECD Official Development Assistance. The poor countries’ needs for
increased concessional aid must thus be met by increased contributions
from all donor countries. The US role will be critical in determining
whether such an aid effort is forthcoming. Although other countries’
aid as a share of GNP is greater than ours and has been rising, while
ours has been declining as a percentage of GNP, we are still the largest
single donor, and other countries look to us for leadership.
Concessional aid is only one of several means by which the indus-
trial countries assist progress in the developing world. A total policy re-
sponse to economic development must include such other actions as
trade and commodity policy, which are not treated in this paper. But bi-
lateral and multilateral concessional aid is an essential element in the
mix.
Two contradictory trends bear on the future of concessional
assistance:
—US interdependence with the developing world is increasing.
An improvement in the economic welfare of LDCs benefits the United
States, both economically and politically. Higher LDC production of
food, energy, and raw materials would serve US interests—as would
the decline in the rate of population growth that would likely result
from higher LDC levels of health and education.
—The difficulties of securing foreign assistance appropriations
from the Congress remain; they will grow if aid requests are increased.4
Widespread public support for aid is lacking. In part, these difficulties
reflect criticism of the effectiveness of bilateral assistance. In part, they
reflect Congressional concern over lack of US control over multilateral
aid.
These facts underline both the importance and the difficulty of se-
curing the increased US assistance pledged at the Downing Street
Summit5 and elsewhere. They point up the need for measures to im-
prove the effectiveness of our bilateral aid programs, if enlarged re-
sources are to be secured. They also point up the need for having a clear
foreign assistance strategy and for explaining to the Congress and the
American people the link between that strategy and our domestic and
international interests.
Against this background, three questions need to be addressed in
determining the optimum role of US economic aid to developing
nations:
4 Nonetheless, AID notes that in recent years the Congress has approved increasing
levels of economic assistance, and that AID authorizing legislation has been passed by
larger majorities than in the past. [Footnote in the original.]
5 For the text of the Declaration issued at the conclusion of the London G–7 Summit,
see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1977, Book I, pp.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—What aid strategy will best achieve US objectives?
—What FY 1982 funding levels should be envisaged as goals?
—What are the organizational prerequisites for an effective aid
program?
This memorandum addresses the first two questions. A separate
report about organizational issues will be forwarded to you by the end
of November. Decisions on the questions raised in this memorandum
need not wait on that report.
II. Present Programs
Bilateral concessional economic assistance is immediately responsive
to Presidential decisions and permits concentration on geographic and
functional areas of importance to the United States. It has three major
components:
—The development assistance program of AID, which has been
running about $1 billion annually, concentrates around 80% of its re-
sources on meeting basic human needs of the poor in poor countries.
The rest goes for similar programs in middle-income countries, largely
in Latin America. There is a heavy functional concentration (90% of the
total program) on agriculture, health, population, and education—by
Congressional mandate.
annually, provides food to foreign countries in the form of grants or
concessional loans. About 70% of PL–480’s total dollar resources is allo-
cated to poor countries for humanitarian relief, economic development,
balance of payments support, and support of US political objectives;
the rest goes to such middle-income or affluent countries as Portugal,
Korea, and Israel. The selection of recipients among middle-income
countries has been heavily influenced by foreign policy considerations.
The size of PL–480 is partly determined by domestic agricultural condi-
tions and objectives; these have sometimes led to its being used in ways
that reduce incentives for food production abroad. USDA has an-
nounced its intention to place less emphasis on domestic-oriented goals
in planning future PL–480 programs.
—Security Supporting Assistance (SSA), which has been running
about $2 billion annually, is given for political reasons and is heavily
concentrated in the Middle East, particularly Israel and Egypt. The
funding levels requested for SSA have tended to vary from year to year,
depending on political events. Its size is determined by the executive
branch independently of the levels requested for development assist-
ance; there is a potential trade-off in the Congress between SSA and de-
velopment aid, however, since both are appropriated in the same bill.
Other components of US bilateral concessional assistance run to
around $200 million annually and include the Congressionally funded

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
Inter-American Foundation, and private voluntary organizations,
which draw on official as well as private funds. Such organizations
have had considerable success in reaching poor people directly
through grass roots activities.
A table showing major recipients of AID funds and PL–480 over
the last several years is attached as Annex C.6
Multilateral concessional assistance has two major components:
—The roughly $1 billion that the US contributes annually provides
about 30% of the resources of soft-loan windows of international finan-
cial lending institutions, of which the largest is the International Devel-
opment Association (IDA). These institutions’ aid is provided on con-
cessional terms to poor countries. (The middle-income countries
receive loans on non-concessional terms from the hard-loan windows
of international financial institutions; the FY 1978 US foreign aid appro-
priation includes about $1 billion for callable capital for this purpose.)
—The roughly $200 million that the US contributes annually to de-
velopment programs of the United Nations is directed to all developing
member countries, both middle-income and poor.
III. Effectiveness
Measuring the relationship between aid inputs and project outputs
is complicated. Some progress has been made, however, in answering
the basic question of what does and does not work in respect of indi-
vidual development projects.
Measuring the impact of aid on overall development programs is
more difficult. As noted earlier, economic growth and social progress
are determined mainly by each receiving country’s own resources and
policies. Since concessional assistance usually provides only a small
part of these resources, its impact hinges on encouraging the receiving
countries to adopt improved policies. This leverage will vary according
to the size of the recipient economy and its need for external resources.
The potential for influence is thus greater in poor than in middle-
income countries, and in small than in large countries.
Trying to estimate this critical link between aid flows and policy
reforms is difficult—not only because it requires sorting out the impact
of concessional aid from other social and economic variables, but also
because it must be attempted with inadequate data and relatively weak
analytic tools. To overcome these constraints and build solid assess-
ments of aid impact will take time. A few generalizations can be made,
however, about the economic effectiveness of present programs.
6 Tab C, attached but not printed, is a table entitled “Major Recipients of U.S. Eco-
nomic Assistance Ranked by 1976 Per Capita GNP.” In the margin at the end of this para-
graph, Carter wrote: “Table seems to lack logic in ’78 proposals.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
The international financing institutions’ soft windows are gener-
ally well managed and have a reputation for apolitical professionalism.
Our contributions to these institutions evoke larger total contributions
from other countries. The fact that these institutions are international
and disburse large resources enhances their influence on the receiving
countries’ economic policies.7
Bilateral aid has had substantial successes, e.g., in Korea and Tai-
wan. These successes took place at a time when the US provided large
resources and the receiving countries needed and welcomed US advice.
Neither condition now obtains in the same degree. The opportunities
for exerting policy leverage through US bilateral assistance programs
thus hinge on an increase in its scale and a close linkage between that
aid and the policies of the international lending agencies. US will-
ingness to exert bilateral pressure for economic reform and the recip-
ient country’s ability to yield to such pressure are now sharply
constrained.
Measuring the effectiveness of US aid in promoting political objec-
tives depends on the specific objectives involved. If aid is given as part
of a base rights negotiation, its effectiveness can be judged by whether
we do or don’t get the base, and at what price. But the effectiveness of
aid in advancing more general objectives, such as peace in the Middle
East, is more difficult to appraise: No one can be sure whether that
peace would be further removed if we had given less aid. The effec-
tiveness of aid in promoting good relations with the receiving country
is even more difficult to assess. The United States probably gets more
political credit from recipients for bilateral than for multilateral aid. But
it is hard to define whether, and if so how, this credit gets translated
into policies of benefit to the US. Countries’ gratitude tends to be
short-lived.8 Providing aid for generalized political purposes is partly
an act of faith—or of fear that things would be even worse without aid.
IV. Strategies
Although the funding levels discussed later in this paper treat both
bilateral and multilateral aid, the strategies presented below focus
largely on bilateral US assistance, since US influence over the policies of
international financial institutions is limited. The question of how best
to use this influence is being examined in a separate study of multi-
lateral aid strategies and funding levels being conducted by the Treas-
ury Department, in close consultation with the Congress.
7 Carter underlined these words and phrases in this paragraph: “international fi-
nancing institutions”; “well managed”; “larger”; “contributions”; “other countries”; and
“enhances their influence.”
8 Carter underlined the words “gratitude” and “short-lived” and wrote “amen” in
the margin adjacent to this sentence.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
All the strategies described below have four things in common:
—All would continue Security Supporting Assistance,9 as a means
of providing concessional aid to advance our political purposes.
—All would continue, in varying degree, the US policy of using bi-
lateral development aid and PL–480 aid to serve basic human needs of
the poor abroad.10 This means a focus on improving the lives of poor
people and helping them to gain access to such amenities as adequate
food and nutrition, health and family planning services, shelter, and
basic education. (The definition of aid for basic human needs recom-
mended by the PRC is given at Annex D.)11
—All would have the US take account of the human rights per-
formance of countries in allocating aid.12
—All would emphasize global problems—food, population,
health, and education13—in some degree. This emphasis could be
harder to come by under a strategy that stressed political purposes than
under one that stressed helping poor people. If the attack on global
hunger was given greater emphasis as a rationale for increased aid, we
would probably elicit increased support among the American people.
Strategy #1 would limit bilateral development assistance to
meeting the basic human needs of poor people in poor countries (de-
fined as those meeting the IDA eligibility of $520 or less in 1975
dollars),14 on the grounds that they need it and have no other recourse.
The proportion of PL–480 going to poor countries would rise. Bilateral
development assistance and PL–480 would be heavily concentrated in
Africa and South Asia; bilateral development aid to governments in
Latin America and the Near East would be limited to a few poor coun-
tries. Allocation of concessional development aid among IDA eligibles
would be determined principally by the receiving country’s economic
performance and commitment to helping its poor.
Concessional aid to middle-income LDCs would be gradually
phased down; concessional aid to these countries in support of techno-
logical collaboration (increased US support of research, development,
and training on problems of special concern to LDCs) would continue,
as it would under the other strategies discussed in this report. SSA and
9 Carter underlined the words “continue Security Supporting Assistance.”
10 Carter underlined these words and phrases in this sentence: “continue”; “using
bilateral development aid”; “PL–480 aid”; and “poor.”
11 Tab E (not Tab D, as indicated in the memorandum), attached but not printed, is
an undated paper entitled “PRC Recommendation for the Basic Human Needs Approach
of US Foreign Assistance.”
12 Carter underlined the words “human rights performance.”
13 Carter underlined the words “food,” “population,” “health,” and “education.”
14 The map at Tab E shows eligible nations. [Footnote in the original. Tab D (not Tab
E, as indicated in the memorandum), attached but not printed, is a World Bank map enti-
tled “Countries Eligible for Soft Loans from the International Development Association

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
hard loans from international financial institutions would continue to
be used to meet other needs for aid to middle-income countries, e.g.,
discouraging emigration to the US and encouraging regional collabora-
tion in the Caribbean.
Because the poor countries have a limited capacity to design and
implement projects, this strategy would allow only moderate increases
in AID funding levels, unless we either moved toward a broader inter-
pretation of current Congressional mandates regarding the kinds of
projects that can be aided or resumed substantial aid to India. If these
changes were made, this strategy would probably result in more aid
going to poor countries than any other; as a result, US influence in
seeking to improve these countries’ policies would probably be greater
than under any other, and there would probably be more progress
toward meeting basic human needs in poor countries than under other
strategies.15 Important segments of the Congress, which have been
pressing for elimination of bilateral development assistance to middle-
income countries, would react favorably to the greater emphasis on
poor countries. So would many poor developing countries; middle-
income countries might well take a different view. There might be
some Congressional objection to the broader interpretation of current
Congressional mandates, which would allow AID to finance infrastruc-
ture programs in support of human needs.
Strategy #2 would provide concessional assistance (both bilateral
development assistance and PL–480) to meet the basic human needs of
poor people, primarily in low-income countries, which would continue
to receive top priority, but also in middle-income countries if enough
aid were available.16 The dominant factor in allocating aid among coun-
tries would be where it would do the most good to help poor people;
any aid to governments of middle-income countries would thus de-
pend on the recipient’s commitment to helping its poor.17 Like strategy
#1, this strategy would allow a sharp sectoral focus.
In granting concessional loans to middle-income countries under
this strategy, our terms would be stiffer and we would expect the recip-
ients to contribute more of their own resources than low-income coun-
tries. Because our aid would represent a smaller part of the total re-
sources available to middle-income countries, it would probably
15 Carter underlined these phrases in this sentence: “US influence”; “be greater”;
and “meeting basic human needs.”
16 Carter
underlined
these
phrases
in
this
sentence:
“poor
people”
and
“middle-income.”
17 Carter underlined these phrases in this sentence: “most good” and “help poor
people.”

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
provide less leverage18 on the receiving countries’ overall policies than it
would in poor countries. It might have a catalytic effect, however, in
stimulating middle-income countries to carry out specific programs or
projects to help their poor.
would permit more concessional assistance to reach middle-income
countries that are politically important to us and that we may want to
see participate in regional development programs—provided that these
countries are prepared to use US aid to help their poor. Since we cannot
assume that this will always be the case, this strategy would provide
less political flexibility than strategy #3, below.
The Congress might perceive this strategy as a rejection of its
clearly stated preference for concentrating foreign aid in the poorest
countries. If the Congress considered the amount going to middle-
income countries excessive, increased aid appropriations might be
jeopardized. On the other hand, we would still be serving poor people;
State and AID believe there is a good chance that many Congressional
objections could be surmounted.
Strategy #3 would be directed to multiple purposes, under im-
proved procedures and with differences dictated by changing circum-
stances, e.g., a greater emphasis on meeting equity concerns. This
strategy would give the President greater flexibility20 than strategies #1
or #2 in meeting political needs. Bilateral development aid and PL–480
aid would be used to promote such foreign policy purposes as regional
cooperation and non-proliferation, even if this required using aid in
ways that were not directed toward helping the poor.
Thus, although most bilateral development aid and most PL–480
would continue to go to helping meet the basic human needs of poor
people, more would go to advancing political or security purposes than
under strategies #1 or #2. Larger amounts of bilateral development aid
and of PL–480 would be directed to key developing countries, regions,
or problems of importance to the United States, regardless of the recip-
ients’ level of development, and their commitment to helping the poor.
SSA would probably be a larger part of total concessional aid than
under strategies #1 or #2.
To the extent that this strategy emphasized political purposes, it
would evoke stronger Congressional criticism from supporters of de-
velopment aid than strategies #1 or #2. It would probably be supported
by those who view aid primarily as a foreign policy, rather than a de-
velopmental, tool, on the other hand.
18 Carter underlined the words “less leverage.”
19 Carter underlined the words “more flexibility.”
20 Carter underlined the words “greater flexibility.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Underlying the choice among these strategies are two key issues:
What should be the relative emphasis in allocating concessional aid be-
tween poor and middle-income countries; and what should be the rela-
tive emphasis between development/humanitarian and political pur-
poses? The temptation is to say that we should do all of these things:
provide all the aid that is needed for all countries and all purposes. This
will be possible if we can secure all the aid funds needed to these ends.
But if aid funds are limited, and if the limit does not vary greatly as be-
tween strategies, hard choices will have to be faced. In this event, more
aid for middle-income countries will mean less aid for poor countries,
and more aid for political purposes will mean less aid for development
needs. The selection of a clear strategy should assist us not only in re-
solving these choices but also in effectively managing our programs
and in presenting them to the Congress and to the public.
V. Long-Term (FY 1982) Funding Goals
US concessional aid totaled about $5 billion in FY 1977 and nearly
$6 billion in FY 1978. The breakdown follows:
Concessional Development Assistance
(Commitments in $ billions)
FY 1977
FY 1978
Bilateral
Security Supporting Assistance
AID development programs
PL–480 food aid
Other
.2
.2
Subtotal
Multilateral
Contributions to multilateral soft lending
.7
Voluntary contributions to UN development-
oriented programs
.2
.2
Subtotal
.9
Total
These totals overstate the amount of aid allocated to development
purposes. Some bilateral development aid, a good part of PL–480, and
most SSA responds to political objectives.
21 Carter drew an upward-slanting arrow next to this number and a horizontal
arrow next to the next three numbers in this column.
22 Carter drew an upward-slanting arrow next to this number and a horizontal
arrow next to the number below it.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
Three broad options for the levels of US concessional assistance to
be achieved by 1982 are discussed below, two of them involving a real
increase in aid.23 The mix of programs mentioned under each of these
illustrative options is only one of a number that might be appropriate at
each funding level.24 Your selection among these options will provide
guidance for internal executive branch planning, but not for submis-
sion of future aid projections to the Congress at this stage.
1. Continue Present Aid Levels in Real Terms. Total FY 1982 conces-
sional assistance (including SSA) would rise in current dollars to about
1978, i.e., about $6 billion. Unless there were a marked shift from bi-
lateral to multilateral aid, this would require us to refuse the increase in
the size of the soft-loan windows of the multilateral banks that their
presidents are likely to propose. If SSA were held constant in nominal
terms, however, this option would permit a modest increase in US bi-
lateral concessional development assistance. Aid levels would decline
as a proportion of GNP. Other donor countries’ aid performance would
be adversely affected. Developing countries’ growth rates would thus
be as heavily dependent as in the past on their internal economic pol-
icies and on trends in the world economy. Relatively rapid growth
would probably continue in the middle-income countries of East Asia
and Latin America; there would be little or no per capita income
growth in many poor countries of South Asia and Africa. US aid per-
formance would be criticized and would have an adverse impact on US
relations with developing countries. This option would be viewed by
many as a violation of our Summit and CIEC pledges by you and Secre-
tary Vance to increase aid.
2. Moderate Increase in Assistance. Under this option, FY 1982 con-
cessional development assistance (including SSA), in FY 1982 dollars,
around $8 billion, or an increase of about one-third over FY 1978 levels.
This could mean:
23 The Brookings study concludes that substantial changes in past AID manage-
ment practices and personnel procedures would be needed if these increased funds were
to be effectively spent. Governor Gilligan indicates that he has already begun making
these improvements. The Brookings study suggests that changes in legislation and in
Congressional requirements regarding aid presentation and implementation would also
be needed. These issues will be treated in our later paper on organizational issues. [Foot-
note in the original.]
24 The illustrative figures shown under each option do not include the over $800
million by which we will soon be in arrears in meeting our past commitments to the soft-
and hard-loan windows of international financial institutions. We will have to seek addi-
tional funds from the Congress to cover these overdue payments. [Footnote in the
original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—about a 50% increase in real terms over the FY 1978 contribu-
tions to the soft-loan windows of the multilateral banks, which is what
the heads of these banks will likely propose;
—about a 100% increase in real terms in bilateral development aid
over FY 1978 levels;
—SSA remaining about where it is now;
—a moderate increase in PL–480 sales.27
Assistance at this level, if carefully programmed, might well in-
duce important policy reforms in some poor countries. In resource
terms, it could have significant impact on LDC growth rates if it were
focused on countries where such reforms were being undertaken.
Under this option, you could more readily carry out the proposal made
to you in a recent report of the National Academy of Sciences for pro-
viding increased support for private and public agricultural research
and development, in the US and the developing countries,28 and you
could provide for increasing technological collaboration with devel-
oping countries in other fields, as well. US aid as a proportion of GNP
would be about the same as now, given the projected increase in GNP.
Other donors would welcome our absolute aid increase, as would the
LDCs. There would, however, continue to be LDC pressure for US con-
cessions in other areas. There would be significant Congressional re-
sistance, mitigated by the fact of the increase being spread over five
years; a large investment of political capital and a close working rela-
tion with the Congress would be required to overcome this resistance.
3. Large Increase in Assistance. Levels of US concessional assistance
dollars. In constant 1977 dollars, aid levels would range around $10 bil-
lion. This could mean not only the 50% increase in multilateral aid de-
scribed above (which is probably the most that the donor countries
would agree to), but almost a doubling of PL–480 over FY 1978 and a
tripling in real terms and quadrupling in nominal terms of bilateral de-
velopment assistance. If concentrated in a relatively small number of
countries’ with growth potential, this aid level might have a significant
impact on the recipients’ economic growth and their progress in
meeting basic human needs—although here, too, policy reforms would
be more important than the resource transfer. The US would be pro-
viding about the same proportion of GNP as aid as the other OECD
countries. This option would thus place you in a good position to call
for increased international effort by all countries in attacking such
27 Carter wrote “—?” in the margin adjacent to this point.
28 This report, entitled World Food and Nutrition Study: The Potential Contributions of
Research, called for additional spending on nutrition and food production research. See
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Document
212.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
global problems as hunger and disease. It would go a long way toward
meeting the developing countries’ aid demands, although they would
still press for initiatives in such other areas as trade and commodities.
Obtaining Congressional support for an increase of this magnitude
would be extremely difficult.
VI. Your Decisions
Your Decision on Strategy for Concessional Assistance
Strategy #1: Concentrate bilateral concessional aid on helping poor
countries—with SSA, non-concessional aid, and concessional aid for
technological collaboration going to middle-income countries. (Fa-
vored by Treasury, OMB, and the Brookings study on the grounds that
it would concentrate aid on (i) the people who need it most, because
they live in countries that have less recourse to such outside resources
as World Bank loans than middle-income countries; (ii) the countries
where it could have the most beneficial leverage on the recipients’ pol-
icies, because it will constitute a larger share of the total resources than
it would in middle-income countries.)29
Strategy #2: Concentrate on helping poor people in poor LDCs with
the flexibility to reach poor people in middle-income nations as well.
(Favored by State, AID, and the NSC staff on the grounds that this
strategy might reach the largest number of poor people, would give the
US the opportunity to develop cooperative relationships with the
largest number of LDCs, and would provide substantial flexibility to
meet varied objectives including regional programs, as in the Carib-
bean, while allowing us to balance our interests between poor countries
and middle-income countries, as well as between economic and polit-
ical purposes, provided that these purposes could be served by pro-
grams that would help the poor.)30
Strategy #3: Follow multi-purpose strategy, with substantial atten-
tion to the political purposes of bilateral development aid, on the
grounds that this will afford us greater flexibility than either strategies
#1 or #2, since aid would not be limited to helping poor people. Since
this strategy would place more emphasis than strategies #1 or #2 on po-
litical and security factors in programming bilateral development aid,
it would make it easier to use bilateral development aid to advance
such political goals as non-proliferation and regional collaboration.31
29 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this option.
30 Owen wrote “Supported by Peter Bourne” at the end of this paragraph. Carter in-
dicated his approval of this option and initialed “J.”
31 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this option.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Your Decision on FY 1982 Concessional Aid Funding Goals
Low Option: Maintain FY 1978 aid levels in real terms.32
Moderate Option: An increase of one-third in total concessional aid
over FY 1978 in real terms. (Supported by Treasury, the NSC staff, and
OMB as the most appropriate target, in view of likely relevant circum-
stances at home and abroad. Supported by State, subject to upward re-
vision if it is demonstrated that increased aid can be used effectively.)33
High Option: A rough doubling of total concessional aid over FY
1978, in real terms. (Supported by AID, which believes it essential that
the President approve a planning figure consistent with the enormous
political and economic stakes that the US has in the future growth of
the developing world. The Brookings study recommends a large in-
crease in concessional aid, and notes that various estimates of future
aid needs converge around this high option.)34
Whatever your choice among these strategies and funding levels,
we face a difficult task in carrying it out—in making needed improve-
ments in bilateral development aid, and in selling both bilateral and
multilateral aid to the Congress. But we can address both these tasks
more effectively if we have a clear sense of your long-range goals.35
32 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this option.
33 Owen wrote “Supported by Peter Bourne” at the end of this paragraph. Carter in-
dicated his approval of this option and initialed “J.”
34 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this option.
35 At the end of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “Need to sell to people—Develop
comprehensive PR effort—Needs to sound conservative & idealistic—Use popular
persons from movies, sports, etc.—Also, we do not need to use World Bank meas-
urements which minimize importance of PL 480.” On November 29, Erb forwarded to
Brzezinski a paper that he and Thornton had prepared entitled “Public Presentation of a
North-South Strategy.” According to Erb’s cover memorandum, a meeting was to be held
on the issue on November 30. No memorandum of conversation of the meeting was
found. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office
File, Subject Chron File, Box 108, North-South Policy: 1977)

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
Annex A
Summary of Study Prepared by the Development
Coordination Committee36
Washington, undated
DCC Study
Summary
The first section of the DCC report discusses the US stake in the de-
veloping world, the history and role of US development aid, and the
major instruments used to provide assistance (bilateral development
programs, PL–480, International Development Lending Institutions, or
IDLIs, UN programs and strategy emphasizing growth with equity and
aimed at meeting basic human needs) as the most effective way of pro-
moting US development aid objectives.
The second part of the study, whose purpose is to examine the ef-
fectiveness of each of the major instruments mentioned above, con-
cludes that all are generally effective in addressing major objectives but
that some have comparative advantages in specific areas: bilateral de-
velopment assistance; IDLI soft lending and UN programs in meeting
developmental-humanitarian goals; IDLI hard lending in meeting
economic-commercial goals; security supporting assistance in meeting
security-political goals.
The study discusses problems which confront bilateral and multi-
lateral assistance efforts. Citing improvements and reforms which
could improve bilateral and multilateral assistance, the study includes
the following measures which could enhance the effectiveness of the bi-
lateral program: (a) concentrating bilateral development assistance on
countries willing to adopt appropriate policies conducive to equitable
growth, (b) influencing domestic LDC development policies by use of
leverage, and (c) innovative programming to demonstrate new ideas
and a dialogue with LDC officials to influence their acceptance of pro-
gram and policy changes.
The final part presents major substantive and funding issues, some
with DCC recommendations and others, where no DCC consensus
emerged, with options for PRC consideration. Major issues include:
36 Confidential. Gilligan circulated the DCC study on U.S. foreign assistance, as
well as a summary of its findings, to PRC members under cover of an October 6 memo-
randum. (Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 26, PRM–08

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—Overall strategy for development assistance.
—Funding levels: Illustrative 1982 funding levels are presented,
each representing a substantial increase over current amounts for all
programs in both real and nominal terms.
—US assertiveness in pushing basic human needs and types of
BHN programs to be funded: the DCC recommends supporting the
IDLIs and the LDCs in stressing BHN rather than taking the lead uni-
laterally, and also recommends an “intermediate” approach permitting
some capital investments in addition to programs immediately bene-
fiting the poor.
—Bilateral programs: Options are presented on the mix of coun-
tries to be assisted, the sectoral composition of the programs and the
degree of conditionality to be used in allocating funds.
—Security supporting assistance: This issue relates to the separa-
tion of politically motivated programs from those with mainly devel-
opmental objectives.
—PL–480: The DCC recommends de-emphasis of market develop-
ment and surplus disposal, and maximum use of the new Title-III
authority.
—IDLIs: Options are presented on the mix of hard and soft lending
and the relative emphasis of the World Bank and regional banks. No
recommendations are made because of Treasury’s agreement to under-
take a full study of future US approaches to the IDLIs, in consultation
with the Congress.
—UN programs: Options are presented on increasing the US share
of voluntary contributions to UN programs and on the relative role of
UNDP and the specialized agencies.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
Tab B
Summary of Interim Report Prepared by the
Brookings Institution37
Washington, undated
Brookings Interim Report: An Assessment of
Development Assistance Strategies
Summary
The study is based on the premise that although development
must occur primarily through self-help, increased concessional aid for
the poorest and non-concessional aid for the middle-income countries
is needed and can play an important role in hastening growth with eq-
uity. Furthermore, the continuous development of new knowledge is
critical to development and is a field where the US has a unique ca-
pacity, drawing extensively on the US private sector, to build indig-
enous LDC capabilities.
In its consideration of the effectiveness of current programs, the re-
port concludes that most bilateral foreign aid vehicles need substantial
improvement.
1. AID: AID has over-narrowly interpreted the New Directions
mandate,38 thereby missing areas important to development—such as
regional development and research. Managerially, it has been hobbled
by unnecessary paperwork, overly restrictive legislation, and insuffi-
ciently qualified personnel.
2. PL–480: With insufficient stress on promoting economic devel-
opment, PL–480 aid has not fulfilled its potential, and has occasionally
acted as a disincentive to LDC agricultural production.
3. Security Supporting Assistance does not go to the countries that
most need development aid, and cannot be readily used to influence
the receiving countries’ economic policies; has little development im-
pact, and detracts from the amounts otherwise available for develop-
ment assistance. Its benefits are largely political.
The report expresses a different view on multilateral assistance:
The International Financial Institutions, particularly the World Bank
Group, have been effective and efficient, have mobilized other donor
37 No classification marking.
38 Reference is to the changes in U.S. foreign aid programs mandated by the Foreign

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
countries’ resources, and have exerted substantial influence on the re-
ceiving countries’ policies.
The Brookings report includes the following recommendations:
1. Program Direction: US development assistance should focus on
meeting basic human needs, by expanding productive employment, as
well as by the direct provision of services and commodities to the poor.
This would entail:
—concentration of bilateral concessional assistance on the poor
countries and the use of concessional aid to support technological col-
laboration in the middle-income countries and non-concessional aid to
meet their other needs;
—greater reliance on the recipient country’s responsibility for
project design and administration;
—a larger effort to mobilize the resources of the private sector, in
both the US and developing countries, to promote research, develop-
ment, and training on problems of direct concern to developing
countries;
—a PL–480 food aid program directed largely to development and
humanitarian goals;
—continued support for expansion of multilateral hard lending to
middle-income countries.
2. Institutional Arrangements: To improve the US capacity to imple-
ment an effective development assistance program:
—AID should be replaced by (i) a Development Cooperation
Agency (DCA) to carry out existing AID functions, whose creation
could be the occasion for needed legislative, procedural, and personnel
changes; and (ii) an International Development Foundation (IDF),
guided by a board of public and private members, to define and sup-
port research, development and training programs on problems of con-
cern to LDCs.
—SSA should be administered by the DCA; its funds would be ap-
propriated to, and justified to the Congress by, the State Department.
—A Coordinator for International Development Policy should be
appointed to ensure that the different types of assistance (bilateral de-
velopment aid, IFIs, PL–480, etc.) fit together into a coherent program.
3. Funding Levels
—The Brookings Study presents alternative funding levels. Under
the high option, concessional assistance would double in real terms be-
lion respectively.
The report suggests only a modest increase in bilateral develop-
ment assistance for next year; larger increases would only be requested
the following year, after the proposed changes in aid procedures and
organization had taken effect.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
Tab F
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter39
Washington, November 10, 1977
SUBJECT
The Future of U.S. Foreign Assistance
You are receiving an NSC memorandum presenting three alterna-
tive strategies to guide future U.S. foreign assistance programs as well
as alternative planning figures for FY 1982 funding levels.
I would like to reiterate my personal support for Strategy #2,
which concentrates on poor people, with a priority for low income
countries but with flexibility to maintain or initiate programs in some
middle income nations as well. I believe this approach would permit us
to respond to the needs of the greatest number of poor people and also
maintain necessary foreign policy flexibility. In addition I believe this
strategy can be successfully defended in Congress, because it will be fo-
cused on basic human needs in sectors such as health and agriculture,
because middle income nations would be expected to devote a signifi-
cant amount of their own resources to projects that we help fund, and
because our loans to these countries would be on stiffer terms than
those for poorer countries.
If we confine ourselves only to low income nations (Strategy #1),
we will lose the opportunity for programs in areas like the Caribbean,
which you have designated as high priority. On the other hand, if we
pursue the so-called “multipurpose” approach (Strategy #3), I believe
that our programs will be too diffuse and that both program effec-
tiveness and congressional support will suffer accordingly.
On funding, I strongly recommend the middle option—a mod-
erate increase in assistance with a planning figure of around $8 billion
amount is sufficient to meet your pledge for “substantial increases.”
However, I would hope that you will permit this planning figure to be
revised upward if we can demonstrate that increased amounts of aid
can be used effectively.
39 Confidential.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
283.
Memorandum From the Representative to the United
Nations (Young) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
NSC Options Memorandum on Future Bilateral Development Assistance
The National Security Council has sent you an options memo-
randum on alternative U.S. bilateral aid strategies and alternative
funding levels through FY–1982.2 The memorandum is based on the
work of AID and the Brookings Institution in reviewing our aid pol-
icies. As you consider these options, I hope you keep in mind a very
promising field of economic assistance to the developing world: sup-
port for regional economic groupings. Let me point to some of the pos-
sibilities in three regions.
Caribbean Basin:
United States interests in the Caribbean Basin continue to be en-
dangered by the slow pace of economic development, rising popula-
tion pressures and political polarization. There are considerable oppor-
tunities for greater economic development which could do much to
diffuse the potential for trouble in this strategically placed region. The
nations of the region already have built regional integration mecha-
nisms: the Caribbean Common Market, the Central American Common
Market; and the Andean Pact in South America, which includes the
littoral nations of Colombia and Venezuela. The democratic and
forward-looking leaders of the region—Perez of Venezuela, Oduber of
Costa Rica, and Manley of Jamaica—have a vision for the region which
is compatible with ours. We should support them. We should be pre-
pared to strengthen these groupings through development assistance
to their regional institutions, particularly the Caribbean and Central
American Development Banks. We should also begin helping to build
institutional bridges among the various groupings in the region.
Southeast Asia:
With the collapse of SEATO,3 the importance of the Association of
South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) takes on new meaning as it gives
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency
randum. A stamped notation reads: “The President has seen.”
2 See the Attachment to Document 282.
3 The Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO), which was established as a re-
sult of the September 1954 Manila Pact, ceased to exist in June 1977.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
political cohesiveness to the area and a possible framework for future
security cooperation. The Japanese have announced their own large
technical cooperation and aid package for the ASEAN region as they
seek to protect their markets and sources of raw materials. The United
States has given only modest support for the regional institutions; al-
lowing the Japanese complete freedom in the area may risk U.S.
markets for exports and lose attractive investment opportunities for
U.S. business.
Africa:
Regional integration may be the only means of ensuring economic
survival, let alone progress, for some of the poorer and politically inse-
cure nations of the African continent. Especially given the mounting
tensions in Rhodesia and South Africa, regional cooperation may be the
only means of strengthening the economies and political security of
countries such as Zambia, Botswana, Tanzania and Zaire. Once Zim-
babwe and Namibia attain independence, substantial new opportu-
nities for regional economic cooperation will arise which should be
planned now and grasped when the independence comes if regional
stability is to be maintained. Another promising venture in Africa is the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), strongly
backed by Nigeria and the Ivory Coast and linking 16 anglophone and
francophone West African states. We could evidence our support for
regional cooperation in Africa by molding the special requirements
fund and the Zimbabwe Development Fund toward regional develop-
ment in southern Africa, supporting the African Development Fund in
regional development projects and encouraging the new ECOWAS
fund.
As you examine the various strategies put forward to you, I recom-
mend that you request a further study and options concerning assist-
ance to regional integration efforts in the developing world.
Recommendation:
That you direct the NSC to chair a study and prepare options for
you on assistance to regional economic groupings.4
4 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation, writing below it: “Within
existing AID study & ’79 budget effort. J.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
284.
Memorandum From Guy Erb of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 9, 1977
SUBJECT
Direct Contributions and Other Measures
Attached are a discussion paper prepared by an interagency group
in response to the PRC’s request for more information on possible im-
provement in the US position on a Common Fund (Tab I), and the
agenda for the November 11 PRC meeting (Tab II).2 I also enclose the
earlier discussion paper submitted to the PRC for its meeting of 4 No-
vember (Tab III).3
Direct Contributions
The first issue before the PRC, direct contributions to a Common
Fund, derives from the divergent views of Secretary Blumenthal, on the
one hand, and yourself, Under Secretary Cooper and Ambassador
Wells, on the other. You will recall that Secretary Blumenthal favored
US adherence to the OECD opening position for a pooling arrange-
ment. He was against making any direct contributions to a Common
Fund. The opposing view expressed during the PRC meeting was that a
constructive response to LDC and developed-country interest in direct
contributions, plus the impact which such contributions would have on
the financial viability of a Common Fund, justify a change in the US po-
sition at an appropriate moment.4
My impression is that working-level agency positions conform
roughly to those expressed at the PRC on 4 November. State, OMB, Ag-
riculture, and possibly Commerce, are willing to consider a US indica-
tion of its willingness to discuss direct contributions at an appropriate
point in the negotiations.5 Treasury staff have been very constructive
during the preparations of the discussion paper, but they are con-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 66, PRC
2 Tab II is attached but not printed.
ment 281.
4 Brzezinski highlighted the portion of the paragraph beginning with “that a con-
structive response” to the end of the paragraph.
5 Brzezinski underlined the words “a US” and “willingness to discuss” in this
sentence.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
strained, of course, by Secretary Blumenthal’s announced opposition to
direct contributions. However, the logic of Under Secretary Solomon’s
criticism of the OECD opening position might lead Treasury to ac-
ceptance in principle of direct contributions. In that case, the main con-
straint on Treasury could be concern that direct contributions could not
be sold on Capitol Hill. Further consultations on the Hill will help
clarify that issue.
Other Measures
The second issue before the PRC relates to measures other than
buffer stocking. Because of the $800 million US arrearage to the hard-
and soft-loan windows of international development lending institu-
tions, there is little that we can offer here. The discussion paper puts the
best face possible at this time on a US approach to this issue.
Recommended Next Steps
The discussion paper requests PRC guidance on whether the US
can consider making direct contributions to a common fund. If that is
the case, further staff work and consultations with the Congress will be
necessary.
I recommend that you approve the consideration of direct contri-
butions and the consequent staff work and consultations.6
I also recommend that you raise at the PRC meeting the possibility
that the US discuss the direct contributions issue within the OECD.
This may be farther than other agencies are willing to go without a
reading of Congressional attitudes. However, I believe that cautious
OECD consultations are a logical consequence of a decision to consider
making direct contributions.7
The PRC is also asked to refer the issue of direct contributions to
the interagency Commodity Task Force, which is chaired by State (Katz
or Bosworth) and which provides guidance and instructions to the US
delegation in Geneva.
I recommend that you approve this delegation of responsibility to
the Commodity Task Force.8
The discussion paper suggests that the PRC refer the Other Meas-
ures issue to the Commodity Task Force for the determination of the
manner and time of its presentation during the negotiations in Geneva.
I recommend approval of this step.9
6 Brzezinski indicated his approval of this recommendation, writing “ok.”
7 Brzezinski underlined the words “that cautious OECD” in this sentence. He did
not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.
8 Brzezinski did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.
9 Brzezinski did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
The discussion paper also suggests that the PRC refer to the Com-
modity Task Force questions relating to (1) the deposits by Interna-
tional Commodity Arrangements to a common fund, and (2) an over-
draft mechanism.
I recommend approval of this suggestion.10
Tab I
Discussion Paper Prepared for the Policy Review
Committee11
Washington, undated
THE COMMON FUND: DIRECT CONTRIBUTIONS
AND OTHER MEASURES
November 11, 1977 The Situation Room
The PRC requested, at its meeting on November 4, 1977, that an
elaboration be prepared of possible improvements in the US position
for the negotiations on a common fund. In particular, more information
was requested on the issues posed by paragraphs 10 through 15 of the
Discussion Paper for the November 4th meeting (Tab A).12
This paper concentrates on the issues posed by (1) a decision on
whether or not to make a direct contribution to a common fund (Para-
graph 10) and (2) the US approach to the demand by LDCs that a
common fund include measures other than buffer stocking in its activ-
ities (paragraphs 13–15).
Paragraph 11 of the Discussion Paper raised the issues of whether
and when to propose an alteration of the OECD position on the propor-
tion of cash resources of an International Commodity Arrangement
(ICA) which must be deposited with a pooling arrangement. It is rec-
ommended that a decision on this question be delegated to the Com-
modities Task Force, chaired by the Department of State, which will
provide guidance and instructions to the US delegation.
Further work is necessary regarding the possibility of an overdraft
mechanism which might support members of ICAs in the event of a
world recession. It is recommended that the Commodities Task Force
10 Brzezinski did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.
11 Confidential.
Discussion Paper printed as Tab A to Document 280.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
consider
the
legal
and
financial
implications
of
an
overdraft
mechanism.
Issue 1: Direct Contribution to a Common Fund
In the negotiations on a common fund the US will have to address
the question of whether it will agree to provide government contribu-
tions to a common fund. These funds would be in addition to the de-
posits in a pooling arrangement made by individual International
Commodity Arrangements (ICAs). (It is assumed that the US would
agree to make contributions to a common fund which were for the ad-
ministrative costs of a common fund organization.) The purpose of a
US agreement to consider direct contributions would be two-fold; (1) it
would permit the US, at an appropriate point in the negotiations, to
move some distance toward LDC demands that a common fund have
its own capital resources; (2) direct contributions might enhance the
borrowing capacity of a common fund by strengthening assurances to
investors of its continued operation in the event of a default by a partic-
ipating ICA or by participating members of an ICA.
To ensure that a direct contribution would be consistent with our
objectives, we would limit its use to building a contingency reserve
within the common fund. Its purpose would be to enable the common
fund to promptly satisfy its obligations in the event that a member gov-
ernment defaulted on its obligations to a particular ICA. If that ICA
were fully extended at the time and the default required putting up ad-
ditional collateral, the common fund could make a bridging loan to that
ICA. The common fund would not assume ultimate liability for the out-
standing loans of that ICA. This liability would continue to rest with
member governments of the ICA. But the bridging loan would help to
keep market conditions orderly while the ICA’s procedures for dealing
with default of a member government came into force.
Funds made available for contingency reserve purposes could be
either in cash, in the form of callable capital or in the form of loan guar-
antees. From the point of view of creditworthiness of the common
fund, cash contributions would be preferable. They would be available
as a liquid cash reserve and could enhance both the borrowing capacity
as well as the terms on which the common fund could borrow. In addi-
tion, cash contributions would yield earnings on investment, which
could help defray interest and other expenses the common fund might
have. The callable capital option, while also enhancing the financial ef-
ficiencies the common fund could obtain, would do so to a lesser ex-
tent. Loan guarantees would be the least helpful from a capital market
efficiency point of view, because they could be mobilized only in the
case of default and would not be available to bridge temporary li-
quidity problems.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Possible Mechanisms for a Direct Contribution
There are conceptually two approaches to providing contributions
for a contingency reserve within the common fund. One approach
would define the contribution as some percentage (probably less than
five percent) of the financial commitments of each ICA that partici-
pated in the fund. Under this approach, we could, at the time member-
ship in an ICA was put to Congress for approval, ask for two author-
ities in addition to those negotiated in the agreement:
(a) authority for the US representative to the agreement to vote for
accession of that agreement to the common fund, if and when such a
common fund had been constituted and approved by the Congress;
and
(b) appropriation of the amount required for the contingency re-
serve of the common fund.
Another approach would be a direct contribution not directly
linked to membership in specific ICAs. Under this approach the
amount of the contribution could be five percent or less of our share in
the ICAs in which we expected to participate. We would seek Congres-
sional approval of, and appropriations for, the common fund, sepa-
rately from approval and appropriations for ICAs.
A variant of this approach would be to make a single contribution
without attempting to estimate requirements of all possible ICAs. This
contribution would probably be smaller than a contribution which was
based on an attempt to estimate needs of all potential ICAs partici-
pating in a fund. This type of contribution could be supplemented by
contributions made through ICAs as they became participants in the
common fund.
Safeguards
Certain safeguards would appear to be essential to protect our in-
terests in the event we were to contribute to a contingency reserve.
(1) We should eliminate or minimize the possibility that our contri-
bution would support ICAs in which the US did not participate.
(2) A contingency reserve should be related solely to the price sta-
bilization objectives of a common fund. It should not be an aid mecha-
nism, but a stock of cash, callable capital, or loan guarantees held by a
common fund and not intended for transfer to members of the
institution.
(3) The institutional arrangements governing decision-making and
operations of a common fund would have to be acceptable to the
United States.
(4) A common fund, with or without direct contributions, should
not control individual ICAs.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
(5) We should ensure that the relationship among the various ele-
ments of a common fund—deposit ratio, borrowing capacity, callable
capital, stock warrants, and a possible contingency reserve—is con-
sistent with our interests and the financial viability of the common
fund.
Issue 2: Measures Other Than Buffer Stocking
The role of a common fund in financing commodity measures
other than price stabilization will be one of the key issues at the confer-
ence. The LDCs want the common fund to allocate a portion of its re-
sources to the financing of such measures as market promotion,
product research and development, production expansion, up-grading
of production efficiency and expansion of LDC processing and trans-
portation activities. This objective is basic to LDC cohesion on the
common fund because it would provide benefits to LDCs unable to
benefit from buffer stocking. Developed countries regard non-
stabilization measures as appropriate and necessary to deal with many
of the commodity problems of developing countries and favor in-
creased international attention to other measures. However, the major
developed countries, including the US, believe that creation of a new
central source of international financing for these measures is neither
necessary nor desirable, and seek to restrict the common fund to fi-
nancing of stabilization measures. The prospect of sharp confrontation
at the conference on this issue calls for presentation by developed coun-
tries of as constructive and concrete alternatives as possible to the fi-
nancing of other measures by the common fund. The principal ele-
ments of a developed country approach are outlined below.
1. Producer-consumer cooperation: International commodity organi-
zations (ICAs) and other producer-consumer organizations must pro-
vide the foundation for effective international action on other meas-
ures. By virtue of their interest in and knowledge of particular
commodities, participants in producer/consumer organizations are es-
pecially qualified to identify and evaluate the need for specific meas-
ures. ICAs, or other producer/consumer organizations, can be ex-
pected to play a major role in implementing market promotion and
new product research and development programs. The International
Institute for Cotton, for example, has a $6 million annual market pro-
motion and product research program financed by producers and con-
sumers. In addition to the projects they implement themselves, the
ICAs and other producer/consumer organizations could also provide
project proposals and coordinate recommendations to international de-
velopment institutions such as the IBRD or the UNDP. To underline its
support for strengthened producer/consumer cooperation on other
measures, the US should confirm at the common fund negotiations that

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
it is prepared to examine, in discussions of particular IPC commodities,
the need for specific other measures and how they can be carried out.
2. International development institutions: International technical
assistance and development finance institutions comprise a second key
instrument of international action on other measures. These institu-
tions have extensive experience in development activities, personnel
skilled in project appraisal and established sources of finance. Al-
though the extent of their commodity related activities is not generally
appreciated, the World Bank will be financing about $3.0 billion in
commodity-related development projects between 1975 and 1979, and
the UNDP, FAO, UNIDO and the International Trade Center also have
substantial commodity related programs. Developed countries should
be prepared to strengthen the commodity activities of these interna-
tional institutions. We should also be prepared to ensure that the World
Bank has adequate resources to respond to the commodity related
needs of LDCs without sacrificing attention to other priority needs.
This approach would provide specific evidence of the constructive
commitment of developed countries to the other measures issue,
though it would not satisfy the desire of developing countries to estab-
lish a source of finance under their control.
3. UNCTAD coordination: Effective and comprehensive coordina-
tion of international activities respecting other measures could con-
tinue to be carried out under UNCTAD leadership. This coordination
involves all of the international development, finance, and technical in-
stitutions; the ICAs; and the other producer consumer groups. Its pur-
pose is to tie together the various commodity related activities of these
institutions. Such a formal, continuing coordination mechanism re-
sponds to the fundamental LDC desire to have the international devel-
opment institutions to address the commodity related problems of
LDCs on a global, rather than country-by-country basis. A main pur-
pose of this coordination is to enable the international development
lending institutions and technical assistance agencies to obtain and
share a continuing flow of information and recommendations from
commodity organizations and their members as to commodity related
needs of developing countries. An immediate step might be for
UNCTAD to undertake a general survey of presently available finan-
cial and institutional resources relevant to other measures and the ef-
fectiveness with which they are being employed.
Next Steps
Issue 1: If the PRC believes that the US can consider making direct
contributions to a common fund, possible mechanisms will need to be
analyzed and evaluated. In addition, detailed consultations with Con-
gressional leaders and staff will have to be undertaken on this issue.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
The staff work and consultations related to the direct contribution
issue could be undertaken by the inter-agency Commodity Task Force,
which will provide guidance and instructions to the US delegation in
Geneva.
Issue 2: If the PRC believes that the approach outlined under Issue
2 is satisfactory, this issue and the determination of the manner and
moment of its presentation in Geneva could be referred to the Com-
modities Task Force.
285.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs (Bergsten) to the Under Secretary of
the Treasury for Monetary Affairs (Solomon)1
Washington, November 10, 1977
SUBJECT
PRC Meeting on the Common Fund
The PRC will meet on Friday, November 11 to discuss various al-
ternatives that might be used to augment the U.S. proposal for a
Common Fund. At the last meeting on November 4, the PRC requested
that the various “sweeteners” to the U.S. proposal (see paragraphs
tages and disadvantages outlined.
The attached NSC paper (tab A)3 does not quite meet the request
made by the PRC. It discusses two possible approaches to the issue of
direct contributions to the Common Fund and does not elaborate much
of the detail. In addition, the discussion of possible measures other than
buffer stocks, although wordier than in the first presentation, does not
add further to the substance.
On the matter of overdraft possibilities and the size of the cash de-
posits which ICAs might put with the Common Fund, the staff group
1 Source: National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
classification marking. Drafted by Junz and Hazen Gale, Director of the Office of Raw
Materials and Ocean Policy, Department of the Treasury. A stamped notation reads:
“Noted by Mr. Solomon.”
2 Printed as Tab A to Document 280.
3 Printed as Tab I to Document 284.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
suggests that further work should be done in the Commodity Task
Force chaired by State Department. One aspect of a possible overdraft,
that of direct lending by the World Bank, has been eliminated because
legal opinions make it virtually certain that the Charter of the World
Bank either would or should have to be amended to permit such
lending.
Direct Contributions
The NSC paper does not pose the question of the desirability, or
otherwise, of direct contributions in any further detail than in the ear-
lier paper (tab B). It is our view, as stated earlier, that the Common
Fund proposal as it stands now would be financially viable. The out-
standing issue concerns the extent of financial efficiencies which could
be obtained over and above what ICAs could obtain on their own. It is
clear that some kind of capital base, however minimal, would increase
the financial economies to be derived from a Common Fund. In addi-
tion, there is the likely tactical need to provide for some direct re-
sources. Nevertheless, the question of direct contributions of this sort
needs to be seen in the context of the overall negotiations. We believe
the U.S. should agree to them only in order to obtain a positive outcome
both in terms of acceptance of institutional arrangements that gives a
considerable measure of control to the ICAs and to consuming nations.
Preliminary discussions with staff members of relevant Committees on
the Hill indicate that—to the extent they represent their Member’s
views—there is little, if any chance that Congress would authorize cap-
ital funding for a Common Fund that did not have appropriate institu-
tional control features.
If it is decided that some kind of direct contribution is needed,
agencies are agreed that any direct contributions to the Common Fund
should be relatively small and should be put into a contingency reserve
that would be used by the Common Fund to relieve a temporary li-
quidity squeeze in the event of default by a member government of a
particular ICA.
Two approaches have been suggested:
—An additional contribution through the ICA, to be authorized
and appropriated at the time governments join an ICA. These contribu-
tions would be used for bridging loans only in the event of default by a
member or members of an individual ICA. They would not be available
to discharge ultimate obligations of that ICA.
—A contribution directly to the Common Fund, to be authorized
and appropriated separately from authorizations of ICAs that are con-
cluded. The size of these contributions could be based on the likely
number of ICAs to be negotiated or on a negotiated lump sum.
Both approaches would enhance the creditworthiness of the
Common Fund and they would permit the industrial countries to move

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
toward the G–77 demand for a fund with its own resources. Either of
these approaches would require greater safeguards in the decision
making, voting, and operational provisions of the Common Fund.
The first approach would allow us to preserve the principle that no
member government should assume responsibility for the liabilities of
ICAs to which it did not belong. It seems feasible also to obtain some
protection on this principle under the second approach, but the risk of
pooling liabilities is considerably greater.
Recommendation:
The PRC should direct the Commodity Task Force to undertake
further work, including consultations with members of Congress, to
determine the technical and political feasibility of the two approaches
and to determine the appropriate time for implementing a U.S. pro-
posal for direct contributions to the Common Fund.4
Other Measures5
Three possibilities for making efforts in the area more effective
have been outlined in the NSC paper:
—Strengthening the role of ICAs in identifying specific commod-
ity problems and making recommendations to international financial
institutions and other funding sources.
—Stepping up the efforts of the existing institutions (IFIs, UNDP,
FAO, etc.) to identify and coordinate commodity related projects.
—Strengthening the efforts of UNCTAD’s Committee on Com-
modities in coordinating projects and making recommendations to ap-
propriate institutions.
A fourth possibility, which is not addressed directly in the paper,
is a coordinating role for the Common Fund itself.
Because of the substantial efforts already going on in the area of
“other measures,” there is considerable sentiment within the U.S. Gov-
ernment and in other major OECD countries that the Common Fund
does not need to get involved in additional financing. But the Nordic
countries, the Dutch, and some officials in the U.S. Government believe
that some concession will have to be made on the issue of other meas-
ures, though not necessarily on financing, in order to achieve a suc-
cessful conclusion of the Common Fund negotiations. It is our view
4 In the margin adjacent to this paragraph, Bergsten wrote: “Tony—I believe we
should oppose direct contributions. Any ‘flexibility’ now will be quickly used up by our
negotiators, in a session that will be inconclusive anyway. We should decide either to hold
firm (my preference) or make a major offer; the worst approach is to be pulled along inch
by agonizing inch; we then lose with both the Congress and the foreigners (LDCs and
DCs). Let’s pose the issue that way. C.F.B.”
5 Bergsten added quotation marks around the heading “Other Measures.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
that at most the Common Fund might have a role in identifying desir-
able commodity projects and in making recommendations to existing
financial institutions. It would rely on those organizations to determine
the feasibility of such projects and the final priorities of funding.6 The
Common Fund would have no money to finance such projects.
Although some countries have suggested that voluntary contribu-
tions could be used to finance other measures, Treasury believes that
any such contributions should be used as part of the backup to the
buffer stock financing operations of the Common Fund.
Recommendation:
The delegation should be authorized to support all three possibil-
ities outlined in the NSC paper. In addition, the U.S. should be pre-
pared to support, if necessary to the successful conclusion of the negoti-
ations, a coordinating role for the Common Fund itself.7
6 Bergsten highlighted the portion of this paragraph that begins with “Common
Fund might have a role” and ends with “rely on those organizations” and wrote in the
adjacent margin: “This is OK. Is it what is meant by a ‘coordinating role’?”
7 Bergsten underlined the phrase “a coordinating role for the Common Fund itself”
and wrote below: “unclear; above seems to suggest a catalytic role, which is OK” and ini-
tialed C.F.B.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
286.
Summary of Conclusions of a Policy Review Committee
Meeting1
SUBJECT
Negotiations on a Common Fund
PARTICIPANTS
State
Commerce
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Mr. Frank Weil
Mr. Richard Cooper
AID
Mr. Julius Katz
Governor John Gilligan
Defense
Mr. Constantine Michalopoulos
Dr. Ellen Frost
Treasury
CIA
Mr. Anthony Solomon
Dr. Robert Bowie
Mr. C. Fred Bergsten
[name not declassified]
White House
OMB
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Mr. Randy Jayne
Charles Schultze
Henry Owen
USUN
Amb. Melissa Wells
NSC
Guy Erb
Agriculture
Thomas Thornton
Mr. Harry Wilhelm
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
The PRC reviewed the status of the negotiations on a common
fund and noted the emphasis which was being given by developing
countries to measures other than commodity price stabilization.
With regard to the possibility of direct contributions to a common
fund by the US, it was agreed the US delegation would not be author-
ized to make any statements on this issue until further work had been
completed in Washington.
The PRC noted the importance of consultations with the Congress
on (1) the rationale for US participation in international commodity ar-
rangements (ICAs) and in a common fund, and (2) on the possibility of
US contributions to a common fund. The PRC requested the Commod-
ities Task Force to draw up talking points for consultations with the
Congress. Initial consultations should be completed by Friday,
November 18.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 66, PRC
White House Situation Room.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
The PRC agreed that the material in the Discussion Paper of No-
vember 112 on other measures could be transmitted to the US negoti-
ators in Geneva. The PRC revised the issues paper by granting to a
common fund, rather than UNCTAD, a coordinating role regarding
ICAs.
The PRC agreed that the US approach to deposit credit ratio
should be kept under review.
The PRC also agreed that the Commodities Task Force should fur-
ther consider the pros and cons of an overdraft mechanism.
2 See Tab I to Document 284.
287.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, November 23, 1977
SUBJECT
Follow-up to PRC Meeting on US Relations with Developing Countries: The
Next Twelve Months—Studies by the PRM 8 Working Group on Increasing
Participation of LDCs in the International System and Key Issues in North-South
Relations
The PRC has agreed to ask the PRM 8 working group to undertake
a study on Increasing the Participation of LDCs in the International
System.2 The study should address such issues as:
1. specific initiatives which the US could support for new or
changed institutional relationships;
2. whether it is desirable to consult with key LDCs on the general
issue of developing-country participation in international bodies or
only with regard to individual institutions or mechanisms;
3. the pros and cons of enabling LDCs to have a greater voice in
international organizations by (a) adaptation of existing institutions,
such as the OECD and the IMF, or (b) using institutions with new
decision-making structures, such as IFAD.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 26,
2 See Document 276.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
The PRC also agreed to request the PRM 8 working group to pre-
pare a report on North-South relations for consideration early next
year. This study should consider the most urgent of the key issues iden-
tified by the working group at Tab B of PRM 8-Track III.3 Those issues
were trade, finance, commodities, non-nuclear energy issues, nuclear
energy issues, direct investment, technology transfer, agriculture,
human rights, arms transfer policy, law of the sea, and defense issues.
The PRM 8 working group’s report should focus on the issues the
group considers most appropriate for PRC review. For each issue the
working group should assess the effectiveness of present policies in
meeting US objectives, accomplishments to date, and problems which
impede achievement of specific US goals.
To facilitate PRC consideration of these issues, please submit by
group’s analysis of participation of LDCs in the international system
and key issues in North-South relations. That report will then be re-
viewed by the PRC.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
288.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, November 23, 1977
SUBJECT
Follow-up to PRC Meeting on U.S. Relations with Developing Countries: The
Next Twelve Months—Study by DCC on Quantitative Targets
The PRC has agreed to ask the Development Coordination Com-
mittee to undertake a study of quantitative development targets for use
in planning and implementing U.S. programs and in international con-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 26,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
sideration of development objectives.2 The study should address such
issues as:
1. the implications of international targets which may lead to com-
mitments for U.S. performance, and safeguards against such implied
commitments;
2. the type of target most appropriate for the U.S. in light of Con-
gressional intentions to ensure that U.S. assistance effectively reaches
those most in need;
3. the merits or demerits of targets set for specific sectors or coun-
tries relative to other kinds of targets.
The study should pay particular attention to the distinction be-
tween planning targets for use within the U.S. Government and inter-
national targets which might be part of an agreement on the objectives
of the Third Development Decade.
Please submit a report by February 28, 1978 for review by the
PRC.3
Zbigniew Brzezinski
2 See Document 276.
3 Tarnoff forwarded the study, an April 1978 paper entitled “Development Coordi-
nation Committee Quantitative Targets Study,” to Brzezinski under cover of an April 24,
1978, memorandum. (Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box
289.
Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, November 25, 1977
SUBJECT
PL 480, Title I
This memorandum is intended to apprise you of the steps we are
taking to comply with the new amendment of the Agricultural Trade
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the Of-
of the page and initialed at the bottom of the page. Christopher chaired the Interagency
Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance, known as the Christopher Committee.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
Development and Assistance Act of 1954 which became effective on
“Sec. 112. (a) No agreement may be entered into under this title to
finance the sale of agricultural commodities to the government of any
country which engages in a consistent pattern of gross violations of in-
ternationally recognized human rights, including torture or cruel, in-
human, or degrading treatment or punishment, prolonged detention
without charges, or other flagrant denial of the right to life, liberty, and
the security of person, unless such agreement will directly benefit the
needy people in such country. An agreement will not directly benefit
the needy people in the country for purposes of the preceding sentence
unless either the commodities themselves or the proceeds from their
sale will be used for specific projects or programs which the President
determines would directly benefit the needy people of that country.
The agreement shall be used to benefit the needy people and shall re-
quire a report to the President on such use within six months after the
commodities are delivered to the recipient country.
“(b) To assist in determining whether the requirements of subsec-
tion (a) are being met, the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and
Forestry of the Senate or the Committee on International Relations of
the House of Representatives may require the President to submit in
writing information demonstrating that an agreement will directly ben-
efit the needy people in a country.
“(d) The President shall transmit to the Speaker of the House of
Representatives, the President of the Senate, and the Committee on Ag-
riculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate, in the annual presenta-
tion materials on planned programming of assistance under this Act, a
full and complete report regarding the steps he has taken to carry out
the provisions of this section.”
Twenty-nine countries are scheduled to receive PL 480, Title I
Agriculture are complying with the new statutory requirement set
forth above by seeking to include a new provision in the FY 78, PL 480,
Title I agreements with certain countries. The new provision, calling for
assurances that the food or the proceeds therefrom are used for needy
2 In November 9 memorandum, Katz, Coordinator for Human Rights and Humani-
tarian Affairs Patricia Derian, and Deputy AID Administrator Robert Nooter requested
implemented. (Ibid.) In a November 22 memorandum to Brzezinski, Tuchman provided
background on both the issue and how it was being pursued. (Carter Library, National
memoranda are printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Hu-
manitarian Affairs, Documents 86 and 88.
3 Tab 1, attached but not printed, is a list entitled “Countries Scheduled to Receive
PL 480, Title I Assistance During FY 78.” The following countries are on the list: Afghani-
stan, Bangladesh, Dominican Republic, Egypt, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, India, In-
donesia, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Korea, Lebanon, Morocco, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines,
Portugal, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syria, Tanzania, Tunisia,
Zaire, and Zambia.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
people, is attached under Tab 2.4 (With Herb Hansell’s help, we are pre-
paring a simplified version of the requested assurances.)
In considering which of the 29 recipient countries ought to be
asked to agree to the new provision, we assessed the possibility of only
including countries engaged in a consistent pattern of gross violations
of internationally recognized human rights (“gross and consistent vio-
lators”). However, of the 29 countries on the overall list, none has thus
far been formally determined to be a gross and consistent violator.
While some of the countries on the list are arguably in that category, it
has been our view that a formal designation to that effect is not a partic-
ularly useful policy tool and has many obvious disadvantages. Yet any
effort to confine our application of the new statutory provision to gross
and consistent violations would almost certainly result in the designa-
tion of several of the 29 countries. Accordingly, we concluded it would
be a mistake to ask only countries designated gross and consistent vio-
lators to agree to the new provision.
As another possibility, we considered seeking to include the new
language in the agreements with all 29 countries. The claimed benefit of
this approach was that it would avoid singling out any countries as
human rights violators. However, AID and Agriculture were strongly
opposed to this course of action because of the considerable additional
burden, expense and possible delay that it would entail, not only in the
negotiating process, but also in the efforts required to monitor compli-
ance with the new provision. Moreover, inclusion of all 29 countries
would not be a faithful construction of the terms of the amendment.
The third approach we considered—and the one we chose—was to
seek to include the new language in agreements with those countries as
to which there are serious human rights questions.5 Such an approach
avoids the principal disadvantages of the two extreme courses dis-
cussed above. It does not, at this point, stigmatize any country as a
gross and consistent violator, but nevertheless enables us to comply
with the statute. Moreover, this approach will prove useful when we
report to Congress on our compliance efforts, as required by the
statute: we will be able to report that all countries about which there is a
“serious question” complied with the “needy people” requirement of
the statute, and yet we will not have to brand any country as a gross
and consistent violator. On the other hand, this approach avoids the
onerousness of including all 29 countries, thus permitting AID and Ag-
riculture to operate without undue disruption of the PL 480 negotiating
and monitoring process.
4 Tab 2, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “New Provision for
Inclusion in Certain FY 78, PL 480, Title I Agreements.”
5 Vance wrote “I approve” in the margin adjacent to this sentence.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
Having chosen the middle course of including only countries with
seriously questionable human rights records, we determined after
wide consultation within State, AID and Agriculture that, of the agree-
ments which are ready to be negotiated, those with Indonesia, Korea,
Bangladesh and Guinea should include the new language. Negotiating
instructions to our personnel in Indonesia, Korea and Bangladesh have
been sent out, and those for the Guinean agreement will be dispatched
on Monday.6
The instructions state that the negotiation of these agreements
should be given top priority and that every effort should be exerted to
conclude the agreements within ten business days. If it should appear
that efforts to include the new provision will make it impossible to con-
clude the agreement within that period, we will communicate a pos-
sible fallback position to the posts, e.g., a side letter or memorandum of
intent. (We are receiving quite understandable complaints from the
posts and bureaus on this matter, but the problem stems from the
statute itself and our need to implement it with fidelity to our human
rights policy.)
Negotiating instructions were also sent out earlier this week to our
personnel in six other countries—and on Monday will be sent to our
post in a seventh—whose human rights records were not determined
to be seriously questionable: namely, Afghanistan, Israel, Jordan,
Morocco, Pakistan, Egypt and Sri Lanka.7
For technical reasons unrelated to human rights, the remaining 18
agreements are not ready to be negotiated at this time. We are consid-
ering within the Department which of the 18 countries are regarded as
raising serious human rights questions. I am attaching, under Tab 3,8 a
supportive editorial from yesterday’s Washington Post and two earlier
Washington Post stories, apparently inspired by the Department of
Agriculture.
Warren Christopher9
6 November 28. The instructions were not found.
7 Not found.
8 Tab 3, attached but not printed, comprises three clippings from The Washington
Back Food Aid in Rights Review,” p. A1.
9 Christopher signed “Warren” above this typed signature.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
290.
Memorandum From Michael Armacost of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 30, 1977
SUBJECT
PL–480, Title I: Shipments to Human Rights “Violators”
PL–480, Title I shipments to a number of countries are being held
up as a result of monumental confusion in our purposes, exaggerated
interpretations of the Congressional intent, and bureaucratic mis-steps
by the Christopher Committee. The salient facts in this case are these:
—Section 112–A of the legislation governing PL–480 Title I pro-
grams specifies that shipments of commodities should not go to coun-
tries that are “gross and consistent violators of human rights”, except
when the President determines that any commodities going to such
countries will be channeled to the needy.
—There are 29 recipients of PL–480 Title I shipments. So far as we
are aware, none has ever been determined to be a “gross and consistent
violator of human rights”.2 Thus we are not legally required to with-
hold shipments to the intended recipients (evidently Chile has been
judged a “gross and consistent violator”, but none of the shipments are
planned for Chile anyway). The Christopher Committee has decided
that 14 of the 29 recipients have engaged in questionable human rights
practices, and the Committee has decided that our PL–480 contracts
with these countries be amended to provide for additional reporting on
human rights matters.3 Our Ambassadors to these countries have been
instructed to seek host government concurrence in such amendments.
—This effort has not been crowned with great success. The Indone-
sian Government bristled at our suggestion and refused. Our Ambas-
sadors in South Korea and Bangladesh have refused thus far to raise it
with the host government.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
furth wrote: “See last paragraph first for explanation of urgency. Rick.” Brzezinski wrote:
“MA, good—OK—talked. 4 countries only [illegible] only. ZB.” Attached to the memo-
randum is an undated handwritten note by Brzezinski listing the four countries (Guinea,
Bangladesh, Korea, and Indonesia) with the comment “all we ask for answers & for
information.”
2 Brzezinski highlighted the second sentence of the paragraph.
3 Brzezinski underlined a portion of the word “questionable” in this sentence. Re-
garding the decision by the Christopher Committee, see Document 289.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
—Evidently new contracts must be signed next Monday.4 Thus we
must either press ahead to secure these amendments in the contracts,
thereby risking a repetition of our experience with Indonesia in other
countries, or seek less offensive new reporting requirements, or drop
for at least this round of PL–480 shipments any effort to change the con-
tracts with recipient governments.
—This effort—which Agriculture leaked to the Washington Post
last week5—has encountered a frosty reception from the Hill. Senator
Inouye is livid about it and has indicated his belief that the Executive
Branch is over-interpreting the Congressional intent embodied in Sec-
tion 112–A. Senator Humphrey, we are told, is disturbed that the
enormous effort that he put into the development of the PL–480 pro-
gram over the years may be jeopardized by this ill-considered move.
Twelve Senators have written to express their dismay that the United
States would withhold food from less developed countries as a lever on
human rights.6
—Bob Bergland evidently is eager to repeal Section 112–A of the
law. But that will take time and will not resolve our immediate
problem.
—The continued delays in shipments that have resulted from this
confusion are costly to the recipients. For example, in the seven weeks
shipments have been held up, the cost of commodities desired by In-
donesia has increased by $17 million.
A reasonable interpretation of the law does not require us to with-
hold shipments from any of the intended recipients. We believe it
would be desirable to expedite early dispatch of the commodities. Since
this has become a public issue, however, it would be prudent to consult
with the Congressional leadership and secure their understanding that
for this round of shipments we will not attempt to add new amend-
ments to PL–480 contracts, while leaving open the future of Section
112–A and how it should be interpreted by the Executive Branch. This
4 December 5. Inderfurth underlined the words “contracts must be signed next
Monday.”
6 Brzezinski highlighted the portion of this paragraph that begins with “effort that
he put into the development” and ends with “as a lever on human rights.” Fourteen Sen-
Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, footnote 5, Document 92. Senator Robert Dole
(D–Kansas) sent a copy of the letter to Carter under cover of a November 17 memo-
randum requesting that he personally intervene in the matter. (Carter Library, White
madge sent a copy of the letter to Vance and Christopher under cover of a November 18
memorandum. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the
Rights—PL 480)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
would allow us to move the commodities, escape from a politically em-
barrassing position, elude a confrontation with the Hill, and avoid the
establishment of what can only be viewed as a “hit list” (the 14 coun-
tries required to send in new human rights reports as a pre-condition
for obtaining PL–480, Title I assistance.)7
RECOMMENDATION:
That you call Vance and discuss this matter with him, urging a res-
olution of the immediate problems along the lines suggested above.8
Henry Owen concurs.9
7 Such a list would have the most pernicious consequences for not only will it com-
plicate our relations with nearly a score of countries, many of which are good friends, but
will undoubtedly acquire some bureaucratic standing and legitimacy and serve as an ex-
cuse for withholding other support from these governments, whether military or eco-
nomic assistance. When that occurs, the conclusion for many countries will be inescap-
able: the U.S. is using human rights concerns in order to justify reductions in its
assistance efforts. Guy Erb agrees that PL–480 shipments should not be held up but does
not have enough information on the human rights dimension of the PL–480 program. Jes-
sica has seen a copy of this memo, but has not had a chance to react to it. There is some
urgency to this matter inasmuch as instructions are going out this afternoon to our Am-
bassadors in the 14 countries instructing them to negotiate changes in the contracts. At a
minimum, I believe you should call Warren Christopher and ask him to hold up outgoing
cables on this subject until the NSC can review it.” [Footnote in the original. Brzezinski
underlined the words “Guy Erb,” “Jessica,” and “has not had a chance to react to it.” He
also highlighted the portion of the footnote that begins with “should call Warren Christo-
pher” to the end of the sentence.]
8 Inderfurth placed a vertical line in the margin and Brzezinski underlined “you call
Vance” and highlighted the recommendation in the margin. He did not indicate his pref-
erence with respect to the recommendation; however, he did speak to Vance that after-
noon, according to a November 30 note from Christopher to Brzezinski. (National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the Office of the Deputy
1977) Brzezinski spoke to Christopher that afternoon, according to a November 30 note
Christopher sent to Brzezinski transmitting copies of his letter to Talmadge and the sim-
plified form of assurance. (Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Hu-
Post reported that the Department had reached agreement in principle regarding
P.L.–480 Title I shipments with South Korea, Guinea, Zaire, Bangladesh, and Indonesia.
(“ ‘Agreements’ Said Reached On Food Aid,” The Washington Post, December 17, 1977, p.
A16) See also Seth S. King, “Link to Food-Aid Program Helping Carter’s Human Rights
9 Brzezinski underlined this sentence.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
291.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, December 14, 1977
SUBJECT
Future Aid Goals
A few weeks ago you approved agency recommendations that our
goal should be to increase US concessional aid by one-third in real
terms by FY 1982.2 Allowing for inflation, this means that concessional
aid would double in nominal terms by FY 1982—to over $10 billion.
News of this decision has begun to leak—notably to the Christian Sci-
ence Monitor. We have received queries from Congressman Long’s3
office.
At your foreign aid budget meeting, OMB staff pointed out that we
are obligated by law to show expected out-year outlays five years in ad-
vance. You expressed concern, as did the Vice President, over the effect
of showing future higher aid goals. It was agreed to postpone a deci-
sion until I could consult with members of the Legislative Inter-Agency
Group.4
I have now consulted. All members of this Group feel that:
a. The out-year goals should be shown and discussed with the
Congress since to do otherwise (e.g., to straight-line future years)
would be to expose ourselves to the charge of deliberate deception.
b. The out-year goals should be shown as very tentative targets,
whose fulfillment will depend on a substantial improvement in aid per-
formance; these targets will be reviewed and perhaps revised from year
to year, in light of that performance.
RECOMMENDATION
That you approve our showing and discussing with the Congress
the long-term aid goals that you approved recently, in the tentative and
conditional sense described above.5
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
page: “Concur. ZB.” An attached undated note from Hutcheson indicates that OMB also
concurred. (Ibid.)
2 See the Attachment to Document 282.
3 Apparently a reference to Representative Clarence Long.
4 No other record of a meeting specifically on foreign aid was found. Carter met to
(Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)
5 Carter indicated his approval of the recommendation and initialed “J.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
292.
Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Christopher to
Vice President Mondale1
Washington, January 5, 1978
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to P.L. 480.]
PL 480 Agreements. FY–1978 Title I agreements have now been ne-
gotiated and signed with nine governments, covering 2.7 million
metric tons of commodities (approximately 50 percent of the total Title
I program for FY–1978). Purchase and shipment of most of these com-
modities are expected to begin in the next several weeks. Negotiations
have been authorized or are underway with another nine countries,
covering nearly 750,000 tons of commodities. These negotiations
should be completed in the next two weeks, with purchase and ship-
million tons, are still under consideration by the Interagency Staff
Committee chaired by the Department of Agriculture.
In light of the recent amendment that brings human rights consid-
erations to bear on the Title I program,2 we have thus far asked six
countries with serious human rights problems to agree to a new provi-
sion in the PL 480 agreement which, in essence, provides that the food
or the proceeds from its sale will be used to benefit the needy. Fol-
lowing is the status of Title I programming in these six countries.
—Indonesia: The Indonesians accepted the new provision and the
agreement has been signed. We are advised that they will probably
start to purchase the commodities in the next few days.
—Korea and Bangladesh: The new provision has been accepted and
negotiations are nearing completion. Shipments can be scheduled soon
thereafter.
—Somalia: Negotiations have just begun. We believe the Somali
Government will not object to the language.
—Guinea: The new provision has been accepted, an agreement has
been signed, and shipments can be scheduled.
—Zaire: Negotiations are still underway, but the GOZ has not ob-
jected to the new provision.
In view of significant Congressional and farm state interest in ex-
pediting this year’s Title I program, we will continue to seek maximum
progress in implementing the program.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
2 See Document 289.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
293.
Memorandum From the Director of the White House Office
of Administration (Harden) to President Carter1
Washington, February 9, 1978
SUBJECT
World Hunger
When your mother and I were in California last fall, she and
Shirley MacLaine got into a discussion of their respective experiences
with poverty in India.2 I was fascinated by their interaction and subse-
quently suggested to them that they work together in making the
public more aware of the problem.
On December 3rd, an initial meeting was held with representatives
the Domestic Policy Staff, and Shirley MacLaine. A wide range of op-
tions were discussed and a decision was made to hold a second
meeting on January 5th with Miss Lillian in attendance.
1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Material, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, National
No classification marking. Richard Harden became the Director of the White House Of-
fice of Administration and the President’s Special Assistant for Information Management
in December 1977.
2 Lillian Carter visited American actor Shirley MacLaine’s home in Malibu, Cali-
fornia, in November 1977. (Nancy Collins, “What Makes MacLaine Run?,” The Wash-
administration officials at the White House to discuss world hunger. (Memorandum
from Marilyn Haft to Margaret Costanza and others, December 9, 1977; Carter Library,
1960s. She returned to the country in February 1977 as leader of the official U.S. delega-
tion to the funeral of Indian President Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed. MacLaine visited India in
to an Indian orphanage. (“Hollywood Today: Shirley’s Indian Orphanage,” The Chicago
unteer programs, including the Peace Corps, under the jurisdiction of a single agency.
The new agency, called ACTION, began operations on July 1, 1971. For the text of
Nixon’s message to Congress proposing the reorganization, see Public Papers of the Presi-
World Hunger Working Group that would provide recommendations on global malnu-
trition and hunger. For the text of Carter’s memorandum on the formation of the group,
see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book II, pp.
II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs.
5 Reference is to Margaret Costanza, the President’s Assistant for Public Liaison
from 1977 until 1978.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
The outgrowth of the second meeting was the decision that the
most productive use of Miss Lillian’s and Shirley’s time would be to ap-
pear in a documentary pointing out what is and can be done and how
the average citizen can help. The representatives from the various
agencies were asked to develop background material which could be
used in production of the film.
On January 11th, Midge and I met with Shirley and Rupert Hitzig,
a producer of documentaries, to discuss details and possible ap-
proaches. It was felt that the maximum exposure could be obtained by
having a one-hour documentary during prime time on one of the major
networks. It was further felt that there would be a good likelihood that
the network would actually produce the film, thereby eliminating the
need to raise any funds. Rupert has taken responsibility for drafting an
outline.
Since it is projected to take 6–12 months to produce the documen-
tary, we are considering the possibility of having Miss Lillian and
Shirley appear jointly on some of the talk shows during the next few
months.
Everything is progressing on schedule, and the main purpose of
this memo is to make you aware of what we are trying to do. I thought
you might want to mention it to your mother the next time you speak
with her, and you might want to drop Shirley a brief note letting her
know you appreciate the work she is doing with Miss Lillian.
294.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, February 10, 1978
SUBJECT
A Letter to Jamaican Prime Minister Manley
Prime Minister Manley wrote you a provocative letter on the
North-South dialogue which was sent on December 22, but received on
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 10, Jamaica: Prime Minister Michael

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
January 10.2 Because of the complexity of the issues raised by Manley
and the differences within the government on appropriate ways to re-
spond, I recommended that you send an interim response to Manley,
expressing your appreciation for his gifts to you and informing him
that you would send a more detailed response shortly. The interim
Tab A.
In his letter at Tab B, Manley described what he considers to be the
core issues of the North-South dialogue: commodity price stabilization;
preventing the erosion of the purchasing power (through exports) of
the developing countries and including energy pricing; and massive re-
source transfers. He also suggests that we address the debt problem
and take Perez’ proposal (to transfer the increase in the price of petro-
leum to the needy countries) seriously.4 Finally, he expresses hope that
you will respond positively and that a “genuine dialogue” between our
countries can begin.
In your letter, you note that Dick Cooper will be inviting Manley’s
representative to Washington to discuss these and other issues. The rest
of your letter responds in a fairly positive and always candid way to the
points Manley raised.
Manley noted his desire to follow up on the discussion of North-South economic issues
that he had had with Carter during his recent visit to Washington. A memorandum of
conversation of a December 16, 1977, meeting between Carter and Manley is in the Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 36, Memcons:
3 Carter’s January 25 letter to Manley is in the Carter Library, National Security Af-
fairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 10,
randum to Brzezinski, Erb noted that his and Pastor’s efforts to secure a draft reply to
Manley’s letter to Carter from the Departments of State and the Treasury had produced
“only a preliminary draft and a request from Dick Cooper for time to prepare a more con-
structive and substantive letter. The Manley letter goes to the heart of the North-South
policy issue which you and I have discussed. We can use the letter to foster a constructive
overall response to North-South issues.” Noting that it would take time to prepare “an
adequate reply,” Erb and Pastor recommended the dispatch of an interim reply to
Manley. (Ibid.)
the profits from an increase in oil prices of between 5 to 8 percent be given to debt-ridden
less developed countries. (Juan de Onis, “But It Asks a ’78 Meeting to Consider Rise Tied
Caracas reported: “Pres Perez’s proposal to increase assistance to the third world appar-
ently fell on deaf ears, in part possibly due to his over enthusiastic efforts to promote it
among the assembled OPEC Ministers.” (Telegram 12394 from Caracas, December 22,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
RECOMMENDATION:
That you sign the letter attached at Tab A.5
Jim Fallows and the State Department have cleared the text of the
letter.
Tab A
Letter From President Carter to Jamaican Prime Minister
Manley6
Washington, February 13, 1978
Dear Mr. Prime Minister:
Thank you very much for your thoughtful letter of December 22. I
was glad to learn of your views on economic relations among devel-
oped and developing countries.
The issues you highlighted—commodities, debt, energy, and the
transfer of resources—are all important. As you know, my Administra-
tion is eager to cooperate with other nations for global economic devel-
opment, and I greatly value our close working relationship in these en-
deavors. I understand that Under Secretary Cooper will invite Sir
Egerton Richardson, your Special Adviser, to Washington to discuss
these North-South issues as well as bilateral concerns. We know that
new efforts are needed to solve worldwide economic problems, and we
hope that the new United Nations General Assembly Ad Hoc Com-
mittee of the Whole will help us in that search.
Let me reaffirm the United States’ commitment to strengthening
the international system for commodity trading. We will continue to
search for sound, effective ways to deal with the problems of indi-
vidual commodities within the framework of the UNCTAD Integrated
Program. On the Common Fund, I regret that the negotiations have not
progressed as rapidly as we both have wished. At the November nego-
tiating conference, the industrialized countries proposed a formula for
an effective Common Fund, which we hope will provide a basis for
fruitful negotiations when they resume.
We believe that a Common Fund should support commodity ar-
rangements between producers and consumers that are designed to
stabilize prices around their long-term market trends. In our view, a
general expansion of world trade would do more than anything else to
5 Carter indicated his approval of the recommendation.
6 No classification marking.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
improve the overall export earnings of developing countries. We are
working toward this goal in the Geneva trade negotiations and en-
courage your leadership.
As you note, energy prices concern both of us greatly. We should
examine all aspects of this issue—for instance, the relationship between
oil price increases and debt. The fivefold increase in oil prices since
1973 created balance of payments problems for both our countries, as
they did around the world. These increases have slowed the pace of de-
velopment. We are concerned about the debt issue and are discussing it
in appropriate forums, such as UNCTAD and the IBRD/IMF Develop-
ment Committee.
I agree with you that increased transfers to developing countries
are necessary. At the Conference on International Economic Coopera-
tion, the United States and other countries pledged to increase their de-
velopment assistance substantially. My Administration will carry out
its commitment as we seek appropriation of additional development
assistance from the Congress in coming years.
My Administration will appeal to the Congress to continue its sup-
port for US participation in the international financial institutions. We
will join in a general capital increase of the World Bank. We are deter-
mined to support substantial replenishments of Inter-American and
the Caribbean Development Banks. We expect to win Congressional
approval of the United States’ participation in the IMF’s new Supple-
mentary Finance Facility.7 It is important to recognize, however, that
there are limits to the amount of assistance which the US and other de-
veloped countries can provide. As you note in your letter, additional
economic assistance must be provided by oil-producing countries as
well as traditional donors.
We must remember that much of the external capital the devel-
oping world receives comes from the private sector—and that their
share is likely to increase. Therefore, it is in our interests to ensure that
measures are not taken which would discourage these flows. At your
request, I have instructed the Commerce and State Departments to co-
operate with your government to do an analysis and a report of the in-
vestment climate of Jamaica, offering suggestions on how it could be
improved.
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
7 Meeting in Paris in August 1977, representatives of selected IMF member states
agreed to the establishment of the supplementary financing facility known as the Wit-
teveen Facility. Later that same month, the IMF Executive Board formally established the
eration on Trial, vol. I: Narrative and Analysis, pp. 549–554.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
295.
Memorandum From Guy Erb of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 11, 1978
SUBJECT
North-South Policies: Assessment and Recommendations
This memo responds to your request for a review and analysis of
our current North-South policies and the possibilities for future
actions.
The first point to bear in mind is that what we commonly describe
as “North-South” issues, that is, the common fund, commodity agree-
ments, technology transfer, poor-country debts, are only a part of a
very complex set of relationships between the US and the developing
world. We face important policy issues regarding:
• arms transfers to the more advanced developing countries—new
demands are expected, not only for such items as AWACS and F–15s,
but for all-weather and night fighting capabilities, standoff precision-
guided bombs and rockets, coproduction agreements, and man-
portable anti-aircraft missiles;
• nuclear non-proliferation—pressure points include heavy wa-
ter technology, research reactors, and control of dual capability
technology;
• economic policy—the US capacity to admit increasing exports
from middle and upper-tier LDCs is primarily an issue of domestic
policy, and is directly related to the overall economic and employment
policies of the Administration. Our approach to those LDCs that take
up our offer to negotiate in the Multilateral Trade Negotiations (MTN)
will have a significant impact on our trade and financial relations with
the key developing countries.
The reality of changing relations regarding arms, nuclear tech-
nology, and trade and investment interdependence underlies the rhet-
oric of the North-South dialogue. Yet there is no effective link between
our bilateral concerns with specific developing countries and the im-
plementation of international economic policy on the one hand, and
“North-South” encounters on the other. For example, US Government
discussions of debt policy focus on proposals to assist the poorest
among the developing countries. The proposals could entail easing the
terms of debt outstanding to the United States valued at anywhere
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 25,
of the NSC Staff. Aaron initialed at the top of the page.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
1973 by 14 “upper tier” developing countries, their annual interest pay-
ments are estimated at $7.0 billion and their annual payments on prin-
trade policies and its reciprocal bargaining with the major developing
countries will have to take into account the need of international
debtors to increase their exports. Without an adaptation to that need
we run the risk of threatening the viability of the international financial
system. Yet even the upper tier of developing countries appear reluc-
tant to break with the Group of 77 on trade and other issues that are re-
lated to this problem. For our part, Congressional pressures make it dif-
ficult to sustain the open trade policies that the situation requires.
Turning to our current approach to North-South trade, foreign
assistance, commodity policy, and technology transfers I feel that we
are in a defensive position on too many fronts. With two possible ex-
ceptions, our approaches to the MTN and foreign assistance, our pol-
icies can be described by one word, containment.2 We seek to contain
first those developed countries that wish to adopt more forthcoming
approaches to negotiations with developing countries; and second, the
leading developing countries, whose proposals are seen as a challenge
to an economic system that has served our interests well and could also
serve the interests of developing countries if given a chance. For the
time being the Soviet Union and other Eastern European countries are
at the margin of international consideration of North-South issues. The
influence of the PRC is limited.
On a variety of issues the United States consciously adopts a con-
servative position within the Group of OECD countries. (See Tab A,
serve our interests in a well functioning world economy, (2) concern
that the Congress would oppose “concessions” to the developing
world, (3) bureaucratic inertia, (4) the natural (and appropriate) con-
servatism of the Treasury Department, or (5) the responsiveness of
State’s Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs (E/B) to the short-run
concerns of the business community.
Statements by the President, Ambassador Young and yourself
have described the political and economic changes that require leader-
ship by the United States. But we have not translated your commitment
to work towards a “broader political and economic international
2 Brzezinski highlighted the first two sentences of the paragraph. He also under-
lined the words “to the MTN and” and “word, containment.”
3 Tab A, attached but not printed, is a January 25 memorandum prepared by the
CIA National Foreign Assessment Center entitled “The International Setting for
North-South Relations in 1978.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
system” into clear guidance for US officials as they approach overall
North-South issues and specific policy decisions.
As a consequence, our policies are fragmented and limited in
scope. Moreover, there is no clear overall context for the evaluation and
implementation of specific policies.
• We seek a more effective negotiation with developing countries
in the MTN but the consequences of a possible response by them for
other North-South issues and of our own importation of more LDC ex-
ports have not been adequately analyzed;
• Foreign assistance dominates US policies toward developing na-
tions but our strategies for different types of LDCs and our funding
goals have not yet been clearly explained to the American public,4 other
OECD nations, and recipient countries;
• The US position for the forthcoming UNCTAD meeting on inter-
national debt is currently so modest that strains within the OECD
group and a confrontation with the developing countries appear
inevitable;
• Our willingness to negotiate producer/consumer commodity
agreements offers evidence of a commitment to share responsibilities
with developing nations. But we are perceived as being more negative
than we really are because interagency squabbles delay constructive
US approaches to international meetings on individual products;
• The common fund is a reminder of the danger of making a
high-level commitment that is not backed up by a bureaucratic commit-
ment to deliver the goods. Again, the United States is seen as a major
obstacle to further progress;
• The US approach to technology issues is hampered by a reluc-
tance to confer any legitimacy on the negotiations within UNCTAD
and by an oversensitivity to the attitudes of American corporations.
US Government decisions on non-aid issues that affect developing
countries, for example, the US offer of concessions in the MTN, stock-
pile policies, the contribution to the Tin Agreement, are not informed
by an agreed approach to US relations with developing countries. The
latter are variously viewed as 1) adversaries, 2) insignificant in the con-
text of other factors, or 3) petitioners. The mutual gains that both the
United States and the developing countries could receive from certain
policies receive lip service, but little real consideration.
4 In a February 8 memorandum to Christopher on “A Program to Educate the
American Public on Foreign Aid,” Lake discussed a recent request by Carter that Vance
and Jordan confer “on the possibility of a public campaign to educate the public on our
foreign assistance programs.” Lake noted that “[s]ome work has already been done by
S/P, the NSC, and others on developing a public education campaign on foreign assist-
ance. This effort, however, has been progressing very slowly. We must formulate a con-
crete strategy and begin to act immediately, if we want to undertake a public education
effort during the legislative cycle.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat
Staff, Official Working Papers of S/P Director Anthony Lake, 1977–January 1981, Lot

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
Within the OECD the United States is viewed 1) as a conservative
force whose defense of economic principles will prevent the adoption
of measures that some European countries are willing to accept, if only
to defuse confrontations with developing countries (France, UK, Ger-
many); or 2) as an obstacle to real progress in the North-South Dialogue
(Nordic countries). Japan’s position is somewhat ambiguous; their gov-
ernment supports us on some issues, but not on others.
A striking element of the current situation in developed countries
is a lack of mutual confidence between senior officials of the major
Western countries and their political leadership.
• A recent cable from Ambassador Enders pointed out that Tru-
deau is far ahead of his Cabinet on North-South questions.5
• Recently, several officials from England, France and Germany
expressed concern that a Summit, an EC Council meeting, or some
other gathering of political leaders might lead to advances in
North-South issues that the officials would find uncongenial.
But the responsibility for the impasse on North-South issues is
clearly not ours alone. The Group of 77 is in difficult straits. On both
debt and common fund issues—the two main planks of the present
platform of the developing countries—their unity is sustained only by
extreme demands. Disagreements within the group forced the suspen-
sion of the Common Fund negotiations in November, since any move
toward the OECD proposal would have fractured their unified front.
Disagreements within the 77 will also hamper their ability to negotiate
on debt in March.6
Unfortunately, the very fragility of the cohesion of LDCs leads
them to adopt extreme positions. Those positions, in my view, increase
the likelihood of confrontations between the developing and devel-
oped countries. However, the CIA downplays the likelihood of a major
confrontation in 1978 with the Group of 77 (Tab A). The CIA analysis
does stress the frustrations that are building up within the Group of 77
and we must therefore look beyond the next twelve months to the
Both offer the G–77 considerable opportunities for a return to the con-
frontation tactics of 1974–75.
In 1974 and 1975 the United States found itself isolated from its
allies and facing a hostile majority in the United Nations. The outcome
was the Kissinger speech to the UNGA in 1975 (delivered by Moy-
eign Policy File, D780052–0246)
6 Brzezinski highlighted this paragraph. Reference is to the discussion of interna-
tional debt at the March meeting of the UNCTAD Trade and Development Board.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
nihan).8 The conciliatory tone of that speech ended the rhetorical fire-
works at the UN, led to the creation of CIEC, and, in effect, bought
nearly three years for the beleaguered OECD countries. That string has
just about run out. I trace the disquiet that you, and indeed, all of us in
the North-South Cluster, feel with current North-South policies to an
increasing discomfort with the stagnation of economic policies that has
followed Kissinger’s forty-one initiatives.
The challenge before us is to make our policies reflect our need to
adapt to political/economic changes in the developing world. We have
a choice: to lead the way toward improved economic and political rela-
tionships, or to try to prevent or slow down drastically the changes that
are occurring. In my view, we now run the risk of taking the latter
course. Piecemeal protective measures abound. The OECD commit-
ment to an open world economy may be faltering, and I sense an un-
willingness to take the international and the domestic steps that would
give the US the leading role it should have in restoring the world’s eco-
nomic health.9
A new approach to the North-South issues would not turn around
the world economy but it could contribute to a US policy that aimed at
reversing the present economic trends. More positive economic policies
toward LDCs might also balance the hard line that the United States
should take on arms transfers and non-proliferation issues.
There are three options for North-South policies that we should
consider:
1. The United States can muddle through the North-South dia-
logue, hoping that divisions within the Group of 77 will prevent strong
pressures on us and that verbal accommodation can defuse any con-
frontational situation that does develop. Although I reveal my own
biases by my terminology, this is by no means a phony option. Mainte-
nance of the separation between the “soft” North-South issues and US
bilateral relations with key developing countries is a course that many
senior and working level US officials would favor.
2. We could attempt to make a tactical advance by using rhetoric
and proposing a long list of initiatives comparable to those contained in
the 1975 speech by Secretary Kissinger. Such a policy might buy some
time, but our credibility would be immediately questioned, and we
would be correctly perceived as retreating from stated objectives.
3. The President could sharpen the cooperation and shared respon-
sibility theme of the proposed Caracas speech10 and emphasize the
9 Brzezinski highlighted this paragraph.
10 Carter addressed the Venezuelan Congress on March 29; for the text of his re-
marks, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book I, pp.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
leadership role that the United States can play in moving the world
toward a more just and more fully employed world economy. The ele-
ments of this approach could include:
• a statement that the US faces hard choices that constrain our
ability to meet the demands of the developing countries coupled with a
serious effort to move toward mutually beneficial policy initiatives
wherever possible;
• constructive criticism of the current approach of the Group of 77;
• a commitment to work with developing and other developed
countries to end the current impasse. US actions in the United Nations,
functional organizations (the IMF, IBRD, GATT, UNCTAD, etc.),
and bilateral contacts would all be part of the implementation of that
commitment;11
• a strong defense of the foundations on which new economic rela-
tionships can be built, the Bretton Woods institutions and an open
trade policy;
• announcement of the President’s decision to reach poor people
effectively with our foreign assistance;
• an enumeration of the specifics of possible cooperative actions
with developing countries on food and energy development, and on
science and technology.
Choice and implementation of this final option would provide the
guidance on specific North-South negotiations that US Government of-
ficials now need. At best, this option could break the deadlock in which
the OECD countries and Group of 77 now find themselves. Short of that
outcome, this option could clear the air and allow more fruitful US rela-
tionships with individual or groups of developing countries. Firm im-
plementation of this option would entail some bureaucratic upheavals
but without a commitment to take that risk I see little prospect that our
North-South policies will be any different in 1980 than they are now.
RECOMMENDATION:
That you approve the third option.
Approve (Prepare draft of Caracas speech and policy guidelines in spe-
cific sectors, such as trade, debt, commodities, foreign assistance-basic
human needs, etc.)12
Disapprove (Other action?)
11 Brzezinski highlighted this option up to the end of this point.
12 Brzezinski checked this option and wrote “Speak to me.” According to the NSC
Correspondence Profile attached to this memorandum, Brzezinski met with Owen,
Thornton, Pastor, and Erb to discuss Carter’s speech in Caracas and Pastor and Erb were
directed to prepare an outline. (Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional
found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
296.
Memorandum From Thomas Thornton of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 14, 1978
SUBJECT
North-South Matters
You will be meeting with Guy and me this Friday on North-South
questions.2 In preparation, I have some observations to make, flowing
in part from the paper that Guy did at your request earlier this week.3
Guy correctly emphasizes the economic side. This is just about the
only real “North-South” question since it is the only heading under
which we confront the “South” as a whole. Also, of course, it is how
they define the issue.
Now obviously, the question of participation in the decision-
making process is a highly political question. But, in fact, what they are
aiming at for the most part is participation in the decision-making
process on economic issues.
In general, then, the political dimensions tend to be bilateral or re-
gional, even when (e.g., Middle East or South Africa) almost the whole
Southern world is our audience. We have been doing well in this area,
not just by Andy Young performing mirror tricks, but because we have
been approaching these issues sensibly in terms of an ethos that is ac-
ceptable to the LDCs and to our own consciences. Andy has, in fact,
had a lot to work with—even he couldn’t have mesmerized the people
at the UN if he had our previous Africa policies to work with. Let’s not
sell ourselves short in this regard, although there are huge problems
(arms sales, human rights and non-proliferation) along the way. What
we need to do there is make sure we have a policy and then stick to it
for a long-term gain, even if we have short-term difficulties.
The economic scene, however, is quite different. We are very much
in disarray—some of which could have been prevented and some of
which probably couldn’t. Guy’s paper tells the story well and I have
only a few supplementary observations to make.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South,
Sent for information. Copies were sent to Henry Richardson, Pastor, Erb, and Owen.
2 No memorandum of conversation of the meeting on Friday, February 17, was
found.
3 See Document 295.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
First, the problem is quite insoluble in terms of present public and
Congressional attitudes on LDCs. This is, of course, a point that I have
been making for the best part of a year.4 Once the President got the
same idea, people started paying attention and slowly but surely we
are starting to work out a public affairs strategy.
Second, we are not organized to negotiate intelligently. We ap-
proach these economic negotiations individually without any grand
strategy. There are possible trade-offs between them; we don’t have to
be forthcoming on every front as long as we are credible on most or
some of them. State was asked by the PRC to provide a strategic over-
view for this year; they have just produced it but it is only a list.5
Guy states it well when he says that we are perceived as being on
the defensive. What we need to do is find some areas where we need
not be defensive. The only way to force Cooper and Company to do this
is to make them show their entire hand on the full range of North-South
negotiations. They have a very good case to make on each individual
point. The poverty of their position seen as a whole, however, will be so
evident that Vance or the President will tell them to do something.
From an economist’s point of view, the best strategy for everybody
concerned is to build up the American economy so that we can buy
more from the LDCs. This, however, is not an acceptable political
strategy any more than it would be domestically to rely solely on a pro-
gram of tax incentives to large companies as the way to combat unem-
ployment. We accept domestically that it is necessary sometimes to
take second-best economic solutions in order to meet a pressing polit-
ical need. The same is true internationally.
Another point that we need to keep in mind is that our ideas of
economic and political rationality are not universally held. Not only do
other countries (and not just LDCs) have different ideas about what a
common fund should look like; many countries (including sympathetic
ones such as India) do not think much of our basic human needs ap-
proach to aid. We have to consider compromise on both political and
economic issues if there is to be a genuine dialogue instead of sermon-
izing on our part.
Again, the way to force these matters out into the open is to make
the bureaucracy produce (or react to) a grand strategy. If State is un-
had prepared entitled “Public Presentation of a North-South Strategy.” In his cover mem-
orandum, Thornton noted that he had “been flogging for some time the idea that the
President should lay the North-South out before the people.” (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 7, President, Europe and Asia,
5 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
willing or unable to produce, then perhaps we should look to an out-
side consultant. It is not just in Europe and Canada that the political
leadership is not in tune with the economic bureaucracy
Guy’s options are useful for organizing ourselves. The first one is
obviously not attractive except as an interim stage while we continue to
sort ourselves out (and get the public debate started.) It would make
sense only if we know pretty well what we are going to do in 1979 and
1980 when the big international pressures will start building. (And, by
the way, when we are going to have to go to Congress for big increases
in aid, if we intend to meet the doubling target.) In sum, then, this is a
strategy that might be a good idea for one or two years.
The second strategy must be rejected out of hand. We have gone to
this well before; to try to do so again will make us look foolish. Better to
say straight out that we have not sorted ourselves out yet and ask for
more time. Also, absent a lot of other work on our part, we probably
could not follow through on any promises that we made.
Option three has many good ideas. What we will need to elabo-
rate, however, is the specifics of its implementation. There will be a
temptation to take the rhetoric for the fact, but unless there are tangible
underpinnings, it will be just as counterproductive as the second op-
tion would be.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
297.
Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC 331
Washington, February 16, 1978
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
ALSO
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Secretary of the Interior
The Secretary of Agriculture
The Secretary of Commerce
The Secretary of Labor
The Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare
The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development
The Secretary of Energy
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Chairman, Council of Economic Advisers
The Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs
The Administrator, Agency for International Development
The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
The Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy
The Director, National Science Foundation
SUBJECT
Science and Technology in Developing Countries (U)
The PRC/NSC should develop options for Presidential decision
concerning political and economic objectives, criteria for balancing ob-
jectives, new initiatives, as well as possible legislation and administra-
tive action regarding U.S. scientific and technological relationships
with various developing country groups. The review should provide:
—basis for reports on these matters called for in recent legislation,2
—policy guidance for the U.S. position at the UN Conference on
Science and Technology for Development,3 and for
—the U.S. position on related issues in other international forums,
including the consideration of a Technology Transfer Code of Conduct
at the UN Conference on Trade and Development,
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 2, PRM/
2 Not further identified.
3 The UN Conference on Science and Technology for Development took place in

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—options for implementation of Presidential decisions on foreign
assistance strategies, and
—an evaluation of the level of support of international science and
technology assistance and cooperation extended by U.S. agencies.
Among the basic questions that should be considered are:
—An assessment of the political and economic implications of pro-
viding scientific and technological resources, both private proprietary
as well as public, to various developing country groups, including the
upper-tier. The assessment should include consideration of transfer of
dual-use technologies.
—An assessment of the developing countries’ requirements and
interests for U.S. scientific and technological resources, including
analysis of areas of convergence or conflict with current U.S. policies
and programs.
—An assessment of the scientific and technological resources
which the U.S. Government could mobilize for the benefit of devel-
oping countries, through such efforts as research and development, sci-
ence and technology assistance and cooperation, and education and
manpower training. Special attention should be given to the provision
of resources for development of and experimentation with technol-
ogies that are appropriate to developing countries’ technical, economic,
and social environments.
—An assessment of the benefits and risks of government action re-
garding private proprietary technology transfer to developing coun-
tries. This should include analysis of possible policy measures and their
impact on capital flows, market access, and labor displacement.
—An assessment of the implications for other OECD countries and
for the Communist countries of expanding U.S. scientific and techno-
logical relations with developing countries. The assessment should in-
clude analysis of opportunities for multilateral policy coordination in
the areas of trade and technology transfer with OECD countries.
—An analysis of the relationship between U.S. scientific and tech-
nological relations with developing countries and a range of global
issues, such as energy and natural resource supply and demand, nu-
clear proliferation, food and population, and others.
The review should draw on related PRM materials and other
studies. It will be chaired by the Secretary of State. It should be sub-
mitted for PRC discussion by June 1, 1978.
Zbigniew Brzezinski

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
298.
Memorandum From Secretary of Agriculture Bergland, the
President’s Special Assistant for Health Issues (Bourne), the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski), the President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs
and Policy (Eizenstat), the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget (McIntyre), and the Chairman of
the Council of Economic Advisers (Schultze) to
President Carter1
Washington, February 17, 1978
SUBJECT
Presidential Commission on World Hunger
BACKGROUND
During the last session, the Congress passed a resolution calling on
you to establish a Commission on Domestic and International Hunger
and Malnutrition. Passage was unanimous in the Senate and 364 to 38
in the House.2 At a meeting on February 3 with key Congressional
sponsors of the resolutions you announced that you planned to estab-
lish such a Commission.3 Following that meeting, you asked us to pre-
pare an options paper on the subject.
COMMISSION OBJECTIVES
The first and most important step in charting the course of the
Commission is to identify its objectives as clearly and completely as
possible. Most of the remaining decisions regarding the make-up and
operation of the Commission are largely dependent on the task as-
signed the Commission. Commissions can and are called upon to serve
a variety of different purposes ranging from issue definition and basic
fact-finding to the promotion of public awareness through public rela-
tions activities.
We are persuaded that the Hunger Commission must be designed
to pursue several related objectives including:
1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Material, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, National
No classification marking. Bergland did not initial the memorandum, Rubenstein init-
ialed for Eizenstat, and Bourne initialed for McIntyre. A stamped notation at the top of
the page reads: “The President has seen.”
Cabinet Room. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No mem-
orandum of conversation was found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
• the development of a solid factual base that identifies the causes
of the problem,4
• identify existing authorities and programs, public and private,
and national and international, and
• assess the programs to determine which are working, which are
not, and why.
These objectives are generally consistent with those in the Con-
gressional resolutions. Such data gathering and analysis has not been
done on a comprehensive basis. Until it is, there will be no clear view of
the problem nor will we know the magnitude of present world-wide ef-
forts and how the problem can be dealt with more effectively. Before
launching an aggressive effort, we must know where we are and how
we got here. Much of the analysis has already been done through the
World Hunger Working Group, and their report, a summary of which
is being sent to you separately today, can serve as a basis for their
work.5 This Commission provides a unique opportunity to assemble
free of institutional constraints, a comprehensive and in-depth review
in a thorough and integrated way.
Once the factual base is developed, we hope this could be accom-
plished during the first 6 to 9 months, the Commission would then pre-
pare an options paper on actions to be taken. Any initiatives requiring
legislation should be prepared in time for possible inclusion in the Ad-
ministration’s 1979 legislative package. At that point, we would see the
Commission turning to the promotion of improved public under-
standing and awareness of the issue and the role of the United States in
helping alleviate the problem.
The key decision then, as we see it, is the extent to which we rely
on the Commission to help develop hunger policies and design pro-
grams or whether the Commission is used primarily to promote public
awareness and generate support. The major argument in favor of using
the Commission as a principal means of fashioning policies and pro-
grams is that the assembly and assessment task requires concentrated
effort by a staff unencumbered by other duties. The central drawback
to using the Commission in this capacity is that given its independent
status vis-a-vis Presidential control, its conclusions and recommenda-
tions will not necessarily correspond with those of the Administration.
In fact, to the extent we succeed in obtaining a dynamic, well-balanced
membership, one can almost guarantee there will be strong differences
of opinion and dissension within the Commission. But this can be
4 Carter made a checkmark in the margin adjacent to each of these bulleted points.
5 The summary of the report of the World Hunger Working Group, established
printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs,
Document 245.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
useful and requesting an options paper minimizes the risks. We recom-
mend that you look to the Commission as one mechanism for identi-
fying and assessing hunger policies and programs and presenting op-
tions for consideration. Certainly it will provide an important
information base whether or not you accept all their recommendations.
Bourne and Brzezinski feel the emphasis of the Commission
should be primarily on building public attention and support for this
issue rather than too heavy a focus on conducting additional studies.
DECISION
Focus primarily on conducting study and policy formulation.
Focus primarily on building public support with policy formulation
secondary.6
As described in the Resolutions, the Commission would focus on
hunger in the United States as well as internationally. We question the
advisability of attempting to deal with the fundamentally different
issues of domestic and world hunger within the confines of a single
commission. For this reason, we recommend that the Commission con-
centrate on world hunger,7 but that domestic policies and programs be
assessed so this experience can, where applicable, be brought to bear.
Some of us feel (Bourne and Brzezinski) that the Commission should
informally8 broaden its scope to serve as a vehicle for building support
for foreign assistance in general, consistent with your decision memo
on that subject,9 and the evolving program to gain public support in
this area. This broad approach might not be acceptable to some of the
Congressional sponsors, if it was explicit. However, the choice of
chairman can be an important factor in the focus the commission
adopts.
DECISION
Emphasis on world hunger (Bergland, Eizenstat, Schultze)10
International and Domestic Hunger
World Hunger and General Foreign Assistance (Bourne, Brzezinski)
6 Carter indicated his approval of this option and wrote: “Collate studies already
done.”
7 Carter underlined the words “world hunger.”
8 Carter underlined the word “informally.”
10 Carter indicated his approval of this option and wrote: “will obviously have to in-
clude a) domestic food & hunger plus b) assistance.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
MECHANISM FOR ESTABLISHING THE COMMISSION
Two choices exist for establishing the Commission
(1) Executive Order
A Commission authorized by Executive Order can be initiated im-
mediately with a prescribed membership; be given carefully prescribed
responsibilities; and operate under a statutory base for agency funding
and manpower sharing. This approach would clearly define Presiden-
tial interest, allow more direct control over the Commission by the
White House, and provide a test of public reaction and interest before
the Administration modifies programs or requests legislation. Such au-
thorization, however, would still require an appropriation from the
Congress. To enable the Commission to be established immediately,
some money could be allocated from the President’s Discretionary Ac-
count while an appropriation was being sought.
(2) Executive Order Accompanied by a Message on World Hunger to the
Congress
This variation of the Executive Order mechanism offers the advan-
tage of option (1), but also provides an opportunity to communicate the
recommendations of the World Hunger Working Group, to broaden
the framework within which the Commission will conduct its work
and offers an opportunity to make near-term changes in existing pro-
grams. Perhaps most important it provides a very appropriate oppor-
tunity to lay out your overall world hunger policy, without having to
wait until the Commission completes its report. To wait that long
without any major statement from you might be too long. Such a
message could also contain a request for an appropriation for the
Commission.
DECISION
Executive Order Only
Executive Order and Message to Congress11
BUDGET
of the Commission’s operation. There are three options for funding:
(1) Funding by the Agencies
Utilizing funds from agency budgets is difficult because most
funds are already committed. In addition, present interagency conflicts
might be aggravated as the agency contributing the bulk of the support
could feel it had a preemptive right over the work of the Commission.
11 Carter indicated his approval of this option.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
A small amount of funds from the agencies might, however, be added
in the early months to those from the Presidential Discretionary ac-
count to allow the rapid implementation of the Commission.
(2) Congressional Appropriation
Members of Congress who have sponsored the resolutions could
be asked to sponsor legislation to provide funds for the Commission.
However, this would open the opportunity for Congress to specify the
form and operation of the Commission more narrowly than we prefer.
(3) Supplemental Appropriation Submitted by the Administration
This option is favored by OMB. While it might be slower than op-
tion (2), it would allow us to maintain control over the Commission as a
Presidential initiative. We recommend this option with a funding level
would be sought from the Presidential Discretionary Account and from
existing agency budgets to allow the Commission to begin operating
until Congressional action is completed.
DECISION
Funding by the Agencies
Congressional Appropriations
Supplemental Appropriations (recommended)13
DURATION OF THE COMMISSION
The Congressional resolutions call for the Commission to have a
life of two years. This is probably reasonable. A shorter period of time
would make it difficult to staff-up and carry out the kind of activities
planned.
DECISION
2 years (recommended)14
1 year
Other
SIZE AND MAKE-UP OF THE COMMISSION
The Congressional resolution recommends that “the Commission
shall be a balanced membership composed of fifteen persons appointed
by the President from individuals who represent diverse background.”
adjacent margin.
13 Carter indicated his approval of this option.
14 Carter indicated his approval of this option.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
You are free, however, to create a Commission of any size, selected on
any basis, and with or without Congressional representation.
We recommend a Commission of twenty people selected to repre-
sent a broad cross-section of interests including business, humanitarian
groups, technical experts, entertainers with demonstrated interest in
world hunger, with appropriate ethnic and geographic diversity. Be-
cause of the intense Congressional interest in this Commission, we rec-
ommend that inclusion of four Congressional members (two from each
House and party).
Given the widespread interest in this issue and the many groups
that would like to be represented on the Commission a careful selection
process is required. This is particularly true with regard to the chairman-
ship of the Commission. Since the members depend upon the objec-
tives of the Commission, they cannot now be selected. We suggest that
the signers of this memo serve as a nominating committee15 and that we
provide you with a list of candidates within 7 days.
DECISION
Approve16
Disapprove
15 Carter underlined the words “nominating committee” and wrote “ok” in the ad-
jacent margin.
16 Carter indicated his approval of this option and wrote “I prefer 15” in the adja-
cent margin. Executive Order 12078, issued on September 5, established the Presidential
Commission on World Hunger. For the text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United
activities under the chairmanship of Sol Linowitz is in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II,
Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
299.
Memorandum From Guy Erb of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 21, 1978
SUBJECT
PRC on U.S. Policies Regarding International Debt
On Wednesday, February 22, 1978, the PRC will meet to consider
international debt issues, in particular, the U.S. position for the March
meeting on debt of the Trade and Development Board of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). The
Board will meet at the “Ministerial” level: Richard Cooper will lead the
U.S. delegation.
A discussion paper for the PRC is attached at Tab III. Annexes to
the paper provide background on debt issues and North/South rela-
tions (Tab A);2 the current debt situation, U.S. debt policy and the posi-
tions of other donor countries (Tab B);3 the text of the proposal pre-
pared by the United States and the European Economic Community at
the time of the Conference on International Economic Coopera-
tion—PRC decision issue (Tab C);4 a note on retroactive terms adjust-
ment—PRC decision issue (Tab D);5 and a note on a means of allowing a
debtor country to forego payments on principal under certain circum-
stances—the Bisque clause (Tab E).6 As Background, I attach CIA assess-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 68, PRC
2 Annex A, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Debt in North/
South Relations.”
3 Annex B, attached but not printed, is a February 2 paper prepared by EB/IFD/
OMA entitled “Current Debt Situation, U.S. Debt Policy, and Donor Country Positions.”
4 Annex C, attached but not printed, is the text of the U.S.–EEC proposal. The paper
at Annex A (see footnote 2 above) noted that the U.S.–EC proposal “clearly distinguished
between debt relief to deal with emergency situations and the provision of appropriate
assistance to handle longer term transfer of resources problems” and “preserved the
case-by-case approach to the problems of developing countries.” Its provisions “identi-
fied measures by debtors and creditors to prevent debt crises from arising;” “laid out
guidelines for creditor-club operations, which would insure equitable and efficient treat-
ment for countries experiencing a debt crisis;” and “suggested a new procedure to en-
hance assistance to developing countries experiencing structural balance of payments
problems, of which debt is an element, which unduly impinge on development
prospects.”
5 Annex D, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Retroactive
Terms Adjustment.”
6 Annex E, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Bisque Clauses.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
ment of LDC Positions on Debt Relief Issues and a CIA research paper
on Non-OPEC LDC debt.7
The developing countries, especially India and Pakistan, have
called for rescheduling of commercial and official debt and/or debt
moratoria. Their proposals have proved unacceptable to the United
States, whose current debt policies are based on an April, 1977, EPG
recommendation that the United States oppose calls for generalized
debt relief as well as the use of debt relief as a normal means of transfer-
ring aid resources.8
However, the UNCTAD secretariat is seeking a compromise that
would involve an outcome for the Ministerial meeting that would be
rather modest from the point of view of the LDCs. In effect, proposals
regarding commercial debt (already questioned within the group of de-
veloping countries) would be dropped and emphasis placed on 1) ad-
justment of the terms and conditions of outstanding loans, and 2) a
mechanism to continue international discussion of features or guide-
lines for treatment of severe external debt problems.
The main issues that require PRC decision prior to the UNCTAD
Ministerial are as follows:
1) Should the U.S. agree to table the USEEC debt proposal, and, if
so, should the U.S. accept the use of debt relief on a case-by-case basis
as a means of implementing the section of the US/EEC proposal on the
structural balance of payments problems of developing countries?
2) Should the U.S. seek Congressional approval for retroactive
terms adjustment on a case-by-case basis to provide assistance to poor
countries?
A decision of secondary importance at this time concerns the pos-
sible analysis of a) the role of aid consortia and creditor clubs in debt re-
lief exercises and (b) bisque clauses.
The first two decision issues could involve a modification, but
would not overturn, current U.S. debt policies. In assessing these deci-
sion issues we have to bear in mind the impact of debt policies on
credit worthiness of individual debtor countries, and 4) prospective re-
quests for debt reschedulings.
Regarding the two main issues before the PRC, the discussion
paper poses the following options:
7 Attached but not printed are two papers prepared in the CIA. The first, ER
Countries: External Debt Positions and Prospects.”

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
(1) U.S. opposition to tabling the US/EEC proposal and to taking
any other initiatives.
(2) U.S. support for tabling the US/EEC proposal, but opposition
to taking any other initiatives.
(3) U.S. opposition to tabling the US/EEC proposal, but support
for an initiative on retroactive terms adjustment.
(4) U.S. support for tabling the US/EEC proposal, and for an initia-
tive on retroactive terms adjustment.
I recommend Option (4).
US/EEC Proposal
The US/EEC proposal, although a relatively weak reed, should be
tabled.
—Even if the United States does not agree to table the US/EEC
paper, other OECD countries probably will table it, perhaps with
changes that we would find objectionable.
—Agreement to table the proposal does not commit the United
States to any specific action, but merely to further discussion of the pro-
posal and to consideration, in consultation with the Congress, of
various means of implementing the proposal (see Discussion Paper,
—Failure to table the proposal would divide the OECD and leave
the initiative on debt entirely with the Group of 77 developing coun-
tries. Even if the G–77 rejects the proposal, as it is likely to do, the US/
EEC paper would remain as an element of subsequent discussions
(Note: there is a risk here because we cannot agree, at this time, to major
revisions in the US/EEC paper).
—Failure to table the proposal would give an impression that the
US was backsliding on the debt issue.
Retroactive terms adjustment
I recommend that the United States agree to retroactive terms ad-
justment on a case-by-case basis for the least developed countries
(LLDCs—15 of which owe the United States debts on past Foreign As-
sistance Act and PL 480 loans) plus those IDA eligible countries with
outstanding loans on harder than current U.S. terms. This course of ac-
total of $1.5 billion of debts outstanding on U.S. loans, at a real cost to
the United States of less than $500 million. The reduction in annual debt
of the Discussion Paper.)
9 Reference is to suboption 3) under Section C of the attached Discussion Paper.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—Retroactive terms adjustment for LLDCs and IDA eligible coun-
tries would be a constructive U.S. action that would have a positive im-
pact on our overall North-South relations, but at a relatively low cost to
the United States;
—In my judgment, the effect on the credit worthiness of devel-
oping countries would be minimal. The impact on future requests for
reschedulings is uncertain, but is unlikely to be sufficiently great to
overturn the traditionally cautious U.S. approach in creditor clubs or
other fora;
—Comparable action is under consideration by the British and the
Danes. The Dutch are pressing for this type of measure within the EEC,
as well as within the OECD. The Japanese are interested in the pro-
posal. The Danes have also indicated a willingness to consult with the
Germans on this issue. The recent Swedish, Swiss, Dutch and Canadian
debt cancellations or reschedulings (see Annex B to the Discussion
Paper, Tab II, pp. 6–7) have created a climate in which a negative US de-
cision would be unfavorably compared to other OECD approaches to
the debt issue. On the other hand, an affirmative U.S. decision would
be in step with actions envisaged by several OECD countries although
the French and Germans are said to have problems with this approach.
—Conversion of past loans to current terms has a logic that pro-
vides an excellent basis for the necessary consultations on Capitol Hill:
for example, the proposal brings terms on past loans up to the standards
now accepted by the Congress (grants for LLDCs and soft loans for other
IDA eligible countries) and is a policy that takes into account the distri-
bution of aid as well as the economic circumstances of individual coun-
tries and their development policies. The Discussion Paper suggests
that the United States seek LDC commitments to use freed resources
for agreed development objectives. Such a proviso might enhance the
proposal’s prospects on Capitol Hill. However, the amounts are small
and U.S. leverage will be slight. This factor plus the disadvantages of
setting up another accounting procedure lead me to recommend
against this form of conditionality.
By tabling the US/EEC paper and announcing its willingness to
consult with Congress on retroactive terms adjustment the USG would
give the UNCTAD secretariat a fighting chance to pull off its proposed
compromise. Secretary General Corea’s attempt to reach an interme-
diate position between the G–77 and the OECD countries (as usual, the
Soviets are at the margin of these discussions) is a significant move,
with implications for the common fund talks and future North-South
discussions. We are uncertain as to whether the G–77 will accept the
UNCTAD proposals. However, the constructive U.S. action that I rec-
ommend would greatly strengthen the hand of the moderate LDCs
within the group of developing countries. Without such U.S. action, it

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
is very likely that the developing countries will stick to a hard line on
debt issues between now and the next major UNCTAD meeting in
1979. As a consequence, the UNCTAD Secretariat’s attempt to act as a
“broker” would have been set back, an outcome contrary to our
interests.
Aid Consortia vs. Creditor Clubs and Bisque Clauses
The PRC is also asked to review two other questions: 1) the use of
aid consortia or creditor clubs for debt rescheduling and 2) the use of
bisque clauses in loan agreements.
Neither one of these questions has yet been adequately examined
within the Government. The issues are familiar to those responsible for
debt policy and I recommend that a study be requested by the PRC, to
be completed before the U.S. delegation leaves for the UNCTAD Minis-
terial. Bisque clauses might well be offered during the UNCTAD
meeting as a possible item for consideration by a working group com-
prised of experts from developed and developing countries. Such a
U.S. initiative could prevent the contrasting approaches of the US/EEC
paper and the LDC proposals from dominating the follow-up to the
Ministerial meeting.
Tab III
Discussion Paper Prepared for the Policy Review
Committee10
Washington, undated
U.S. POLICY ON DEBT RELIEF FOR DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
February 22, 1978 The Situation Room
SECTION I: INTRODUCTION
Virtually all the LDCs are avoiding militancy on North/South
issues, at least for the moment, in part because of the continuing
slackness in the world economy and the press of immediate economic
problems. However, no significant progress has been made on such
issues as the codes on technology and multinational corporations, and
the UN Overview Mechanism got off to only a modest beginning. At
the same time, prospects for movement on issues of importance to the
10 Confidential.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
developing countries (Group of 77) as a whole, the Common Fund and
debt, are uncertain.
Debt issues will be the focus of the ministerial-level session of the
Trade and Development Board of UNCTAD next month (March 6–10).
The only other agenda topic relates to development and financial
problems, including debt, of the least developed countries (LLDCs).
The G–77 views the meeting as an opportunity to secure commitments
from the developed countries for increased resource transfers, and in
particular will be pressing for generalized debt relief on official debt
owed by low-income LDCs. The pressure for generalized relief comes
predominately from the few LDCs (India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh)
that stand to benefit the most, although for a number of others (particu-
larly African LDCs) the issue has developed political importance.
Last week in Washington, UNCTAD Secretary General Gamani
Corea spoke with U.S. officials.11 His presentation represented a move
away from the original G–77 position. He said that a procedural solu-
tion could be devised to handle proposals on debt relief mechanisms.
However, on the issue of debt relief or alternative measures to transfer
resources, he felt that something needed to be done. He allowed,
though, that each creditor country could, on a case by case basis, decide
on how such relief would be provided.12 Corea emphasized that he
could not guarantee that the G–77 would accept his position.
Differences between the developed countries (Group B) and the
G–77 remain broad and substantive. The G–77 will almost certainly
raise the discussion in the new Overview Mechanism in the United Na-
tions,13 and probably at UNCTAD V in May 1979. (See Annex A on the
debt issue in North/South relations.)
ruary 14 meeting with Corea and Cooper’s February 15 meeting with Corea. Vance noted
that the developed and developing countries differed over “the call of the developing
countries for a ‘second window’ to finance measures to improve commodity export
earnings. Dick warned that if the Common Fund took on the aura of a new aid institution,
as it would under this approach, Congress would not support any type of Common
Fund. We urged Corea to concentrate on the main function of the Fund—financial sup-
port for commodity price stabilization agreements.” (Carter Library, National Security
12 In his February 16 Evening Report to Carter, Vance noted that, according to
Corea, the LDCs had “narrowed their demands and now seek relief of the debt burden of
the poorest countries. Corea suggested retroactive adjustment of the terms of past official
debt to conform with current aid terms.” Cooper countered that “adjustment of terms of
all past loans to a group of countries would be a form of aid, and basic needs and human
rights are important US aid allocation criteria;” as such, “each country should be consid-
ered separately and on its merits.” (Ibid.)
mittee of the Whole to oversee North-South economic negotiations.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
U.S. POLICY ON DEBT RELIEF FOR DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
U.S. debt policy recognizes the distinction between an immediate
debt crisis and a structural balance of payments problem of which debt
is one element. U.S. debt relief is provided on a case-by-case basis in sit-
uations of default and imminent default where necessary to ensure fu-
ture repayment. Debt relief should not be used as a form of develop-
ment assistance and debt reorganizations should normally take place in
the framework of a multilateral creditor club. Furthermore, in April
1977, the EPG agreed to recommend opposition to all proposals for
generalized debt rescheduling and to the use of debt relief as a normal
means of transferring aid resources.
The U.S. policy on debt relief reflects: (a) the economic necessity of
a case-by-case approach; (b) the importance of honoring contractual
obligations; (c) a desire to adhere to the budgetary process and avoid
“back door” financing, and (d) the need to maintain the confidence of
private capital markets.
In considering the alternative positions discussed below in Section
II for the UNCTAD Ministerial meeting, two issues arise which could
lead to modification of U.S. policy on debt relief:
—Should the U.S. use debt relief to provide assistance to LDCs on
a case-by-case basis in implementing the structural balance of pay-
ments section of the US/EC proposal? (See Annexes B and C.)
—Should the U.S. use, with Congressional approval, retroactive
terms adjustment (a form of debt relief) on a case-by-case basis to pro-
vide assistance to the least developed LDCs?
SECTION II: ISSUES FOR THE UNCTAD MINISTERIAL MEETING
The U.S. objectives for the meeting are to: (1) preserve the long-
term financial interests of the U.S.; (2) maintain a unified position
among the major creditor countries; (3) keep discussion of the debt
issue and the problems of the LLDCs on a constructive level; and
(4) avoid adverse effects on overall North/South relations. These objec-
tives must be delicately balanced; too much emphasis on one will un-
dercut the others.
The major questions that need to be addressed with regard to the
U.S. position at the UNCTAD Ministerial are: (a) whether or not to
support tabling the US/EEC CIEC proposal on debt; and (b) whether
or not to support any other debt-related initiatives. There are four
possibilities:
(1) U.S. opposition to tabling the US/EEC proposal and to taking
any other initiatives.
(2) U.S. support for tabling the US/EEC proposal, but opposition
to taking any other initiatives.
(3) U.S. opposition to tabling the US/EEC proposal, but support
for an initiative on retroactive terms adjustment.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
(4) U.S. support for tabling the US/EEC proposal, and for an initia-
tive on retroactive terms adjustment.
A discussion of each of these four possibilities follows.
A. NO US/EEC PROPOSAL AND NO OTHER INITIATIVES
Proposals from the developing countries (G–77) for generalized
debt relief will be on the table at Geneva. The developed countries
(Group B) have not yet agreed to place proposals on the table. Last year
at the Conference on International Economic Cooperation (CIEC), the
U.S. and the EEC tabled a joint proposal on “features” to guide interna-
tional action in situations involving debt-servicing problems. It was ta-
bled as part of the CIEC package of the developed countries on a
take-it-or-leave-it basis. The proposal was not accepted by the LDCs,
but the Ministers agreed that it could form a useful basis for consider-
ation elsewhere. The proposal was rejected by the LDCs. At USG in-
sistence, this proposal has not been “activated” for consideration at the
UNCTAD Ministerial. The EEC, supported by Japan, has been pressing
to table it as the centerpiece of the Group B position for the Ministerial.
If the LDCs rejected it a year ago, there is a presumption that they
would reject it again.
In the absence of any U.S. initiative, other Group B countries might:
a. choose not to move forward on debt at this juncture; or
b. choose to go ahead with the US/EEC proposal (or a modified
version of it) without the U.S.; or
c. abandon the US/EEC proposal with each country advancing as
far as it can to meet LDC demands.
In the absence of significant Group B initiatives, the G–77 might:
a. downplay the significance of the setback by agreeing to hold fur-
ther technical discussions; or
b. hold fast to their more extreme demands for generalized relief
and pursue them in other UN fora, such as the UN Overview
Mechanism;
c. break off the discussions charging bad faith on the part of Group
B, and raise the stakes by making debt relief their major objective at
UNCTAD V (May 1979 in Manila).
In short, the pros and cons of going to the UNCTAD Ministerial
“with an empty bag” are the following:
PROS:
—Ensures that the U.S. position on debt is not eroded.
—A hardline position, if supported by Group B, might defuse ex-
pectations for future concessions in the debt area.
CONS:
—Destroys Group cohesion on debt.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
—Isolates the U.S., thereby exposing the U.S. to greater pressure.
—Risks bringing the dialogue on debt to a halt and reducing
chances for compromise on other North/South issues.
B. THE US/EEC PROPOSAL, BUT NO OTHER INITIATIVES
The value of tabling the US/EEC proposal at the meeting is essen-
tially tactical. Tabling the US/EEC proposal is probably the only course of ac-
tion that would keep Group B together and allow the developed countries
to say they are being responsive to LDC concerns.
The other members of Group B could be persuaded that the US/
EEC proposal should be “activated” without any substantive changes,
and not for negotiations. Having rejected it once, it is unlikely that the
G–77 would accept this proposal at the UNCTAD Ministerial. The G–77
might decide to break off the dialogue on debt in the expectation that
the developed countries would sooner or later feel enough pressure to
move further toward meeting LDC demands (perhaps at UNCTAD V).
However, it seems most likely that the G–77 will insist on continuing discus-
sions on debt proposals.
There is one significant drawback for the U.S. in tabling the US/
EEC proposal: we would have difficulty implementing the proposal if it were
accepted by the G–77. The section of the proposal addressed to countries
having debt problems of a longer-term structural nature outlines a new
international procedure for dealing with these situations. The U.S. and
other donor countries would be committed to “enhance” their assist-
ance to a country that opted to take advantage of the new procedure.
(See Annex C, page 4, subpara. (v).) This would be done by increasing
the quantity and improving the quality of their aid by various meas-
ures with special emphasis on program aid and other flexible forms of
fast disbursing aid, as well as debt reorganization. Thus the US/EEC
proposal clearly implies a U.S. commitment to extend assistance to
LDCs experiencing structural balance of payments problems that im-
pinge unduly on their development.
The U.S. has no aid instruments which lend themselves readily to
this purpose. Bilateral Development Assistance, P.L. 480 and Security
Supporting Assistance (SSA) are all subject to varying policy and legis-
lative constraints. Moreover, Congressional concerns expressed during
the recent Witteveen Facility hearings about the use of official financing
for balance-of-payments support suggest that the Executive Branch
might face considerable criticism if it attempted to implement the US/
EEC proposal.
It is difficult at this late stage to change the language of the US/
EEC proposal to eliminate our problem with implementation. The
changes we would want to make are unacceptable to the EEC, and
might open up the proposal to changes that the U.S. could not accept.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Thus, there are three alternative approaches to implementing the
proposal for benefiting countries:
ONE: Reschedule debt due on official development assistance
(ODA). This could be justified under current FAA legislation which
permits rescheduling to ensure repayment.
TWO: Adopt an ad hoc approach. Each time a country takes advan-
tage of the procedure, the U.S. would explore the various ways of put-
ting together a package of new aid from development assistance, SSA,
and P.L. 480 funds (as was done for Jamaica). If in exceptional circum-
stances, debt relief were also utilized, consultations with the Congress
would be required.
THREE: Seek Congressional authorization and appropriations for
the amounts of balance-of-payments support required to meet commit-
ments resulting from the new procedure. Only a prior authorization
and appropriation of funds would allow fast disbursal of assistance for
this purpose.
The diplomatic benefits for the U.S. of joining with Group B in ta-
bling the US/EEC proposal are considerable. Against these advan-
tages, the costs in terms of tension between the Administration and the
Congress must be weighed. If the PRC agrees on one of these alterna-
tives, it would be necessary to consult with Congress prior to agreeing
to table the proposal at the ministerial in order to avoid a reaction by
Congress that could affect adversely more important actions sought by
the Administration (such as larger FAA and IFI appropriations, or ap-
proval for U.S. participation in the Witteveen Facility of the IMF).
While there may be costs in terms of Congressional relations, the risk of
incurring these costs are likely to be small since there is a strong expecta-
tion that the G–77 would not accept the US/EEC proposal.
In short, the pros and cons of joining with other Group B countries
in tabling the US/EEC proposal are the following:
PROS:
—Helps assure Group B cohesion.
—Minimizes the chances of a breakdown in the discussions on
debt without yielding any additional ground.
—Serves as a counterproposal to LDC proposals that are already
on the table.
CONS:
—Risks some damage to the Administration’s relations with
Congress and a possible adverse impact on Congressional actions on
bilateral and multilateral assistance.
—The USG would have difficulty implementing the US/EEC pro-
posal unless it made a commitment to provide assistance to LDCs
facing structural balance of payments problems.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
—Since the LDCs are likely to reject the proposal and because
Group B could not agree to substantive revisions in it, tabling the pro-
posal would be an empty tactical ploy.
—Tabling the proposal may make it an important part of subse-
quent discussions of debt relief with developing countries.
C. AN INITIATIVE ON RETROACTIVE TERMS ADJUSTMENT, BUT
NO US/EEC PROPOSAL
The terms of old aid are harder than the terms of new aid for a
number of LDCs. For the least developed, which generally receive
grants now, there is a significant discrepancy between current terms
and past terms. At the moment, AID assistance to the LLDCs is solely in
the form of grants; P.L. 480 is extended on a mixture of grants and
loans.
In a DAC meeting last month, the Netherlands proposed that
donor countries give consideration to some form of retroactive terms
adjustment for the poorer developing countries. The UNCTAD Secre-
tariat sees agreement on this as the major accomplishment of the March
ministerial meeting.
Section 208 of the International Development Cooperation Act of
1978 (S.2420) would partially modify current U.S. policy by authorizing
the new aid agency—on a case-by-case basis—to waive interest pay-
ments and use payments of principal (in the form of local currency) for
development purposes. The authority would extend only to existing
Foreign Assistance Act loans to the LLDCs. The authority proposed is
similar to existing authority covering new P.L. 480 loans under Title III.
If approved, the Humphrey Bill would, in effect, permit retroactive
terms adjustment for past FAA loans for LLDCs.14 The rationale for and
the effect of retroactive terms adjustment is to increase resource
transfers through a debt relief process.
There are three basic options for case-by-case retroactive adjust-
ment of past loan terms; two with respect to the least developed coun-
tries and one with respect to other low-income countries.
1) For the 15 least developed countries that owe the U.S. ODA
debt, convert the loans provided under the Foreign Assistance Act
(FAA) to grants. (This is basically consistent with the debt provision
contained in the recently proposed Humphrey Bill.)
grants.
14 Senator Humphrey’s International Development Cooperation Act of 1978
(S.2420) addressed U.S. bilateral and multilateral development policy. Following Hum-
phrey’s death in January 1978, Senators Case and Sparkman introduced the bill in
Congress.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
3) In addition to action for the LLDCs, for non-LLDC IDA eligible
countries (per capita income less than $550 in 1976), adjust past FAA
and P.L. 480 loans which are at harder than the currently most favor-
able loan terms (ten years grace at two percent interest, thirty years
amortization at three percent interest) to these most favorable loans
terms.
There has been staff level considerations of other options, but they
were discarded as either impractical or too costly.
The cost to the U.S. and benefit to the LDCs of these options is de-
scribed in the table below.
As a general principle, specific action would only be taken on a
case-by-case basis to exclude countries which, for example, violate
human rights. In addition, we could seek to obtain LDC commitments
to use freed resources for agreed development objectives. This would
enhance the likelihood of obtaining Congressional approval but reduce
the attractiveness of the initiative for the LLDCs.
US Costs of Alternatives for Retroactive Terms Adjustment
($ million—For Debt as of December 1, 1977)
Reduction in US
Real Economic
Present Value of
Total Debt
Annual Debt
Cost to U.S. from
Debt Outstanding
Outstanding
Service Receipts
Adjustment
Subject to
Subject to
Action (Change in
Adjustment
Adjustment
Present Value)
Option 1
Convert LLDC FAA
Debt to Grants—
Humphrey Bill
Option 2
Convert LLDC FAA
and PL 480 Debt to
Grants
Option 3
(2) Plus Non-LLDC
IDA Eligible Convert
to Best Current Loan
Terms
25*
47*
*Additional Debt—Mostly Local Currency Repayable PL 480
The pros and cons of U.S. support for a Group B initiative on retro-
active terms adjustment are the following:
PROS:
—Retroactive terms adjustment is a means of increasing resource
transfers quickly to the countries most in need of additional aid.
—Announcing this initiative at the UNCTAD meeting may have a
political payoff in the North/South dialogue.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
—Section 208 of the Humphrey Bill reflects some Congressional
support for adjustment.
—By restricting use of retroactive adjustment to a case-by-case
basis, U.S. opposition to generalized debt relief is not compromised.
—Aid distribution, economic conditions in LDCs, and their devel-
opment commitment are taken into account.
—The cost to the U.S. is small.
CONS:
—It would not be additional if Congress responded by making
off-setting cuts elsewhere. It would not be additional for other donors
that provide debt relief within aid budget ceilings.
—It is unlikely to be of any real interest to the LDCs and thus may
buy little in the debt negotiations.
—We have been told that the French and the Germans may not be
able to support this initiative due to both statutory and political
constraints.
—It removes the main argument that the U.S. has used to resist use
of debt relief as an aid instrument—i.e., that the Executive Branch
cannot support it because of Congressional restraints. Thus it may give
rise to pressures to widen the list of countries eligible for retroactive ad-
justment or to provide other forms of debt relief.
—It would require both authorizing and appropriations legislation
from the Congress.
If the PRC decides that the U.S. should support a retroactive ad-
justment initiative, the U.S. delegation at the UNCTAD meeting would
only be able to support the principle and to express the intention of the
Administration to support legislation for it.
D. THE US/EEC PROPOSAL AND AN INITIATIVE ON
RETROACTIVE TERMS ADJUSTMENT
U.S. support for tabling the US/EEC proposal plus support for an
initiative on retroactive terms adjustment would combine the advan-
tages and disadvantages of each component.
SECTION III: OTHER ISSUES
A. ADDING BISQUE CLAUSES TO ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE
LOANS
A bisque clause allows a debtor, at its option, to skip a few pay-
ments of principal on a loan containing such a clause if it faces
debt-servicing problems. These principal payments can be added onto
the end of repayment schedule or stretched out over the remaining life
of the loan. Interest on the remaining payments can be increased so that

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
in present value terms there is no net loss to the creditor. (See Annex E
on bisque clauses.)
As a further initiative for the UNCTAD Ministerial, the U.S. might
propose that donor countries agree in principle to adding bisque
clauses to aid loans. However, there has been little discussion of this
possibility and it is unlikely that the other members of Group B would
be prepared to support this on such short notice. Since this device is
closely related to aid terms, it lends itself to examination at the tech-
nical level.
In general, the pros and cons of adding bisque clauses to aid loans
are the following:
PROS:
—The addition of bisque clauses to F.A.A., P.L. 480, and SSA loans
would not require legislation. However, prior consultations with key
congressional committees should be undertaken.
—A bisque clause is not a debt-relief device if it is written into the
original loan contract.
CONS:
—The financial benefit derived from adding bisque clauses to aid
loans would be very small, which means that an initiative of this nature
would get Group B little mileage in the dialog on debt.
—If introduced in the context of negotiations on debt relief, this
limited initiative would compromise the U.S. position on generalized
debt relief, making it more difficult to resist other LDC proposals.
—The G–77 would not view this initiative as being responsive to
their current debt problems.
B. AID CONSORTIA VS CREDITOR CLUBS
The U.S. has participated in negotiations to reschedule official and
officially-guaranteed external debts of a dozen developing countries on
more than twenty separate occasions since 1956. Except for India and
Pakistan—where extraordinary conditions pertained—these negotia-
tions took place in ad hoc creditor clubs convened when a debt crisis
clearly existed.
At UNCTAD IV in 1976, the U.S. announced that it would re-
schedule debt only in creditor clubs. This policy statement was a conse-
quence of an early decision to stop providing debt relief to India in the
Indian aid consortium. However, because of the precedents of India
and Pakistan, a question has arisen as to whether any exceptions to the
basic policy of rescheduling in creditor clubs should be allowed in the
future. The question is particularly relevant because Pakistan has for-

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
mally requested that debt relief be negotiated at the next meeting of its
aid consortium.
Although other creditors are willing to address ODA debt reor-
ganization in aid-consortia, debt renegotiation in aid-consortia poses
three serious problems for the USG:
(1) Aid-consortia are by definition concerned with the provision of
economic assistance, and dealing with debt through them suggests that
debt relief is being used as a substitute for aid.
(2) For the USG, debt relief is in addition to budgeted assistance.
This is not the case for most other creditors where debt relief constitutes
a portion of the aid budget and thus does not necessarily represent a
real increase in resource transfers. Thus on burden-sharing grounds,
the USG is placed at a disadvantage.
(3) The IMF “conditionality” of the creditor club exercise has been
much stricter than experienced in an aid-consortium.
The question arises, however, as to how the U.S. should respond to
a request for a consortium rescheduling by a debtor encountering fi-
nancial difficulties where ODA debt is a major element and other cred-
itors will not support creditor club action. The U.S. has three basic op-
tions for dealing with these situations:
(1) We can strictly adhere to a policy of rescheduling only in a cred-
itor club. This would place the U.S. at odds with other donors that are
willing to negotiate debt in aid consortia.
(2) The U.S. could consider a genuine request for a rescheduling in
an aid consortium by a debtor country to facilitate the treatment of
ODA debt problems in a creditor club; or introduce some creditor club
criteria, or conditionality into consortia arrangements.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
300.
Summary of Conclusions of a Policy Review Committee
Meeting1
SUBJECT
U.S. Debt Policies
PARTICIPANTS
State
Richard Cooper—Under Secretary for Economic Affairs
Robert Hormats—Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Business and Economic
Affairs
AID
Governor John Gilligan
David Bronheim—Special Assistant to the Administrator
Defense
Charles Duncan—Deputy Secretary
Ellen Frost—Deputy Assistant Secretary for International Economic Affairs, ISA
USUN
Ambassador Melissa Wells—Ambassador to UN for Economic Affairs
JCS
Lt. General William Y. Smith
NSC
Guy Erb—Staff Member
CIA
Dr. Robert Bowie—Deputy to the Director for National Intelligence
[name not declassified]—Analyst, Office of Economic Research
White House
David Aaron
OMB
Bowman Cutter—Executive Associate Director for Budget
Randy Jayne—Associate Director for National Security and International
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 68, PRC
House Situation Room. Erb sent the Summary of Conclusions to Brzezinski under cover
of a February 27 memorandum in which he noted that it “reflects the discussions after the
PRC meeting between Dick Cooper and Tony Solomon that resulted in a decision to sup-
port, if asked, the section of the Humphrey Bill on retroactive terms adjustment of the
debt of the least developed developing countries.” Erb reported that “[o]ther agencies
have agreed to approve the decision to support the debt section of the Humphrey Bill and
State, Treasury, and AID have approved the summary as it now stands.” (Ibid.) In
a February 27 memorandum to Aaron, Erb commented that “Treasury resisted change
hedgerow-by-hedgerow. State, AID, and NSC were in favor. OMB acquiesced, but with
little enthusiasm. Agriculture supported the decision. Defense was indifferent.” (Carter

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
Treasury
C. Fred Bergsten—Assistant Secretary for Monetary Affairs
Robert Pelikan—Director of Development Nations Finance
Agriculture
Howard W. Hjort—Director for Economic Policy Analysis and Budget
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
The PRC met on February 22, 1978 to discuss U.S. policy toward
the official debts of developing countries, and in particular (1) a forth-
coming meeting at the ministerial level of the Trade and Development
Board of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD) (March 6 through 10) that will discuss international debt
issues; and (2) Section 208 of the International Development Coopera-
tion Act of 1978 (Humphrey Bill), that would authorize the U.S. to ad-
just outstanding loans to the poorest countries, making them equiva-
lent to the grants that the U.S. now provides to those countries.
The US/EEC Proposal
The PRC considered possible U.S. actions regarding the debt pro-
posal that the United States and the EEC tabled at the Conference on In-
ternational Economic Cooperation last year. The PRC agreed that the
US/EEC proposal should be tabled at an appropriate moment during
the UNCTAD Ministerial meeting.
Retroactive Terms Adjustment
The PRC also considered the possibility of a case-by-case retroac-
tive adjustment of the terms of loans outstanding to least developed de-
veloping countries, or to those countries plus those eligible for credits
from the International Development Association.
The PRC agreed that the Administration, if asked, will support the
Humphrey Bill provisions on least developed country debt.2 The U.S.
delegation to the UNCTAD Ministerial will so state, in the context of
discussions of retroactive terms adjustment, and will indicate that U.S.
policy on this subject will depend on the outcome of the legislative
process.
Other Issues
The PRC also agreed to request further study of (1) the possible
role of aid consortia and creditor clubs in debt rescheduling operations;
and (2) whether clauses that allow a debtor to skip a few payments of
2 In a March 6 memorandum to Owen and Erb, Brzezinski noted that Carter had
“directed that in each case, we must assess the impact on the budget.” (Carter Library,
Economics)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
principal if it faces a debt servicing problem could be added to U.S. loan
contracts (bisque clauses).
301.
Memorandum From Guy Erb of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 7, 1978
SUBJECT
North-South Policies
Dick Cooper sent you a memo to follow-up his conversation with
you and Henry Owen concerning our North-South policies. (Tab A)2
After some discussion within the State Department, no reference was
made in the memo to implementation of policies announced by the last
Administration, e.g., the International Fund for Agricultural Develop-
ment and the IMF Trust Fund. The note is optimistic, and on specific
points is somewhat misleading. For example, its reference to a “gen-
erous offer” in the MTN refers to the average overall tariff cut that we
offered, 43 percent. The U.S. offers to most developing countries are
considerably lower, for example, Brazil—25 percent, India—33 percent,
cent, is an exception.
The report, U.S. Relations with the Developing Countries—1978, pre-
pared by the PRM 8 working group, gives a contrasting impression of
the state of our North-South policies. (Tab B)3 That report states that the
“honeymoon” is over between the United States and the developing
countries. After reviewing trade, foreign assistance, investment, and
arms sales, the PRM 8 report concludes that, “. . . we face a very difficult
set of issues, with few bright spots for 1978.”
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 27, PRM
page reads: “ZB has seen.” Copies were sent to Owen and the North/South Cluster of the
NSC Staff. The latter copy included an unidentified regional bureau report, presumably
at Tab A (see footnote 2 below).
2 Tab A, attached but not printed, comprises a February 23 memorandum from
Cooper to Brzezinski and an undated Department of State paper entitled “North-South
Activities of the Carter Administration.” The latter asserts that “[s]ince taking office the
Administration has pursued an active North-South policy.”
3 Tab B is attached but not printed.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
302.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, March 24, 1978
SUBJECT
Secretary Blumenthal’s Memo to You Regarding IFI Replenishments
1. Purpose. In the attached memorandum (Tab A),2 Secretary
Blumenthal:
a. discusses his general strategy regarding IFI replenishments, for
your background information;
b. recommends specific replenishments for the Asian and African
development banks.
My memorandum defines alternative responses for your consider-
ation, and records the views of other agencies.
I. General Strategy
2. Overall Level. Treasury describes three overall strategies re-
garding IFI replenishment, and favors the middle option: that the IFIs
should be replenished at a rate that would increase their real lending
resources by an average of 3–5% annually. The upper end of this range
would be consistent with your November decision that there should be
a substantial increase in multilateral aid between now and 19823 (as
would the high option: 7–9% real annual growth). Treasury is not now
asking you to choose among these options.
3. World Bank and Inter-American Development Bank. This average
conceals a marked divergence between what Treasury believes should
be done to replenish individual IFIs. For example:
a. Treasury favors a larger percentage increase for the World
Bank’s soft loan window (IDA) than for the World Bank, since it con-
siders that soft lending is more needed than hard lending in most de-
veloping areas.
b. Treasury favors a substantial increase for the Inter-American
Development Bank’s hard lending window, and a cut in its soft lending
window, since it considers that there is little need for soft lending in
Latin America.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
initialed “C” at the top of the page.
2 Tab A, attached but not printed, is a March 16 memorandum from Blumenthal to
Carter.
3 See the Attachment to Document 282.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Treasury is not now making recommendations regarding either of
these banks, since the staff work and international negotiations are not
sufficiently advanced. Treasury says that its recommendations on the
World Bank Group and the Inter-American Development Bank will
come to us in July or later. Some idea of the magnitudes involved can
be gained from this range of rounded annual appropriations, which
would have to be secured in FY 1982 for the World Bank and Inter-
American Development Bank under the high and low strategies de-
scribed by Treasury:
Low
High
World Bank Hard Lending
World Bank Soft Lending
Inter-American Bank Hard Lending
Inter-American Bank Soft Lending
II. Specific Recommendations
4. Timing. Treasury recommends that you now make decisions con-
cerning replenishment of two smaller banks:
a. The Asian Development Fund, on which we need to make our
decision known at a Board meeting April 22.
b. The African Development Fund, on which a decision is required
before April 30. You may wish to make our decision known during
your African trip.4 Nigeria is the Fund’s strongest supporter in Africa
and you may have an opportunity to meet briefly with Kwame
Fordwor, President of the African Development Bank, in Lagos.
Treasury will carry forward Congressional consultation about
each of these replenishments as soon as you have made your decisions.
Treasury is confident that, by phoning and meeting members during
the recess, it could complete the African Fund consultation in time to
permit you to announce this decision while you are in Africa. The
Asian Fund consultation will take longer, since a good deal more
money is involved and there has been less preparatory Congressional
consultation; if we begin immediately, Treasury indicates that we will
be able to meet the April 22 deadline.
OMB recommends in a memo at Tab B that you not make decisions
on these two banks until Treasury can develop fuller alternative strat-
egies for the IFIs as a whole, which you can review upon your return.5
5 Tab B, attached but not printed, is a March 24 memorandum from McIntyre to
Carter which reads: “Given the other replenishment decisions pending, I have strong res-
ervations about your making these two decisions in a piecemeal fashion. The entire

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
Cy Vance, Mike Blumenthal, and I recommend that you make this
decision now. While the discussion of alternative strategies in Treas-
ury’s memo could be amplified, I doubt this would contribute greatly
to your decision since the differences among options that you will be
reviewing in these two cases are not so large as to hinge on later deci-
sions you will be making regarding much larger World Bank and Inter-
American Development Bank replenishments. Delay would prevent
you from announcing the African Fund decision during your trip and
could make it difficult to complete Congressional and international
consultation regarding the Asian Bank before the April 22 Board
Meeting.
I share, however, OMB’s desire to secure early Treasury recom-
mendations concerning the general magnitude of World Bank and
Inter-American Development Bank replenishments. I recommend that
you authorize us to indicate to Treasury that you wish its recommenda-
tions on these two larger banks to be submitted in time to be considered
during OMB’s mid-May budget reviews.
Defer decision on Asian and African Development Funds. (OMB)
Decision on these Funds, as indicated below (Vance, Blumenthal,
Owen) and request Treasury to prepare strategy and recommendations
on World Bank and Inter-American Bank before spring budget review.6
5. Asian Development Fund
a. Treasury recommends US support for a four-year $1.8 billion
overall replenishment, requiring annual US appropriation requests of
lieves that this option strikes the best balance between international
and Congressional concerns.
b. The Vice President (who is interested because of his forthcoming Asian
trip),7 State, AID, and I recommend authority to agree to a four-year re-
plenishment of up to $2 billion, which would imply an annual US ap-
propriation request of $111 million annually. This course would be
more responsive to the desire of other donor countries (Japan, Ger-
many, UK, and Australia), who favor the $2.15 billion ADB replenish-
group of IFI decisions raises the fundamental problem with foreign development assist-
ance. On the one hand, you have indicated your desire for U.S. leadership in foreign aid
with substantial increases in the more effective programs, such as the IFIs. On the other,
Congress has shown strong hostility toward large foreign aid budget increases, particu-
larly for the IFIs, and may undercut your initiatives. Given this major dilemma, these IFI
replenishment decisions deserve your most careful consideration as a package with the
implications for bilateral aid also taken into account.”
6 Carter indicated his approval of both actions in this option.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
ment recommended by its management, which is efficient and could
put the money to good use. The difference between $100 and $111 mil-
lion annually would not be of great amount [account?] on the Hill,
where we have been told that any increase over the $60 million annual
level will cause problems.8
6. African Development Fund
a. Treasury and I recommend that the US offer a three-year contri-
million. This is larger than the overall 5% IFI replenishment rate dis-
cussed under I, above, or than suggested by a sense of the Senate reso-
lution, which called for a US contribution of 10.6% to this Bank.
Treasury believes the money can be well spent and is needed, since the
Bank is new; it also believes that the Congress will be receptive, since
the Black Caucus and other House and Senate supporters of aid to Af-
rica are favorable. My reason for opposing the larger US contribution
suggested below is that I am not clear more money could be put to
good use.9
b. State and AID recommend that the US offer to take a 20% share of
any replenishment of up to $750 million, which would result in a US
three-year contribution of up to $150 million. They support this option
because it would be more responsive to other countries’ desires and
would assure a US share roughly equivalent to that in other multilat-
eral banks.
In case you make decisions on the Asian and African Development
Funds now, OMB has no preference among or objection to any of the
above options, all of which it considers consistent with a middle-
of-the-road strategy.
8 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation.
9 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
303.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
North-South Dialogue, Energy, the Caribbean and Law of the Sea
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Terence A. Todman, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
W. Anthony Lake, Director, Policy Planning Staff
Robert A. Pastor, NSC Staff Member
Ambassador Viron P. Vaky
Guy F. Erb, NSC Staff Member
Venezuela
Carlos Andres Perez, President
Simon Bottaro Consalvi, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Manuel Perez Guerrero, Minister of State for International Economic Affairs
Valentin Acosta Hernandez, Minister of Energy and Mines
Carmelo Lesseur Lauria, Minister, Secretariat of the Presidency
Hector Hurtado, Minister of State, President of the Investment Fund
Ambassador Ignacio Iribarren
Dr. Reinaldo Figuerido, Director of Foreign Trade Institute
North/South
Saying he would like to exchange ideas on North-South matters,
Perez observed that President Carter’s administration had given an-
other cast to the dialogue. Recalling that the developing nations waited
for President Carter to take office before concluding the CIEC talks,
Perez noted that while the termination of CIEC was not entirely satis-
factory, nevertheless new perspectives opened up on such items
as the Common Fund and the debt problem. Even though the pro-
posals agreed upon were relatively modest, the U.S. had showed
understanding.
Since that time, however, virtually nothing has happened, and he
felt very pessimistic. Perez said he would be meeting with European
Chiefs of State in Jamaica in June. They would try to move the “hard
heart” of Germany’s Schmidt. The U.S. position, however, would be
key and the attitude of the United States could support other U.S. pol-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
flores Palace. Carter visited Caracas March 28–29. The portion of this memorandum of
conversation on energy is printed in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXVII, Energy

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
icies, in Africa, for example. Perez said he would like to have President
Carter’s evaluation of the situation.
President Carter said he had of course been in office a little more
than one year. He has nevertheless seen a common desire on part of
both the North and South to reach goals which were not incompatible
among themselves: Common Fund, commodity prices, debt forgive-
ness, increased aid. But our mutual desires have been frustrated by the
inability of the DC’s to negotiate with any semblance of order or mu-
tual understanding with 90 different nations. Each leader acted polit-
ically for his audience back home. Attention focused on the most rad-
ical demands or proposals. News media concentrated on leaders who
abused us the most. President Carter said he had discussed this
problem with Manley.2 There was an obvious need for a forum that
could work in a calm and objective atmosphere. This was the case, for
example, with the Common Fund. We were eager to contribute. We felt
that there was a major responsibility on the shoulders of those who buy
and sell commodities to reach agreements on these issues. But this was
almost impossible in a large group of over a hundred nations.
Until a procedural system could be set up to permit quiet negotia-
tions, differences will continue to be emphasized rather than coopera-
tion. We have, however, been unsuccessful so far. President Carter said
he was prepared to use his influence with the DC’s, and even the USSR,
to persuade them to contribute to solution of all these problems. We
feel frustrated, however, because of the desire, which we recognize is
legitimate, of everyone for a voice in the deliberations.
President Carter suggested that there could be two stages: a small
committee which could discuss these issues reasonably, draw up the
general lines of a proposal, and then make a presentation to a larger
group.
Perez Guerrero, speaking for Perez, noted that they shared Presi-
dent Carter’s perceptions, and especially those described in his speech
to the Venezuelan Congress.3 The world was in a profound crisis, not
one which would pass easily. It required mutual cooperation. You need
us, he said, and we certainly need you. He described the move in the
UN for adequate machinery and the eventual decision to move to the
committee of the whole. He appreciated the need for some kind of
two-step procedure and this is something to be considered.
Perez Guerrero then noted that Perez’ reference to Schmidt’s “hard
heart” should not be taken as meaning that was the only problem. We
2 See Document 294.
3 Carter addressed the Venezuelan Congress on March 29; for the text of his speech,
see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book I,

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
have the impression, he said, that even the U.S. at times was more in-
clined to defend the status quo than create new solutions. There
seemed to be at times those who looked to poverty as the problem
rather than to structural changes. But while poverty and the need for
aid should be attended to, a change in the rules of the game to permit
nations to develop more equitably was also important. The necessary
changes could take place gradually.
Attention necessarily focused on the U.S. and on how it handled
economic and fiscal problems. How was the U.S. handling the critical
monetary problem, for example? Can you do that and balance the
budget?
President Carter said that we had to move from confrontation to ne-
gotiation. We have seemed defensive because we have had to respond
to loud attacks. Many past Presidents, including Nixon and Ford, were
prepared to cooperate more with the developing world than the
Congress. The Congress, very sensitive to the mood of the people,
reacted to condemnations of us. When they heard such attacks their
perception was that aid was not only not appreciated but not wanted.
Hence, they were unwilling to authorize some major moves that were
needed.
President Carter, responding directly to the question of the mone-
tary crisis, said that the U.S. has a sound and strong economy with no
basic weakness. He cited GNP and other indicators. We have deliber-
ately tried, he said, to keep growth high. OPEC nations, he noted, had a
positive trade balance of $40 billion. This had to be absorbed by the rest
of the world. Germany and Japan had positive balances. Our trade, he
noted, was negative by over $30 billion.
President Carter noted several factors that should lead to a strength-
ening of the dollar. Interest rates would be higher in the U.S. this year,
leading to greater investment in-flows. There would be no increase in
oil import levels in 78. Last year our economic growth averaged three
percent higher than our major trading partners. This year that gap will
narrow because other nations’ economies are growing faster. We are
more aware of the need to act to stabilize the dollar in times of market
disorder, and we have worked out agreements with Germany and
Japan in this regard. Had oil prices been pegged to the SDR during re-
cent years, President Carter noted, OPEC would have earned less.
The U.S. will seek continued growth; we expect to balance the
budget by 1980, but it may not be balanced before that. We hope to
have an energy bill passed shortly giving us an overall energy policy
for the first time.
We have confidence in the strength of the U.S. economy, Perez
said. What worries us is that the North/South dialogue has stagnated.
We have talked about ways of moving the dialogue forward in the UN.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
The G–77 has pressed for an open forum. No decisions have been made
to carry out the limited agreements of CIEC. Concern over the poor is
understood, but poverty is a symptom not a cause. We understand,
Perez continued, the U.S. efforts to decrease consumption of oil; it is
difficult to become more austere. But concretely, Perez said, how do we
put our mutual ideas into practice? How do we make progress on such
items as the Common Fund or debt?
President Carter said that the U.S. for its part often has the impres-
sion that the G–77 wants all or nothing. Its demands often seem so
strict, its condemnation so severe, that it apparently does not under-
stand the practical limitations that do exist. We would welcome, he
said, through Under Secretary Cooper or the Secretary of State or some
other official to describe what we have done, what our plans are, what
our practical problems and limitations are so that mutual under-
standing will be enhanced. We are prepared, for example, to make
various types of aid available such as food. Perhaps we could work out
a plan that the DC’s could carry out sequentially. But we feel that our
limits have not been comprehended by others.
Perez said that we are in a vicious cycle. Whenever the LDC’s talk
of cooperation, the U.S. talks of aid. The U.S. concept is anchored to aid.
This is important, of course, but more important is to cooperate on
changing relationships, so that countries can overcome the need for aid.
Charity is not the answer. Cooperation to establish better relationships
in major economic interactions is what is needed. What is needed is not
always food, but technology to grow it. Often with food aid, pur-
chasing and production power is reduced. Perez cited trade as an ex-
ample. While on the one hand the U.S. spoke of loaning money or pro-
viding aid, protectionism seemed to be rising in the U.S. Increased
trade barriers will only make imbalances and poverty worse and the
need for aid greater.
President Carter noted that the U.S. had taken the lead in the MTN.
Negotiations were being pushed by us. LDC support of our efforts to
lower trade barriers would be helpful. The French would not even
discuss the issue until after the elections.4 The Japanese and the
Germans have been reluctant to get involved. If the U.S. Congress
knew that the LDC’s were willing to cooperate, they might take a dif-
ferent view.
At the President’s request, Secretary Vance then reviewed the
various items in the North/South agenda. On debt, he noted that lim-
ited progress had been made at the recent UNCTAD meeting; more
could have been made had there been better preparation by the partici-
4 Apparently a reference to the elections for the French National Assembly held on
March 12 and 19.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
pants. But progress here would depend upon working out possible for-
mulae in smaller groups.
On the Common Fund, the Secretary said, the trouble is the
“second window”. We are fairly close together on the “first window”.
Some work was done in UNCTAD, but the next step is to work on the
second window concept, since this was symbolic as well as substantive.
Here again perhaps a smaller group could get things started. We
should make that the next step due to the importance of the Common
Fund.
On the financial side, replenishments for the IFI’s were of major
importance. Support for this would assist in persuading Congress to
take favorable action on these replenishments. In trade, the key sector
was the MTN. LDC support in this was important. (Perez Guerrero in-
terjected that the U.S. had worked more with the other DC’s on this
than with the LDC’s.) Finally, there should be some cooperation and
consideration for refining the structure of the overview committee.
President Carter suggested that Under Secretary Cooper might
meet with comparable officials of a few other nations, including Vene-
zuela and Jamaica, for quiet consultations. At this staff level issues
could be defined and analyzed for the information of the leaders in a
quiet way.
Perez said that was a good idea, but it should be done with discre-
tion so that others could not accuse us of “running things”. In this con-
nection, Perez said, the role of Algeria, as Chairman of the Overview
Committee, is important. Despite some of their strong views, its leaders
were responsible and practical and should be included.
President Carter mentioned that several other leaders, even the
Saudis and Sadat, had suggested that we work with Boumediene.
[Omitted here is discussion of energy, the Caribbean, and the Law
of the Sea.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
304.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, May 19, 1978
SUBJECT
A Strategy For the Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs) Into the Eighties
As you requested, we have developed a proposed strategy for the
MDBs into the 1980s. To facilitate planning, I am seeking your approval of
an overall strategy for all the MDBs and a preliminary U.S. position for up-
coming replenishments in the largest banks—the International Develop-
ment Association (IDA), the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (IBRD), and the Inter-American Development Bank
(IDB). Your decisions on the Asian Development Fund (ADF) and the
African Development Fund (AFDF) have already been made,2 and suc-
cessfully negotiated internationally. My recommendations are agreed by
all agencies, with one exception as noted.
IDA
The principal multilateral component of your program to increase
U.S. concessional aid should be a major expansion of IDA, in which the
an expansion is essential to approach your overall aid target of $10 billion by
FY 82.
At this level, IDA would be able to almost double its programs aimed
at the poorest people in the poorest countries with almost 50% of lending
related directly to food production. It will be able to exercise maximum lev-
erage for appropriate policies in recipient countries. Our participation at
this level would induce other donors to maximize their contributions. It
would make a major contribution to the overall U.S. posture in the
North-South dialogue.3
1 Source: Department of the Treasury, Office of the Secretary, Executive Secretariat,
under cover of a May 18 memorandum from Bergsten, who noted that Carter had re-
quested the memorandum “for the mid-year budget review, to lay out our overall
strategy for the MDBs as part of total U.S. foreign assistance strategy for 1979 and be-
yond.” Bergsten also noted that Treasury officials had “worked out the memo in some
detail with NSC (Henry Owen) and OMB, and believe they will support our proposal.”
2 See Document 302.
3 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
World Bank
We should seek a $40 billion General Capital Increase (GCI) in the
Bank to expand its real lending by 5 percent annually for about six years,
maintaining its position as the central agent of global development.
Such a contribution would enable us to maximize our leverage in the
bank.
Annual appropriations of $1.6 billion would be needed during FY
82–87, if there is a continued need to appropriate callable capital—an issue
on which we are now working with key Congressional leaders. In any
event, however, budget outlays would be only 0 to 10 percent of this total be-
cause of the large callable capital component.
With this increase, the Bank could support continued rapid growth in
the upper and middle income LDCs and provide a much needed “cushion”
for them against many uncertainties in the world economy such as
shortfalls in private capital flows. The cost to us is only two cents for every
dollar of lending, because of burden-sharing among donor countries and
the Bank’s heavy reliance on borrowing from the private capital
markets. The major alternative is to limit the GCI to $30 billion, but this
would greatly reduce the impact of our pledge—with only a slight re-
duction in the annual appropriation request and cutting only one year
off the replenishment period.4
Inter-American Development Bank
In the upcoming IDB replenishment, we should support 7 percent
annual real growth in the Ordinary Capital (OC) while reducing modestly
the size of the Fund for Special Operations (FSO) because there is little need
for highly concessional funds in Latin America. The net result would be a
virtually unchanged level of total IDB lending, with a shift from softer
to harder terms due to the rapid economic improvement of most Latin
American countries. From FY 80–83, annual U.S. appropriations would
be $661 million for the OC and $150 million for the FSO.
State prefers to hold the FSO at current levels ($200 million annually)
and increase OC lending by 10% annually ($720 million) in order to pro-
vide some increase in total IDB activity. They believe that the cutbacks
which I propose would have adverse effects on overall U.S. policy toward Latin
America.
Approve my proposal
Prefer State proposal
4 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.
5 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
General Discussion
While I am seeking authority for specific U.S. pledges to the re-
plenishments, we need to retain a certain degree of negotiating flexibility to
adjust to the position of other donors and maximize our leverage on
key policy issues, and to take into account subsequent Congressional
views. We should be able to move our pledges plus or minus about
$200 million annually in IDA, perhaps $100 million annually in the IDB,
and to a lower level in the World Bank. The recommended figures, how-
ever, represent the preferred outcome on which we would seek agreement with
the Congress and then negotiate internationally.
These recommendations would permit the MDBs to continue to
serve priority U.S. interests. Aggregate growth in MDB lending will
keep pace with LDC growth, enabling the banks to maintain their share
of total aid flows and thus their policy leverage. This leverage will in-
creasingly be oriented towards improved basic human needs (BHN)
policies by recipients, as well as more BHN projects. Our human needs
and human rights objectives will be furthered by this emphasis. More
projects will also be developed in the priority area of energy and raw
materials.
These recommendations have taken fully into account our Congressional
difficulties with MDB appropriations. In fact, I am encouraged by the pros-
pects for making good on the bulk of our existing arrearages ($835 million)
over the course of this year and next, if we continue to work hard with the
Congress on the issue. These numbers may, however, result in future
arrearages, especially for IDA. My proposals would produce the fol-
lowing appropriations levels for the future:
($ millions)
Bank
Actual
Request
Est.
Est.
Est.
FY 78
FY 79
FY 80
FY 81
FY 82
IBRD
IDA
IDB
Subtotal
Others
Total
produces budget outlays in any event. [Footnote in the original.]
7 Includes $835 million of arrearages. In practice, makeup will be split between FY
79 and FY 80, thereby smoothing the annual appropriation trend. [Footnote in the
original.]
produces budget outlays in any event. [Footnote in the original.]

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
If you approve my recommendations, our FY 82 appropriations level will
nating the need to appropriate callable capital, the FY 82 level would be only
sional support for these figures will be difficult to achieve and will re-
quire a maximum political effort by the Administration each year.
However, if successful, there will be major benefits for our interna-
tional economic policy and for overall U.S. foreign policy.
W. Michael Blumenthal9
Attachment10
9 Printed from a copy that bears Blumenthal’s stamped signature “Mike” above this
typed signature.
above), Bergsten noted: “A longer background paper is also attached, which elaborates
on the issues in the memo for the President and will be submitted to OMB to provide de-
tailed backup.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
305.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, June 15, 1978
SUBJECT
Legislative Constraints on Foreign Assistance
Secretary Vance’s memo at Tab A, prepared at your request,2
transmits a detailed list (Tab 1) of existing legislative constraints on our
authority to carry out U.S. military and economic assistance programs
and a list of proposed renewals or new constraints (Tab 2).3 He also rec-
ommends actions to deal with these restraints.
This list offers persuasive evidence that your complaint about leg-
islative interference is well founded. Secretary Vance points out that
the restrictions fall into three general categories:
1. Conditional Restrictions. These are provisions that allow certain
actions to be taken only if it is first determined that specified criteria are
met and that the Congress is so informed.
2. Prohibitions. These prevent the granting of assistance by naming
countries explicitly or by setting forth criteria that trigger such action
automatically.
3. Congressional Veto. Some restrictions provide for Congressional
approval or veto of actions you propose to take.
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
Hutcheson, who wrote: “The attached memorandum was received by my office midday
today. Dr. Brzezinski’s office has requested that you review this memo at your soonest
convenience as the State Department must testify on Monday [June 19]. Due to time con-
straints, I have been unable to get thorough White House staff review of this memo, par-
ticularly from Frank Moore’s office. This is being forwarded to you at this time for your
information.” (Ibid.)
2 During a May 25 news conference in Chicago, Carter made a statement on foreign
assistance programs in which he said: “Some of the legislation governing these foreign
aid programs has the effect of placing very narrow limits on where and when they can be
used. Some of these limitations, though they were enacted many years ago and under
special circumstances, continue to be entirely appropriate and advisable today. Others
may be outmoded. For that reason, I have concluded that we should review the full range
of legislation which now governs the operation of these programs. I’ve asked the Secre-
tary of State to conduct this review and to consult with Congress constantly in preparing
the study for me. We want to take a careful look at whether our legislation and proce-
dures are fully responsive to the challenges that we face today.” For the text of Carter’s
statement, as well as the ensuing question-and-answer session with members of the
press, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book I, pp.
972–979. No written request to Vance to undertake this review was found.
3 Neither of the tabs to Vance’s memorandum was attached.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
Secretary Vance recommends that we concentrate on resisting new
restrictions and on avoiding renewal of those that would otherwise ex-
pire. This makes sense.
Secretary Vance also proposes we consult with the Congress on the
possibility of introducing floor amendments to pending bills to remove
certain restrictions during this session of Congress. This course seems
to OMB, NSC staff, and me to involve serious problems:
—In almost all cases, floor amendments to pending bills would re-
quire an intensive lobbying effort by the Administration.
—This is probably not the proper moment for raising such new
budgetary issues as a Security Assistance contingency fund and ex-
panded military assistance, in light of your concern about budget disci-
pline and our current aid troubles on the Hill.
—We need to review the restrictions in detail and obtain the views
of all interested agencies before deciding which to try to repeal. Then
we can undertake the Congressional consultations that Secretary Vance
recommends.
Accordingly, OMB, NSC staff, and I have recommended to State
that when Secretary Vance testifies Monday before the House Interna-
tional Relations Committee4 to provide an overview of the Administra-
tion’s foreign policy and an assessment of the legislative restrictions,
he:
—focus on the present legislative constraints, citing some that seri-
ously interfere with the conduct of U.S. foreign policy;
—avoid giving the impression that the Administration is seeking
repeal of all restrictions, without regard to underlying Congressional
concern;
—emphasize that the list should serve as a basis for joint Execu-
tive/Legislative branch consultations, and offer to work with Congress
to see what should be done to improve present legislation and drop un-
necessary constraints;
—reiterate our opposition to the new restraints proposed in the FY
79 aid bills;
—stress the importance of adequate funding for AID and IFI’s and
the need to resist unjustified budgetary cuts in ongoing programs,
since the meat-axe approach to aid funding is as much of a restraint on
U.S. policy as the specific restrictions set forth in present legislation;
—lay the groundwork for a major Administration effort during the
next budget cycle to “remove the barnacles” on U.S. economic and mili-
tary assistance programs.
We will work with State on this testimony and move promptly to
coordinate an Administration position on the proposals set forth in the
attached memo, as well as other questions regarding these restrictions.
4 Vance’s June 19 statement focused on U.S.-Soviet relations and U.S. policies in Af-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Tab A
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter5
Washington, June 10, 1978
SUBJECT
Legislative Constraints on Foreign Assistance
This is a report on our review of legislative constraints on au-
thority to carry on military and economic assistance programs. It in-
cludes recommendations of short-range and long-range efforts to head
off further constraints and revise the existing laws.
I. Existing Legislation
The authority to conduct programs of military and economic
assistance is derived primarily from two basic statutes, the Foreign As-
sistance Act of 1961 and the Arms Export Control Act (originally
enacted in 1968). The Foreign Assistance Act governs bilateral eco-
nomic assistance programs and grants of military equipment and
training. The Arms Export Control Act governs foreign military sales
and financing, as well as the licensing of commercial arms exports.
Both of these statutes originally were drafted in broad terms. In re-
cent years, Congress has perceived that there has been abuses of the au-
thority granted under those broad statutes. That, coupled with a Con-
gressional desire for more active involvement in foreign policy matters,
has spawned a gradually increasing array of statutory prohibitions,
conditions, reporting requirements and complex procedures. The cu-
mulative effect of these constraints has been to make assistance pro-
grams more cumbersome and inflexible, and less effective as foreign
policy instruments.
At Tab 1 is a compilation of existing restraints. While it does not
purport to include every provision that might be characterized as a
constraint, it does illustrate graphically the extent to which and the
ways in which the conduct of foreign relations of the United States can
be regulated and controlled by legislation. While constraints imposed
by other laws have been included, most of the restrictions enumerated
relate to the Foreign Assistance and Arms Export Control Acts.
5 No classification marking. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Cy—Consult &
minimize restrictions as much as you can. No time for me to decide now on each item.
Consult with Baker and Rhodes also. J.” Senator Howard Baker (R–Tennessee) was
Senate Minority Leader and Congressman John Rhodes (R–Arizona) was House Mi-
nority Leader.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
As illustrated by the attached compilation, the existing statutory
constraints take many forms and address a wide range of subjects.
However, from the standpoint of their effect on military and economic
assistance as implements of foreign policy, they fall into three general
categories.
The first type consists of conditional restrictions—provisions of
law which allow certain actions to be taken only if it is first determined
that specified criteria are met and Congress is informed. (The statute
which required your recent determination on assistance to Zaire is an
example.)6 This type of restraint is intended to assure Congress that po-
tentially controversial actions will be subject to high-level approval
within the Executive Branch and that Congress will be informed of the
decision in a timely way so that it can make its views known. These
statutes may delay or impede action, but usually do not prevent you
from carrying out programs you regard as important.
The second type of constraint is the prohibition against providing
assistance. Some of these name specific countries as ineligible for U.S.
assistance. Others refer to types of conduct (e.g., severance of diplo-
matic relations) that result in ineligibility. In either event, they may op-
erate to prevent furnishing of assistance which is otherwise within the
scope of your general statutory authority.
The third group is comprised of provisions for Congressional veto
or approval of actions you propose to take. (Examples are major arms
sales and nuclear exports.)
Many statutory prohibitions either provide for the possibility of
waiver, or are subject to your general authority to waive most prohibi-
tions against programs under the Foreign Assistance Act. Some waiv-
able constraints are enacted with the expectation that they will be
waived and, as a practical matter, fall into the category of conditional
restrictions described above. In some cases, however, even though a
waiver would be legally possible the political cost would be very high.
For example, the thirty-day Congressional review for major arms sale
proposals may be waived and the sale made immediately in any case
where “the President states . . . that an emergency exists which requires
such sale in the national security interests of the United States.” In the
four years that the Congressional review procedure has been in effect,
this waiver authority has never been exercised.
6 In accordance with the International Security Assistance Act of 1977, Carter issued
military and economic aid to Zaire was in the interests of U.S. national security. For the
text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book I,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
II. Next Steps
In your May 25 statement, you indicated that any proposal for
modification to the existing law would await our review of all restric-
tions and consultations with the appropriate committees of Congress.
At the same time, you expressed your intention to oppose any further
restrictions.
It is very late in the legislative cycle to propose major changes in
the pending bills. Committee work has been completed on all five FY
1979 bills (development assistance and security assistance authoriza-
tions in each house, and foreign assistance appropriations in the
House); the House has passed its development bill, and floor action on
all of the others will probably occur in the next few weeks.
This means that any legislative initiative at this time would have to
take the form of floor amendments to the pending bills. The prospects
for success of floor amendments are always difficult to judge, and
success or failure is highly visible. Careful preparation is therefore es-
sential. Moreover, once a bill is opened up with proposed floor amend-
ments, there is an increased risk that others will also propose amend-
ments of their own.
III. Short-Range Recommendations
I recommend that we now concentrate primarily on minimizing
new restrictions and on avoiding the renewal of those that would oth-
erwise expire. (At Tab 2 is a list of principal constraint provisions in FY
1979 foreign assistance bills pending in Congress.) We therefore should
initiate immediate consultations with Congress to determine whether it
would be feasible to propose floor amendments to the pending bills. In
these consultations, we would try to determine whether any initiatives
at this time would undermine other objectives of the Administration’s
legislative program (e.g., repeal of the Turkish arms embargo), detract
from our efforts to resist new restrictions, or dissipate Congressional
support for a more comprehensive revision of the legislation at a later
date. I would begin the consultations by discussing our approach with
Bob Byrd and Tip O’Neill.7
If you agree that we should begin consultations with the Congress
on the possibility of introducing floor amendments to pending bills, I
recommend the following proposals as worthy of consideration:
1. Economic Development and Security Supporting Assistance for the
Same Country.
The Senate development assistance bill retains an existing prohibi-
tion against long-term development assistance and short-term eco-
7 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
nomic support (security supporting assistance) for the same country.
The bill passed by the House repeals this prohibition. A floor amend-
ment in the Senate to repeal this prohibition would avoid the likelihood
of Senate Foreign Relations Committee insistence on its retention when
the bill goes to conference. This would increase our ability to respond
to immediate economic needs without foregoing longer term develop-
ment projects. Some members are certain to oppose this amendment as
a “politicization” of aid.8
2. Contingency Fund.
Economic Assistance:
The House security assistance bill authorizes $10 million for the
Foreign Assistance Act’s economic assistance contingency fund. The
Senate bill authorizes only $2.5 million. Unless the Senate bill is
amended on the floor, a compromise in conference (probably $3 to $5
million) is likely. We would need to explore with the Congressional
leadership whether a major increase in the contingency fund (of up to
$50 million) could be achieved without incurring a reduction in some
other program. However, strong opposition to an increased contin-
gency fund can be expected, based on Congressional reluctance to pro-
vide funds without a specific intended use in mind. Those who work
most closely with the Congressional Committees believe that we would
be fortunate to achieve $10 million.9
Military Assistance:
The Foreign Assistance Act authorizes the President to draw on
Defense Department stocks for emergency military assistance needs in-
volving vital U.S. security interests. Grants up to $67.5 million may be
made in any fiscal year under this authority, subject to the same con-
straints as apply to other military assistance. However, the availability
of this authority in any year requires appropriation act language. This
latter requirement, added in 1976, has never been met because of Ap-
propriations Committee opposition and, therefore, you cannot exercise
this authority. Some members would strongly oppose a floor amend-
ment to permit the use of this authority. They would argue that it
is a form of a contingency fund and is also a possible opening for
the resumption of grant military assistance programs Congress has
terminated.10
8 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation.
9 Carter underlined the phrase “achieve $10 million.” He indicated his approval of
the recommendation.
10 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
3. Waiver Authority.
You have authority under section 614(a) of the Foreign Assistance
Act to waive most limitations contained in the Foreign Assistance Act
and in acts appropriating funds for Foreign Assistance Act programs.
However, this waiver authority does not apply to constraints unless
they are in the Foreign Assistance Act or an appropriations act. Thus,
country specific prohibitions in the annual appropriation acts may be
waived to allow assistance under the Foreign Assistance Act, but not
under any other law. (Had Zaire not paid its delinquent debt, assist-
ance would have been prohibited by the appropriations act. This prohi-
bition could have been waived to provide economic assistance under
the Foreign Assistance Act, but not military credits under the Arms Ex-
port Control Act.) We should attempt by consultation to determine
whether a broadened waiver authority would be supported in
Congress, in view of the likely opposition to what would be widely
seen as an erosion of hard won Congressional powers.11
IV. Long-Range Recommendations
Together with Congressional Committees, we are beginning an ex-
tensive revision of the foreign assistance legislation for the next session
that will simplify and restructure the applicable legal requirements. In
this process we will strive for a better balance between Congressional
oversight needs and Executive requirements for flexible authority, in-
cluding sufficient authority to be able to deploy foreign assistance re-
sources rapidly to serve priority foreign policy needs. This effort will be
coordinated with other agencies. We plan intensive consultations with
a view to developing legislative revisions that both the Administration
and the Congress can endorse. We hope that the new legislation will be
ready for the new Congress.
In addition, I have asked the Department to study the effect of
these constraints on the ability of American companies to sell their
goods and services abroad.12
11 Carter highlighted the portion of this paragraph that begins with “but not mili-
tary credits” through the end of the paragraph. He indicated his approval of the
recommendation.
12 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
306.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of Second Multilateral Meeting in Panama
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Andrew Young, U.S. Representative to the U.N.
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Warren Christopher, Deputy Secretary of State
Terence Todman, Assistant Secretary of State
Robert A. Pastor, NSC Staff Member (note taker)
President Carlos Andres Perez, Venezuela
Simon Consalvi Bottaro, Minister of Foreign Affairs for Venezuela
President Alfonso Lopez Michelsen, Colombia
Virgilio Barco, Colombian Ambassador to the U.S.
Prime Minister Michael Manley, Jamaica
P.J. Patterson, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Trade and Tourism for
Jamaica
Omar Torrijos, Chief of Government, Panama
Nicolas Gonzalez Revilla, Minister of Foreign Relations for Panama
Rafael Angel Calderon Fournier, Minister of Foreign Relations for Costa Rica
(Other members of other governments’ delegations attended but are not
identified.)
Prime Minister Manley opened the second session by referring to
the frustration he felt on the primordial issue of the North-South dia-
logue. There has been no practical results yet from the Paris meeting.2
In trying to understand the causes of the failure, he said that he attrib-
uted it to the interaction of two groups—the industrialized countries
and the oil-producing countries—who saw the North-South dialogue
as merely a way to bargain with each other. The industrialized coun-
tries were saying that if they could receive fair prices for oil, then they
could consider large transfers of resources. The oil-producing countries
said that if international institutions could be reformed, then they
would consider transfer of resources, provided also that there were
greater resources transferred from the industrialized countries.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Panama Hotel. Carter was in Panama City June 16–17 to sign the protocol confirming the
exchange of documents ratifying the Panama Canal Treaties. The memorandum of con-
versation of the first multilateral meeting, held the evening of June 16, is ibid.
2 See Document 265.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
To summarize, Manley said that the developing world got “caught
in the door, and the result is a terrible crisis”. The overall effect is a se-
rious slowing down of the world economy, but what is painful for the
industrialized countries is disastrous to the developing world.
Manley suggested that we pause to look at the non-oil-producing
developing world. As the tendency grows toward protectionism, there
is a hesitancy on the part of important industrialized countries to reach
the point of practical action in the North-South dialogue.
There are many developed countries, Manley said, that are finally
beginning to realize the deleterious impact on their economies of the in-
ability of developing countries to expand their own economies. Indus-
trialized countries are beginning to learn that they cannot sell if the de-
veloping countries cannot buy.
Manley suggested a practical solution to this problem in a compre-
hensive context. Fundamentally, the need is to effect the terms of trade.
This has four components: First, the Common Fund is the first practical
attempt to look at this problem in structural terms. Energy must also be
included. Secondly, transfer of resources. Thirdly, reform of multilat-
eral institutions, particularly the International Monetary Fund. Fourth,
debt.
If we could arrive at a simultaneous response to each of these four
elements that would mean important progress in the North-South
dialogue.
Jamaica had been working on two areas. First it had been trying to
move its own approach from one of generalities into one of practical so-
lutions. There has been some progress. Secondly, internationally, it had
done some work recently among the Commonwealth countries within
the context of the trade negotiations in Geneva, and it believes that has
been effective. At the same time, Jamaica has been using its strategic
position in the Non-Aligned Movement to press socialist countries to
be more forthcoming on North-South issues since they just cannot ig-
nore them any more.
Manley urged President Carter to look at two sets of negotiations:
First, the Bonn Summit in July,3 where he urged President Carter to
make sure that the leaders at the Summit will not exclude agricultural
products from the trade negotiations. Also, he asked that he use the
Bonn Summit for helping push forward the UNCTAD negotiations,
which will begin in mid-September. He stressed the importance of the
UNCTAD negotiations in achieving structural reform with regard to
commodity trade.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
President Carter said that Manley had addressed the problems of
North-South relations in a very profound way. There is no doubt, he
said, that “I, as well as other leaders of the industrialized countries,
have not given adequate attention to the developing world. I have not.”
But as a person who deeply cares about this issue, I will try. But at the
same time, the developing countries could help. In the multilateral
trade negotiations, Colombia and Venezuela could play a much more
active role than they are playing right now. The problems of agriculture
are not really with the U.S., but with the European community. Your
voices could be very constructive.
The Non-Aligned Movement could be much more helpful if it
were much more independent than it is right now. The U.S. feels that
it is being captured more and more by the Cubans. By no stretch of
the imagination can Cuba realistically be considered a non-aligned
country. If the Non-Aligned Movement is to keep its independence and
its objectiveness, then it must consider which path it will take in the
future.
At the last summit in London,4 President Carter said, there was a
constructive feeling on our part as well as on the part of the Federal Re-
public of Germany, but the developing countries have since rejected
anything but a total compliance with their own demands. There needs
to be a phased implementation of an overall plan based on principles
that we all agree to. He suggested that this be done in the new Com-
mittee of the Whole of the United Nations.
The President then said that his own conclusion is that he should
work much more with leaders like Prime Minister Manley and Presi-
dent Perez and others to sketch out points of agreement as well as
points of disagreement. It is only by doing this that he could see clearly
what steps the developed countries need to take. Only then could he
use his own position as a leader with the industrialized countries and
also to the OPEC nations—particularly the wealthy ones, like Vene-
zuela. He said that he would use his influence with both groups to see
that these steps are taken. He said that it is necessary to take advantage
of the goodwill on both sides and leave aside the radical rhetoric that
sometimes is used in the Group of 77. It is this rhetoric which the U.S.
Congress and the American people hear. We feel that our contributions
to the World Bank and to the Inter-American Development Bank are
neither understood nor appreciated by the developing countries. There
is a need in the U.S. for some recognition of our contributions. This
would be extremely helpful to the U.S. Congress. Excessive rhetoric or
demands by the developing countries makes it more difficult to discuss
these issues in the Congress.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
The President then suggested that we follow up this meeting, and
he pledged that he would take a more active role and have an analysis
drafted of the points of agreement as well as the points of disagree-
ment. This memo would go to the Bonn Summit with specific recom-
mendations on positions which the industrialized countries should
take at the September UNCTAD meeting.
The President then asked for Prime Minister Manley’s analysis and
those of the others of whether the United States and other industrial-
ized countries should channel their financial contributions through the
multilateral development banks or through other means.
The President said that the United States is trying to sustain its
growth as a way of helping the world economy and the developing
countries. He said that the United States and other industrialized coun-
tries are bringing the leading and more prosperous developing coun-
tries—including OPEC—into more important roles in international in-
stitutions, such as the World Bank. He alluded to the U.S. friendship
with Saudi Arabia and Iran as helpful in this regard. He said that they
now want to participate more actively in these organizations. A second
objective of his economic program is to reduce inflation. He said the
Germans are particularly concerned about this, but that we are making
progress.
With regard to energy, he said that the United States is almost the
largest energy producer as well as consumer in the world. For a long
period, the producer interests in the United States have had the polit-
ical power in Congress. It is therefore difficult to develop an overall en-
ergy policy, but he was hopeful that it would be done.
In summary, the President said that he would try to make a clear
presentation at Bonn and that he would be responsible for not only the
presentation, but ultimately for the implementation of the new posi-
tions. Furthermore, he will make sure that the September UNCTAD
meetings will have our complete participation and constructive leader-
ship. At the same time, however, he asked that the Group of 77 mod-
erate their rhetoric and put the discussions onto a more constructive
plane. He believes that we have finally reached a point where we can
make progress.
In closing, the President reaffirmed his hope that the governments
who are present at this meeting would take a strong role in the multi-
lateral trade negotiations, in the GATT, and in the Non-Aligned Move-
ment because their leadership in some ways is much more effective
than what the United States can do. The President said that he has not
been in office very long, but he has begun to see the problems which
Prime Minister Manley described as very profound. Americans are a
very generous people and they would like to be helpful. As for himself,

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
the President said that he will take a more responsible and active role in
these North-South issues from then on.
President Perez then expressed his absolute solidarity with Prime
Minister Manley’s words. Since President Carter was elected, we have
been hearing from the U.S. a voice of sincerity and a will to contribute
to these actions which we have not heard before. It is true that the tone
is not always appropriate in our rhetoric, but often times other consid-
erations play a part in this. At the same time, however, Perez believes
that we have reached a grave situation. On the one hand, the industrial-
ized countries appear to be becoming preoccupied with East-West
problems and have begun to ignore North-South issues, which are
more profound. If this continues, the President is likely to hear screams
instead of rhetoric. President Perez said that he fears that we will move
backward, and he said that he hopes that President Carter will stimu-
late his advisors instead of quieting them.
President Carter responded by saying that he would like to have
someone representing himself take an outline of what he intends to
propose in Bonn. After consulting with Deputy Secretary Christopher,
he said that probably would be Dick Cooper.
Prime Minister Manley confirmed that the first documents would be
coming from the United States.
Then President Carter said that we would try to get a document to
the Jamaicans as early as we can so that we have time to discuss this
issue before the Summit. He very much valued Prime Minister
Manley’s comments on this document and repeated that he wanted to
present the points of agreement, the points of disagreement, and within
the latter, our position and the G–77 position. He said that he wanted
Prime Minister Manley to correct our interpretation of the G–77 posi-
tion if that was warranted.
307.
Editorial Note
In his June 22, 1978, Evening Report to President Jimmy Carter,
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance discussed the status of the bilateral con-
sultations on North-South issues to which Carter and Jamaican Prime
Minister Michael Manley had agreed during their June 17 discussion in
Panama City (see Document 306). Vance reported that the Under Secre-
tary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard Cooper, would travel to Ja-
maica in July for the proposed consultations. In the meantime, the De-
partment of State had given Jamaican Foreign Minister P.J. Patterson

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
“papers which describe the US position and what we believe to be the
Group of 77 position on major international economic issues, and what
we believe to be areas of agreement and disagreement. Subjects cov-
ered include trade, resource transfers, commodities, monetary issues,
debt, technology transfer, illicit payments and multinational corpora-
tions. The Jamaicans will comment on these papers before Cooper sees
Patterson.” In the margin adjacent to this section of Vance’s report,
Carter wrote: “Keep me informed with an outline of the issues.” (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Eight papers on North-South issues were given to Patterson on
June 23; copies of all eight are attached to a June 23 memorandum by
Alexander Watson, Director of the Office of Development Finance in
the Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs, Department of State.
(Memorandum from Watson to Cooper and other Department of State
principals; National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff,
Records of the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard
Carter subsequently sent all eight papers to British Prime Minister
James Callaghan, under cover of a July 7 letter in which he noted that
he “would very much appreciate” Callaghan’s opinion on them.
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Presi-
dent’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 20, United
308.
Paper Prepared in the Department of State1
Washington, undated
Outline of Major North/South Issues
I. Trade
US and G–77 agree on desirability of maintaining open trading
system with expanded opportunities for LDC exports. Disagreement
focuses on the following:
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
of the page: “Most of LDC demands seem unreasonable. JC.” The paper was originally
sent to Carter under cover of the June 28 Evening Report from Vance, who noted: “You
requested an outline of the issues involved between the US and the Group of 77. [See

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
(1) Improved market access for LDC exports. LDCs want all bar-
riers to their trade removed; US believes that improved market access is
desirable but at times we must adopt measures to prevent disruptions
of US domestic market and allow industry to adjust.
(2) Special and differential treatment (S&D). LDCs want preferen-
tial access to DC markets; US agrees this is useful means of facilitating
LDC trade but that eventually preferential treatment should be phased
out.
(3) Reciprocity. US expects LDCs to make contributions by July 15
to Multilateral Trade Negotiations (MTN) which are consistent with
their development needs; LDCs are reluctant to make contributions
until July 15 when other offers may be judged.
II. Resource Transfers
Consensus exists that economic development is in interest of all
countries and that it will be expedited by a net transfer to LDCs of eco-
nomic resources. At issue on official aid are:
(1) Volume—Will US and other DCs accept target of transferring
0.7 percent of GNP annually to LDCs in the form of official develop-
ment assistance (ODA)? Presently US ODA is about .23 percent of
GNP.
(2) Quality—Can quality of US assistance be improved?
(3) Automaticity—Will US agree to provide resource transfers au-
tomatically, irrespective of annual OMB budget process, Congressional
procedures, or concern for efficient and effective use of the funds?
(4) Conditionality—Will US alter concern that aid be specifically
targeted to meet needs of poor in LDCs, by providing direct budget
and BOP support rather than project loans and grants?
III. Commodity Trade
Trade in commodities has been important issue in North/South
dialogue since Seventh Special Session of UNGA and subsequent adop-
tion of UNCTAD’s Integrated Program for Commodities.2 Major issues
are:
Document 307.] Such an outline is attached, indicating what we believe to be the areas of
agreement and disagreement. It was drawn from the papers presented to the Govern-
ment of Jamaica by Dick Cooper.” Carter wrote in the margin adjacent to Vance’s com-
ment: “Retained.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject
cover of a July 8 memorandum. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Ma-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
(1) Need to further liberalize conditions for IMF Compensatory Fi-
nance Facility (CFF) loans to offset declines in foreign exchange
earnings caused by depressed world market commodity prices.
(2) Inclusion in new Wheat Agreement provisions for financing of
stocks to be held by LDCs.3
(3) Number of commodities for which price stabilization agree-
ments may be feasible.
(4) The weight to be given economic feasibility in judging desir-
ability of negotiating new international commodity agreements.
(5) Source of capital for a Common Fund; appropriate capital
structure for a Fund; need to give such a Fund a role in financing
non-stabilization measures (second window); and design of an accept-
able decision-making structure for a Fund.
IV. Debt
March 1978 UNCTAD Ministerial meeting produced broad agree-
ment on DC debt.4 At issue are:
(1) In debt rescheduling, whether debt relief should be provided
by creditors not only in situations of imminent default but also as aid
device to enhance economic growth and help LDCs achieve develop-
ment targets.
(2) Extent to which debt relief should be conditioned upon debtor
country undertaking comprehensive economic development and/or
stabilization program.
V. Monetary Issues
US has fostered reforms which allow international monetary
system to be more responsive to individual country needs. Yet LDC’s
believe present monetary arrangements operate to their disadvantage
and they therefore seek greater access to official BOP financing on fa-
vorable terms. At issue are:
(1) Nature and extent of conditions on IMF loans.
3 Nations were negotiating a new agreement to replace the 1971 International
Wheat Agreement. No agreement was reached in 1978 and the negotiations were
suspended.
(S. IX), which, among other things, reflected agreement that donor governments would
endeavor to revise the terms of previous development assistance loans in keeping with
the more lenient terms of contemporary loans. The resolution also called for international
expert consideration of how the way in which previous debt issues were addressed
might offer lessons for the future. See Yearbook of the United Nations, 1978, p. 429; see also
“Developing Nations Agree to Reduce Debt Relief,” The New York Times, March 12, 1978,
p. 10.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
(2) Whether LDCs should be given a larger share of IMF quotas
and of IMF decision-making, irrespective of their financial contribu-
tions to the Fund.
(3) Whether SDRs should be issued on automatic basis to LDCs as
a mechanism to transfer economic resources.
(4) Whether new provisions for flexible exchange rates operate to
disadvantage of LDCs.
VI. Illicit Payments
Consensus for international agreement on illicit payments appears
to be developing in UN working group on corrupt practices.
No important substantive difference between US the LDCs exists.
matic conference to include agreement on illicit payments. Issues are:
(1) Priority and importance of the issue.
(2) Timing of a diplomatic conference.
(3) Efforts by some members of G–77 to link illicit payments agree-
ment to conclusion of negotiations on a code of conduct.
VII. Technology for Development
Dialogue on technology thus far has focused on regulation of pro-
prietary technology and conduct of enterprises and governments. Fun-
damental issues are:
(1) Whether a code will be legally binding.
(2) Whether propositions of G–77 will sustain flows of relevant
technology to LDCs.
(3) How LDCs will improve capabilities to receive and effectively
apply technology, and move toward self-sustaining technological
capability.
VIII. Transnational Enterprises and Investment Climate
Foreign direct investments are important source of economic re-
sources and technology for LDCs. However, value of this investment to
DCs and LDCs has been open to debate. For more than a year UN Com-
mission on Transnational Corporations has sought to elaborate code of
conduct as a means to establish international framework within which
TNCs should operate. Major issues are:
(1) Whether code should apply both to responsibilities of gov-
ernments as well as TNCs.
(2) Whether the code should be binding or voluntary.
(3) Whether the code should have a follow-up mechanism, and if
so, what kind.
(4) Whether the transnational enterprises covered by code should
include state-owned and mixed ownership enterprises.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
(5) Definition of standards for expropriation and compensation.
(6) Availability of international dispute settlement mechanisms for
arbitration under international law.
(7) Respect for contractual obligations and other agreements, and
standards in event of renegotiation of contacts.
309.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, July 3, 1978
SUBJECT
North-South Dialogue and the Summit
Attached are the North-South papers that you asked Dick Cooper
to prepare.2 I recommend that you read his covering memo and the
Summary of Issues at Tab A, which precedes an analysis of the possibil-
ities for compromise. Tab B summarizes what your Administration has
done so far in this field; Tab C contains the papers that Dick Cooper
will discuss with the Jamaicans.
I agree with Dick that the central North-South issues are aid and
trade. This is how the vast majority of resources move from industrial
to developing countries. The other Summit countries believe these
issues should be at the center of the Summit North-South agenda; they
are emphasized in the draft Summit Declaration.3 It will be useful to
press your Summit partners on trade and to join in what I sense to be
their general desire to increase aid—e.g., by pledging more resources
for multilateral banks and more aid to help LDCs produce energy.
But there are also foreign policy aspects to the North-South rela-
tionship. From this standpoint, commodity agreements and the
Common Fund are important, even though there is not much that we
can say about them at the Summit. Dick’s substantive conclusions on
these issues make sense to me.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
Brzezinski initialed at the top of the page.
2 Not attached. See Document 310.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
Progress on aid, trade, and commodities will require a large ex-
penditure of political capital. The Congress is now sitting in judgment
not only on aid and (prospectively) on trade, but also on the Interna-
tional Coffee and Sugar Agreements and a US contribution to a buffer
stock for the International Tin Agreement.4 Since our influence on the
Congress is limited, we should focus on a few key issues. Even this may
require an effort that is almost Panama Canal-ish in scope.5 Your own
continuing involvement will be the key to success.
It would be helpful to know, at the meeting Dick recommends or
otherwise, whether you agree that aid and trade should receive priority
attention among North-South issues at the Summit. After the Summit,
in light of its results and of Dick Cooper’s discussions with Jamaican
leaders, we can do more staff work and recommend follow-up actions
on these and other North-South issues that they will raise, such as the
Common Fund and LDC participation in international consideration of
economic issues.
4 The International Coffee, Sugar, and Tin Agreements regulated commodity prices
and sales among their signatories, which included both importing and exporting nations.
In 1975, the United States signed the then most recent version of the Coffee Agreement; in
1977, it signed the latest iteration of the Sugar Agreement; and in 1976, it signed the fifth
iteration of the Tin Agreement.
5 Reference is to the Carter administration’s effort to secure ratification of the
Panama Canal Treaties. See footnote 4, Document 163.
310.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Cooper) to President Carter1
Washington, July 3, 1978
SUBJECT
North/South Dialogue: Follow-Up on Your Discussions in Panama
As you requested, I have compiled two sets of papers on North/
South economic issues. The first set (Tab C)2 describes areas of agree-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
initialed at the top of the page.
2 Tab C, not attached, includes the June 23 memorandum from Watson to Cooper
and the eight papers on North-South issues discussed in Document 307. Tabs A–C are at-
tached to a copy of this memorandum in the National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Sec-
retariat Staff, Records of the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
ment and disagreement between the U.S. and the LDCs (the so-called
Group of 77 or the “G–77”). This was given to the Jamaicans and the
Venezuelans on June 23 and we will shortly receive their comments. I
will be traveling to Jamaica for discussions with Prime Minister Manley
and his officials at the end of this week, July 7 and 8. The second set
(Tab A)3 suggests possibilities for reconciling or at least narrowing the
differences between us and the G–77. It would be helpful to have any
guidance you might want to give before then, both to guide my discus-
sion with the Jamaicans and to give some indication beforehand to the
other participants at the Summit of your sense of priorities in this large
and diverse domain.
The North/South dialogue covers a vast range of subject matters—
trade, monetary affairs, foreign investment, technology transfer and so
on. We have singled out eight of the most important areas in these
papers. The developing countries are a diverse group with diverse in-
terests in each of these many areas. They are held together by a
common stand with respect to the rich countries and they have devel-
oped a “political platform” with something to appeal to everyone, held
together with a strong appeal to the need for political solidarity. They
schedule conferences in international bodies to provide pressure points
on the developed countries (which in practice means the Western de-
mocracies—they have been peculiarly silent on the role of the commu-
nist countries). Apart from the UNGA, the major conferences coming
up are UNCTAD V and the UN Conference on Science and Tech-
nology, both about a year from now.
There are serious, and in most cases, insurmountable, obstacles to
reconciliation of our position with the current position of the G–77. This
is for three reasons. The first involves the extreme character of many of
the G–77 proposals. Some of these sound like caricatures of themselves
but unfortunately they are not. (For example, one proposal calls on the
governments of industrialized countries to regulate production of all
synthetic products that are in competition with natural products.)
The second reason is the immobility of the G–77 with respect to
their formal proposals. Their commitment to solidarity plus something-
for-everyone leaves them practically no negotiating flexibility. More-
over, the Group can be intimidated by its own radical members from
giving way on stated positions. For similar reasons, they have been un-
willing to establish priorities among issues, although we observe that
they seem to attach more importance to some issues than to others. We
have attempted to loosen up the G–77 position by bilateral approaches
through national capitals. These approaches have the desirable effect of
3 Tab A, not attached, is an undated paper entitled “Summary of Issues.”

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
maintaining a dialogue and assuring the developing countries of our
genuine interest in their problems. But so far we have been able to
make only limited progress in getting the G–77 as a group to be more
flexible.
The third obstacle to reconciliation concerns our difficulty in per-
suading the Congress and more generally the public to contemplate se-
riously taking steps that seem to run so strongly against present U.S.
conceptions of domestic and world order, and often seemingly against
U.S. interests. Even when they may be in our interests, Congress is re-
luctant to spend funds for these purposes.
I conclude from these considerations that we cannot reconcile our
positions with those of the G–77 in the near future on most issues. But
we must continue to engage in constructive discussion with them, since
the process of discussion reinforces the moderate voices within the
G–77. There are, moreover, some things which we can and should do
which will be well received by the developing countries, and others
which we could do if we thought it necessary in the interest of molli-
fying them. These actions are called “accommodating moves” in the
material at Tab A and are pulled together in the summary introducing
them. The G–77 can perhaps be persuaded over time to move their po-
sitions, so that accommodating moves may eventually involve a recon-
ciliation. (We have already actually made a number of accommodating
moves since you have taken office, and these are listed at Tab B.)4
The most important areas for us to focus on, in terms of substan-
tive value to the developing countries and our own long-range in-
terests, are trade and aid:
—On trade, a) we should make our MTN offers on products of spe-
cial interest to developing countries as generous as possible. We should
also press advanced developing countries to make contributions to the
MTN, and to encourage this we should be prepared to enrich the offers
which we have already put on the table. Second, we should undertake
not to impose countervailing duties against LDC export subsidies
unless we can show injury to the domestic economy. Third, we should
seek tight, internationally managed procedural rules around the Euro-
pean Community’s insistence on the introduction of “selective safe-
guard action” against individual countries.
b) More generally, we should maintain our markets open to the
products of developing countries. We actually have quite a good record
here, although developing countries are reluctant to acknowledge it.
They focus especially on textiles. Our policy toward sugar is of great,
4 Tab B, not attached, is an undated paper entitled “North/South Activities of the
Carter Administration.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
both real and symbolic, interest to the developing countries, especially
those in Latin America. It is important in the North/South context that
we not move toward greater restrictions on sugar imports and prefer-
ably that we relax the restrictions that we now have.
—The volume of foreign aid, both bilateral and multilateral, is of
tremendous importance substantively and politically. You know the
domestic difficulties with this, so I will not rehearse them here.
It would be good to emphasize these two areas at the Summit. The
Japanese and especially the Europeans are skittish on the question of
trade, and we need to remind them of the vital importance to the eco-
nomic prospects of developing countries of maintaining our markets
open to their products. You also might mention there your planning
targets on U.S. foreign aid for FY 1982, since that will indicate your
commitment to this area despite the widely-known domestic political
difficulties with it.
In addition to these two areas, we should continue to push along
with price-stabilizing commodity agreements where there is some
promise of success. We have agreed to negotiate on rubber and there
is perhaps some prospect for a copper agreement. Beyond price-
stabilizing agreements, we may want to indicate a willingness to sup-
port applied research for product improvement in other commodities
(e.g., jute, sisal).
In the category of things we might do if necessary to mollify the
developing countries are our positions on the Common Fund and on
providing debt relief before acute debt crises arise:
—The Common Fund is a major plank in the G–77 platform of de-
mands. The substantive value to the economic welfare of developing
countries is considerably less than the political significance that they
have given to it. A major move toward the G–77 position on the
Common Fund would be well received by them, but because it would
provide only marginal benefits to the world economy, a major invest-
ment of your political capital would be required to secure Congres-
sional support for U.S. participation and a U.S. contribution of perhaps
$100 to $250 million.
—Authority to ease the terms on outstanding debt of the poorest
countries is now before the Congress. In addition to pressing for that
authority and using it when we get it, we would please some of the
leading moderates in the G–77 (e.g., India, Pakistan, Jamaica) if we
would agree to a procedure whereby official debts could be resched-
uled in anticipation of a balance-of-payments crisis rather than, as now,
trying to provide additional aid in such situations and relying on debt
rescheduling only when default appears imminent. However, this ap-
proach could involve very substantial amounts of money and there will
be major Congressional difficulties with getting authority and appro-

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
priations for this purpose because it would be inconsistent with the
Congressional desire to control the uses of aid funds.
On most matters now involved in the North/South dialogue, the
G–77 have set the agenda. True, by its nature it covers most of the
topics of interest to both sides, but we can and should seize the initia-
tive in certain respects. Illicit payments is one area where we have done
so. The emphasis on basic human needs in foreign aid is another. We
could reinforce this latter initiative by setting concrete objectives—e.g.,
in the areas of disease eradication, clean water, food production—for
the year 2000. Moreover, we could be much more aggressive than we
have been concerning the trade barriers imposed by advanced devel-
oping countries, in comparison with which all the industrial countries
are paragons of free trade.
Henry Owen’s counterparts in the other Summit countries have
been told that you will raise North/South issues at the Summit. Most of
those countries have positions roughly similar to ours, although there
are often important differences in detail. They also have problems on
their home front, and one thing we all need to do is to improve do-
mestic consciousness of the importance of North/South relations.
If you have the time, I would recommend that you meet with your
senior advisers concerned with North/South issues sometime before
the Summit, perhaps on July 10, to discuss these issues and for you to
provide guidance to us on where you would like to lay the most
emphasis.
311.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, July 12, 1978
SUBJECT
North-South Issues at the Summit
1. In the attached memo (Tab A) Dick Cooper reports to you about
his talks in Jamaica with Prime Minister Manley and other Jamaican
officials.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
Sent for information. A handwritten notation indicates that Hunter and Erb had copies.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
2. I agree with Dick that the two key LDC issues for the Summit are
MTN and aid.
a. On MTN I concur with Dick’s recommendation that the Summit
should direct the US, EC, Japanese, and Canadian negotiators to bring
the developing countries into the negotiations.
b. On aid, I also agree with what Dick says about Summit pledges
to provide more resources for IDA and other multilateral institutions.
3. We have late information about four likely North-South issues
that other heads of government may raise at the Summit:
a. Trudeau may want to strengthen that section in the draft Declara-
tion which calls for more aid to help LDCs increase energy production,
and requests the World Bank to examine how this can be done most ef-
fectively. This is one of the more promising Summit initiatives, and we
should support Trudeau.
b. Callaghan may announce forgiveness of some past LDC debts to
the UK. It is not clear whether this would represent an increase in aid to
LDCs; it might be offset by reductions in new aid. This idea came up at
the Summit Preparatory Group; the British wanted all countries to join
a multilateral statement to this effect, but others did not agree. If Calla-
ghan announces this British decision and say that legislation now be-
fore the Congress would permit the US also to ease the terms of some
past LDC debts. I attach a briefing memo on this point at Tab B.2
c. Fukuda will announce a doubling of Japanese aid from 1977 to
1980, with the comparison being made in dollars. This is a disap-
pointing outcome to the argument between the Finance Ministry and
the Foreign Ministry, which favored a doubling from 1978 to 1981 in
terms of yen. The Foreign Ministry position would have meant $4 bil-
about $3 billion in 1981). Bob McNamara urges you to press Fukuda at
Bonn to change his position. I agree. Aid proponents in Japan, we are
told, believe that external pressure on Fukuda might cause him to alter
his view. This could mean $1 billion more per year for LDCs.
d. Giscard may raise his idea of an African fund. If so, you might
say that the US agrees fully with the need for more effective coordina-
tion among aid donors and between donors and recipients in Africa.
We cannot, however, support certain aspects of the French proposal as
it now stands: We cannot commit ourselves to multi-year financing or a
high US share of financing; nor can we commit ourselves to participa-
tion in every project donors desire. But we have no objection to men-
tioning aid for Africa in the Summit Declaration, and will continue dis-
2 Tab B, attached but not printed, is a July 10 paper prepared in EB/IFD/OMA enti-
tled “Retroactive Terms Adjustment.”

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
cussions with others to assure the most efficient and visible use of our
resources.
4. You should know that Prime Minister Manley is again consid-
ering a North-South Summit. He has invited Schmidt, Callaghan, and
Nordli to Kingston in late August or early September and has dis-
cussed the proposed meeting with Trudeau and Fraser. Over the long
run, the idea of a North-South Summit may well warrant exploration,
but it would have to be well prepared, which means that it could not
happen in the near future. In the meantime, informal North-South con-
sultations of the sort that you directed Dick to hold with Jamaican
leaders will continue to be useful.
5. There is a US initiative in the aid field that you may want to men-
tion: your intention to create a Foundation for International Techno-
logical Foundation [Cooperation], to relate US private and public sci-
ence and technology more effectively to LDC needs. This is the one new
idea to emerge from our aid review: you have mentioned it in several of
your speeches; and planning is now going forward. I believe other
countries would be interested and impressed. Talking points are at
Tab C.3
Tab A
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Cooper) to President Carter4
Washington, July 11, 1978
SUBJECT
Report on my Discussions in Jamaica
On July 7–8 I led a small U.S. delegation to Kingston to meet with
Prime Minister Manley, Foreign Minister Patterson and senior Ja-
maican officials to follow up your Panama discussions on North/South
3 Tab C, not attached, is a July 12 memorandum from Press to Carter on “Talking
Points for Economic Summit on Foundation for International Technological Coopera-
tion.” Tab C is attached to a copy of this memorandum in the Carter Library, National Se-
78.
4 Confidential.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
economic issues.5 In his opening remarks Manley specifically requested
that I convey to you his compliments on “your superb performance in
Panama,” during which you gave so many speeches to so many people,
providing something different and pertinent on each occasion. The
tone of our meetings with Manley, and subsequently with Patterson
and his team, was cordial. Our exchanges were frank, and often re-
vealed substantial differences of approach.
This meeting was an attempt to find ways to improve the current
North/South relationship through an informal exchange of views on
both the substance and procedures of the dialogue. In view of the com-
plexity of the problems that beset the dialogue I did not expect to, nor
did we, achieve a breakthrough at the Kingston meetings. But I believe
that over time such informal consultations can help us reduce our polit-
ical and economic differences with the LDCs. The meeting has sup-
ported most of the points made in my memo to you of July 3.6 And I be-
lieve that most of the talking points on North/South issues that were
sent to you on the same date remain valid. However, many of the issues
that the Jamaicans raised will come up during the Bonn Summit and
some will soon require significant U.S. policy decisions.
The Jamaicans made clear that they were not speaking for the
Group of 77, but would convey their best interpretation of the G–77 po-
sition, even though focusing occasionally on issues of particular con-
cern to Jamaica. Patterson placed the highest priority on: 1. agreement
on a Common Fund, 2. debt relief, 3. energy. Manley and Patterson also
stressed the importance of trade, referring to Manley’s agreement with
you in Panama on the need for trade liberalization.7 During the discus-
sions they further emphasized the importance of negotiations on inter-
national commodity agreements, the institutions for conducting the
North/South dialogue and cooperation for development with OPEC
and the Eastern European countries—on the last point they made a spe-
cific proposal for greater East/West cooperation. They clearly favored
expanded flows from developed countries. They responded in a con-
structive manner to subjects that we had raised in our papers, espe-
cially private investment and illicit payments.
5 A memorandum of conversation of a July 7 meeting among Cooper, Manley, and
U.S. and Jamaican officials is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Mate-
rial, International Economics, Guy Erb File, Box 37, Manley (Prime Minister Michael)
Cooper, Manley, Hormats, and Erb is in the National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secre-
tariat Staff, Records of the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N.
6 See Document 310.
7 See Document 306.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
—Common Fund. The Jamaicans put considerable emphasis on the
early negotiation of a Common Fund with its own resources to support
the buffer stocks of international commodity agreements and a “second
window” based on voluntary contributions by participating countries.
They see the Common Fund as an important instrument to restructure
markets so as to stabilize export earnings from commodities. The
Common Fund has considerable political significance and our ultimate
approach to it will have to weigh the importance of this issue to our
North/South relations, its probably modest economic impact, and the
considerable political efforts that will be necessary to gain Congres-
sional approval of a Common Fund. Tactically, I recommend that we
not go beyond the present brief reference to the Common Fund in the
Summit Declaration. Any movement toward the LDCs on this point at
the Summit would reduce our flexibility when negotiations resume.
—Debt. The Jamaicans’ main point is that LDC commercial in-
debtedness is bound to pose serious problems over time. Accordingly
they would like to establish a facility for rescheduling private as well as
the official debt. We indicated the difficulties with this, and they prob-
ably could not get G–77 support for their view, particularly for ad-
vanced developing countries who must borrow in private capital
markets.
—Energy. The Jamaicans stressed the links between energy and
achievement of a New International Economic Order. However, apart
from Venezuela, they do not have OPEC support for their views that
trade-offs exist between energy and other North/South issues. The Ja-
maicans did support the types of energy cooperation between devel-
oped and developing countries that will be considered at the Summit.
—Trade. The Jamaicans are disappointed with progress in the
MTN on matters of interest to them and other developing countries.
They are particularly concerned about the liberalization of trade in ag-
ricultural products and the negotiation of a safeguards code, where ac-
ceptance of the proposal of the European Community for selective safe-
guards would be quite detrimental to LDC interests. Jamaica also
stressed a bilateral trade issue: their request for a U.S. offer of a tariff
concession on rum, an item of great interest to many Caribbean coun-
tries and on which a final U.S. decision is still pending.
—North/South Dialogue. The Jamaicans strongly supported the
U.N. Committee of the Whole,8 which in their view should follow up
the CIEC with high level negotiations on key North/South issues. Our
approach to this U.N. Committee is different—we favor frank ex-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
changes, but not negotiations. Other Summit participants are skeptical
as to the value of this Committee.
—East/West Issues. The Jamaicans proposed that the Summit coun-
tries call upon the Soviet Union and other Eastern European nations to
collaborate with industrialized democracies in support of Third World
development. This was the main Jamaican initiative during the meeting
and it reflects Jamaica’s hope that the Socialist countries will play a
larger role in world development. Manley may have supported this ini-
tiative because he believes the Socialist countries have something to
contribute but also because he feels the West would do more if the So-
cialist nations were more forthcoming.
The Bonn Summit
Jamaica would like to see several results from the Summit:
—recognition that economic development in the LDCs will
strengthen prospects for growth in developed countries, thus there is a
mutuality of interest in economic progress in developing countries.
—agreement on the importance of providing increased assistance
to LDCs for development purposes, and to provide special support to
LDCs in balance-of-payments difficulty.
—a commitment to provide substantial benefits to the developing
countries in the MTN.
—discussion of, but not necessarily public statements about, the
desirability of joint East/West collaboration for development.
Recommendations
What to say at the Summit: I recommend that at the Bonn Summit
you stress:
—The importance of developing country growth to developed
country prosperity.
—The need for a common commitment to substantial increases in
development assistance, including the need for large World Bank and
Inter-American Development Bank capital increases and a large IDA
replenishment (along the lines you already approved), stressing your
personal commitment to work with the Congress to make good on our
commitments.
—The importance of a common effort by developed countries to
insure that the developing countries both contribute to and benefit
from the overall results of the MTN, namely through greater developed
country tariff concessions on specific products of concern to LDCs, and
avoidance of a closing off of offers and final agreements on tariffs and
codes—especially the safeguard code—until adequate negotiations
have taken place with LDCs. In this connection the Summit should ask
negotiators to integrate the LDCs more in the MTN.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
312.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, August 11, 1978
SUBJECT
Letter from Prime Minister Callaghan
Prime Minister Callaghan has written you a letter (Tab B), replying
to your letter of July 7, which transmitted a statement of US
North-South policies and our points of agreement and disagreement
with the developing countries.2 Callaghan thanks you for the paper,
encloses his officials’ comments, comments on the broad consensus be-
tween our two countries, and mentions two issues where there may be
a difference of approach: LDC indebtedness, and the Common Fund.
On these issues he recognizes our constraints and urges us to be as flex-
ible as possible in light of these constraints. Attached is a draft reply
(Tab A)3 that should meet his concerns.
On LDC indebtedness, the reply says that we will continue to play
a positive role in international discussions, and indicates that much de-
pends on what happens to pending legislation.
On the Common Fund, the reply indicates that we will participate
constructively in negotiations, while consulting actively with the
Congress. This is consistent with the Summit commitment: “We agreed
to pursue actively the negotiations on a Common Fund to a successful
conclusion . . .”4 Church and Javits have recently indicated their oppo-
sition to (and their belief that there is no chance of securing Congres-
sional approval for) a Common Fund involving a direct US contribu-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 20, United Kingdom: Prime Minister
2 Tab B, attached but not printed, includes an August 3 letter from Callaghan to
Carter and a U.K. paper commenting on the eight U.S. papers on North-South issues. See
Document 307.
3 Tab A, attached but not printed, is a copy of the signed August 15 letter from
Carter to Callaghan.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
tion.5 With both the Chairman and Ranking Minority Member of the
Foreign Relations Committee opposed, the chances of securing ratifica-
tion of a Common Fund treaty would be dim. But we can participate
usefully in international discussion and negotiations about this issue
while seeing whether we can, through Congressional consultations,
alter attitudes on the Hill. In light of these consultations, we can then
make firm decisions.
I have cleared the attached reply with State (Dick Cooper, who
is working on a memo for you about the Common Fund pursuant to
your breakfast discussion today),6 Treasury (Fred Bergsten), and Jim
Fallows’ office.
RECOMMENDATION
That you sign the letter to Prime Minister Callaghan at Tab A.7
5 Owen reported on a conversation with Javits in an August 8 memorandum to
Carter. Javits had “said that neither he nor Senator Church believed there was any chance
of the Congress approving a Common Fund. They thought the Congress would support
individual commodity agreements, and perhaps some arrangement for transfer of funds
among such agreements, but not a Common Fund to which there would be a direct US
contribution. He stressed that as Chairman and Ranking Minority Member of the Foreign
Relations Committee their views as to what the Congress would accept should be taken
seriously. He made clear that he and Senator Church shared the attitude they attributed
to the Congress.” (National Archives, RG 56, Office of the Under Secretary of the
Common Fund)
6 Carter held a breakfast meeting on August 11 with Vance, Brown, Brzezinski, and
President’s Daily Diary) No memorandum of conversation was found. An August 10
briefing memorandum on the Common Fund prepared by Lake for Vance for the
meeting is in the National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Official
7 Brzezinski wrote beneath the recommendation: “Concur. ZB.” A separate hand-

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
313.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, August 17, 1978
SUBJECT
Common Fund
I understand that you will shortly be considering whether the Ad-
ministration should initiate consultations with the Congress on U.S.
participation in the Common Fund. I want you to know that I have very
strong reservations about the whole enterprise, for three fundamental
reasons.
First, the economic justification for any Common Fund which we could
support is extremely small. Even its supporters agree that the real impact
on developing countries would be tiny.
Second, we have a large number of far more important development
issues under consideration by the Congress. The major effort that would be re-
quired to win Congressional approval of U.S. participation would clearly di-
vert support from much more fundamental U.S. programs—including bilat-
eral and multilateral aid, the Witteveen Facility at the IMF, individual
commodity agreements and trade measures which help the developing
countries. The game would simply not be worth the candle. I feel that
even raising the issue on the Hill may adversely affect these much more impor-
tant programs.
Third, there is little chance that Congress would support U.S. participa-
tion at all unless you personally invested a great deal of effort and prestige in
the project. Even then, success is not assured. In any event, as just indi-
cated, your doing so would clearly hurt us on much more important
issues by diverting your own time and that of much of the
Administration.
I therefore believe that we should stick to the present U.S. negotiating
position, excluding mandatory contributions to the Common Fund of the
type envisaged by the LDCs which would clearly turn it into an aid in-
stitution. If necessary, I believe we can fashion a more limited approach based
on contributions to a contingency reserve fund against possible losses by the
organization, which the LDCs would accept if we—and the other industrial-
ized countries—make it clear that we can go no further.2
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
2 Carter wrote in the margin adjacent to this sentence: “may be best bet.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
In combination with a narrowly defined “second window” this ap-
proach could thus avoid any significant foreign policy costs and might
even generate modestly positive reactions. If we go to the Hill, I would
thus start with this alternative—or quickly fall back to it—to avoid the
larger costs outlined above. Even this modest version, however, may not
be acceptable to the Congress without your heavy personal involvement.
W. Michael Blumenthal3
3 Blumenthal signed “Mike” above this typed signature.
314.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, August 18, 1978
SUBJECT
Common Fund
Attached are memoranda from Secretaries Vance and Blumenthal
concerning the Common Fund.2 They differ about its merits and the
form that it would take, but agree that there are serious Congressional
obstacles. Under the circumstances, I believe the most useful next step
would be intensive Congressional consultation about the advantages of
the type of Fund that Cy proposes, in the course of which variants such
as Mike proposes could also be explored. After that consultation we
can judge better whether changes in US policy are feasible and desir-
able. Accordingly, I recommend that:
1. You authorize us to proceed with intensive Congressional con-
sultation about the Common Fund as soon as the foreign aid bill has
been passed (probably in late September). This timing will leave little
time for fixing the U.S. position before negotiations begin in early Oc-
tober; we will try to accelerate consultations.3
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
Congress. J.” Brzezinski also initialed the memorandum.
2 Blumenthal’s memorandum is printed as Document 313.
3 Carter indicated his approval of all three recommendations in this memorandum.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
2. You direct that U.S. representatives at informal international
meetings in the meantime indicate that we will consult intensively with
the Congress about the unresolved issues and will frame our positions
on these issues in light of the results of that consultation and of on-
going international discussions.
3. You direct that the results of Congressional consultations be re-
ported to you and that the PRC be asked promptly to give you agreed
or divergent recommendations as to U.S. policy, in light of these
results.
Attachment
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter4
Washington, August 18, 1978
SUBJECT
Common Fund
I believe it is politically important in the North/South context to
move the Common Fund negotiations toward a timely, successful con-
clusion. The developing countries see the Fund as the touchstone of in-
dustrial countries’ attitudes toward their aspirations and our support
for it as an important indication of our commitment to a constructive
North/South dialogue. The Bonn Summit and statements by you, Mike
and me during the ASEAN Ministerial meeting5 have increased expec-
tations that the U.S. will take the initiative at expected negotiations on
the Fund this November.
I believe that we should make a vigorous effort to move forward.
Our taking a major step towards the LDCs—with a view to breaking
the impasse in the next round of negotiations—would be a positive po-
litical gesture. It would strengthen the climate in the UN, UNCTAD
4 Secret. Cooper sent a draft of this memorandum to Vance for his signature under
cover of an August 15 memorandum. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat
Staff, Records of the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper,
5 The Ministerial meeting between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and
the United States took place in Washington August 2–4. For Vance’s statement at the
opening session, the transcript of a post-meeting news conference, and a joint statement
issued at the end of the meeting, see the Department of State Bulletin, September 1978, pp.
19–25. For a statement issued by the White House on Carter’s participation in the
meeting, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book II,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
and other forums. On the other hand, failure to move forward will sour
our relations with the LDCs in multilateral forums.
Negotiating an agreement with the LDCs on this issue, however,
poses considerable difficulties, which merit careful consideration:
—We will have major difficulties securing Congressional ap-
proval—a treaty will be involved—and may not succeed.
—The Common Fund will compete for Congressional support and
financing with other foreign economic policy issues which Mike Blu-
menthal and others consider to be of greater substantive economic im-
portance to us and the LDCs.
—The contribution of a Common Fund to world economic welfare
would be modest.
Issues
Differences between developed and developing countries revolve
around four issues: (1) direct contributions to the Fund versus cash de-
posits via individual commodity agreements, (2) need for a “second
window” to finance development-type measures, (3) the precise terms
of reference of the Fund, and (4) voting arrangements.
The U.S.—together with other industrialized countries—has pro-
posed a Common Fund financed through pooling of the assets of indi-
vidual commodity agreements. We have argued that the Fund does not
need a second window because the financing of non-stabilization
measures is best handled by existing international institutions—
though we have agreed the Common Fund could play a coordinating
role. Finally, we want voting shares that reflect our stake in commodity
trade and equity in the Fund.
The G–77 say there can be no Common Fund without direct contri-
butions, although limited possibilities for compromise may exist. The
G–77 position on voting may be more flexible, and they may agree that
contributions to the second window can be voluntary.
Direct Contributions for Price Stabilization (First Window)
The LDCs, particularly ASEAN, see direct contributions (the U.S.
share probably amounting to $50–100 million) as the sine qua non of the
Common Fund. This level represents a scaling down of earlier de-
mands. While direct contributions may not be essential to the financial
viability of the Fund, the LDCs view them as: 1) symbolic of our polit-
ical support for the Common Fund and for their objective of greater
participation in the international economic system, 2) a means of
shifting the burden of financing commodity agreements from devel-
oping to developed, socialist, and OPEC countries.
Our agreement to “up front” direct contributions would signifi-
cantly improve prospects for the success of the negotiations, but it
would not remove all obstacles. For instance, our insistence on voting

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
arrangements satisfactory to us would run counter to the basic G–77
desire for a new institution controlled by the developing countries.
Second Window
We could now agree to a second window based on voluntary con-
tributions to finance such measures as commodity productivity im-
provements, research and development, and new product usage,
without agreeing to contribute to this window. Some other developed
countries are likely to contribute. The U.S. will be under increasing
pressure to do so as well. Many African countries and the Indian Sub-
continent believe they will not benefit from buffer stock financing ar-
rangements. To them the second window will be more important than
the first. Our willingness to make a contribution to it would signifi-
cantly improve prospects for success in the negotiations, and might
make it easier to reach agreement in a first window closer to our
objectives.
Terms of Reference
There is still a substantial difference of view over the appropriate
terms of reference for the Common Fund. Some LDCs would like it to
be very broad, permitting the Fund, for example, to intervene directly
into commodity markets even when there is no agreed International
Commodity Agreement for the Commodity in question, or permitting
the Second Window to finance manufacturing activities that use pri-
mary products. The developed countries want a much narrower term
of reference with respect to both windows. This can probably be
worked out in the negotiations.
Decision-making
Some LDCs see the Common Fund as a key element in the New In-
ternational Economic Order, as “their” institution which they will con-
trol. Needless to say, the developed countries want to maintain at least
a blocking minority. Moderate LDCs have indicated that the LDC posi-
tion here is negotiable, but at best we can expect some tough negotia-
tions on this.
Congressional Considerations
In view of the precedent of individual commodity agreements (all
of which have been treaties), the need for appropriations, and the na-
ture of the Fund as a major “umbrella” commodity institution, it seems
likely that the Senate would insist that it be presented as a treaty re-
quiring advice and consent to ratification. Some members of Congress
have told us recently that a Common Fund would be rejected by the
Congress. I do not share that view if we properly prepare the ground. A
major campaign on the Hill, supported by your strong personal in-
volvement, would be necessary. Even so, it might not succeed.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
The question of timing is also important. The 1979 legislative cal-
endar will be crowded with other initiatives of great importance to the
LDCs and ourselves, viz the MTN, IMF quota increase, aid legislation,
and a World Bank capital increase. The Common Fund would compete
with these initiatives for Congressional support and funds, and success
in obtaining Congressional support for the Fund might come at the ex-
pense of these initiatives. On the other hand, to put off submission of
any Common Fund agreement until 1980 would involve another set of
problems, since 1980 will be a short session, shadowed by the election.
If, however, we stick to our present position, the negotiations are
likely to fail, and the onus of failure will likely be on the United States.
Acrimony in the North/South dialogue would be inevitable, though
how damaging or enduring the fall-out might be is open to question
since—with the exception of a few countries (e.g., Venezuela)—the
Common Fund has not been a problem in our bilateral relations with
LDCs.
Most other developed countries are anxious to move for political
reasons and will join us if we move in a positive direction. The excep-
tion so far has been Germany. Schmidt has argued that a global export
earnings stabilization scheme would be preferable to a Common Fund.
In fact a similar scheme has been in existence for some time—i.e. the
IMF’s Compensatory Finance Facility, which lends substantial sums to
countries suffering export shortfalls. We are now looking for ways to
improve this Facility. Schmidt’s argument also ignores the political sig-
nificance of the Common Fund to the LDCs.
There is obviously considerable room for trade-offs among the
four major issues discussed above. Highly satisfactory decision-
making arrangements would allow us to be more flexible on the terms
of reference, for instance, and a willingness to make a contribution to
the second window might permit successful negotiations on the basis
of a very tight position on the first window. We will be working with
Treasury and others during the next month to establish a detailed nego-
tiating position if you give us the general go ahead now.6 You will have
an opportunity to review the position before we begin negotiations.
Recommendation
That you approve our moving forward to achieve a timely and
successful conclusion of the Common Fund negotiations. This will al-
6 In an August 29 memorandum to Vance, Cooper noted “that the President took
favorable note of Secretary Blumenthal’s position that we could fashion a more limited
approach to a Common Fund based on contributions to a contingency reserve fund.”
(National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Official Working Papers of S/P

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
most certainly require some form of direct U.S. contribution to the
Fund. We should only take a firm position on this issue, however, after
Congressional consultation (which we would undertake immediately
after passage of the aid bill) has given us some view as to the chances of
Congressional ratification.7
7 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation and wrote: “See H Owen
Memo. J.”
315.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Cooper) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, August 18, 1978
A Possible Orientation to North/South Issues in 1979
This memorandum suggests a possible orientation for the Carter
Administration to North/South issues in 1979. It concentrates on two
issues, and does not purport to be comprehensive.
Since 1974 we have been on the defensive in the North/South de-
bate. To a great extent this is inherent in the character of the debate,
since the G–77 are the demandeurs, and we are the defenders, if not of
the status quo at least of the essentials of the existing international eco-
nomic system. By any historical standard this system has served most
countries—including most developing countries—exceedingly well.
Nonetheless, it would be desirable for us to regain the initiative. To
do so, we should play from our strengths. Apart from our economic
size and our military might, traditionally the two strongest elements of
the American position in the world, as seen by others as well as by our-
selves, have been our leadership in moral and humane values (in par-
ticular, our commitment to freedom of the individual and our defense
of his rights against the state and other large impersonal entities) and
our technological prowess. The President’s early emphasis on the im-
portance of human rights as an element of American foreign policy,
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot
dential. A stamped notation at the bottom of the first page reads: “CV.” Vance underlined
portions of the memorandum.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
and the shift of emphasis in our aid program to basic human needs,
have both helped us to regain the initiative in the area of moral and hu-
mane values. We should continue to press those issues, firmly but not
obsessively, in our relations with developing countries. Not all devel-
oping countries will like this position, but in my view it provides the
only possible basis for building and sustaining broad-based support for
foreign assistance with the American public.
The second half of President Carter’s administration presents sev-
eral opportunities to emphasize our second strength, technological
prowess. January 1979 is the 30th anniversary of Harry Truman’s inau-
gural address, in which he put forward his famous “Point Four” pro-
posals. Truman, it is said, is the President Jimmy Carter admires most;
it would be fitting if he picked up a dramatic Truman initiative in his
own administration. The State of the Union message offers an ideal oc-
casion for recalling Truman’s Point Four initiative, reviewing briefly
the substantial progress in the intervening 30 years, and outlining his
own program in general terms.
(Truman’s Point Four program offered to make “the benefits of our
scientific advances and industrial progress available for the improve-
ment and growth of underdeveloped areas”.2 He offered to make avail-
able our store of technological knowledge to “produce more food, more
clothing, more materials for housing and more mechanical power to
lighten their burdens” of the free peoples of the world. It represented
the beginnings of our development-oriented foreign aid program.)
In the international arena, UNCTAD V will take place in Manila in
May and the UN Conference on Science and Technology will take place
in August. Each presents an occasion for unveiling some details of the
program. Indeed, others will be looking to the U.S. to take some initia-
tive at these conferences.
What would be the content of such a program?
First, we could pull together in an integrated fashion a number of
disparate initiatives President Carter has already approved:
1. The Foundation for International Technological Cooperation
2. The technological aspects of the President’s world health initia-
tive, especially greater emphasis on tropical diseases in our medical re-
search.3
2 This program was the fourth component of the “program for peace and freedom”
outlined by Truman in his January 20, 1949, inaugural address; see Public Papers of the
3 Documentation on the Carter administration’s world health initiative is in Foreign

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
3. The technological aspects of the President’s forthcoming world
food initiative (although he should not anticipate too baldly the results
of the Presidential Commission his food message will establish.)4
4. Our technological cooperation with others in energy (we will try
to assure you that this can have some real contents).
5. Other miscellaneous technological projects which are spread
around the government, such as those of NASA, the Geological Survey,
the Bureau of Weights and Measures, etc.
Second, we must spell out more precisely the orientation of the
FITC and our own approach to technological cooperation with devel-
oping countries. Here I would emphasize three aspects:
1. FITC should serve as a broker between the needs for applied
technology in developing countries and the availability of American
skills and knowledge both in the USG and in the private sector.
2. Assistance, largely in the form of specialists on temporary duty,
in establishing institutions of applied research and other technologi-
cally oriented organizations in developing countries.
3. Assistance in training persons from developing countries in U.S.
colleges, universities, and technological training institutions.
Obviously some additional money will be required to carry out
these functions, but the sums need not be large. Even the costs of
training large numbers of foreign students in the U.S.—which I
strongly support, since I believe U.S. training and direct exposure to the
United States is one of the best long-term investments we can make in
developing countries—would involve only relatively minor costs,
about $100 million to train 10,000 foreign students annually.
Collaboration in research and development projects involving
hardware, for example various energy projects, would not be ruled out.
This could involve more substantial money, but each large project
could be put to Congress on its merits, just as we do for domestic re-
search and development projects.
A reasonably well integrated program in technical assistance
offers a constructive approach to middle-income developing countries.
These are countries which do not need our financial assistance and for
which we find it increasingly difficult to justify financial assistance. We
can, nonetheless, emphasize our willingness to engage in technological
collaboration, to help train people, and to help establish applied re-
search facilities in those countries, provided they are willing to bear
much of the cost. At the same time, this approach complements well
our emphasis on basic human needs—food, health, education—in our
foreign assistance programs.
If you agree that this is a useful approach, I will work with Lucy
Benson, Tony Lake and others over the next several weeks to sketch out

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
the content and timing of a suggested program in technology in 1979
starting with the President’s State of the Union message.5
5 Vance highlighted this paragraph and wrote “Yes—please do” in the adjacent
margin.
316.
Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for International Organization Affairs (Maynes) to Acting
Secretary of State Christopher1
Washington, September 8, 1978
SUBJECT
Committee of the Whole Suspends Work Pending General Assembly Discussion
of Mandate
After two days of intensive caucusing by the G–77, the Committee
of the Whole met this afternoon to have the Chairman announce a deci-
sion to suspend the Committee’s work pending General Assembly dis-
cussion of its mandate. The G–77 decided that it wanted no further sub-
stantive discussion of issues until the question of the Committee’s
decision-making authority is resolved.
Since Jamaica and others in the G–77 leadership came to the COW
meeting with the purpose of forcing the issue of decision-making and
fully prepared to pay the price of scuttling the Committee if their tactics
didn’t work, there was an air of inevitability about the breakdown and
little immediate bitterness expressed. Foreign Minister of Jamaica
stressed the fact that “one country” was responsible for the failure to
reach agreement, and further finger-pointing at the United States can
be expected. However, a number of Western delegations supported the
U.S. position with varying degrees of enthusiasm.
As a result of the impasse in the COW, the General Assembly de-
bate on North/South issues will no doubt take on a confrontational
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot
Barry, Director of the Office of UN Political Affairs, Bureau of International Organization
Affairs. Sent through Cooper.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
tone unless there are breakthroughs visible on the horizon on substan-
tive issues under negotiation in other bodies.
We plan to make a major effort to get our position on the role of the
COW across to developing countries prior to the opening of the Gen-
eral Assembly.
317.
Letter From President Carter to British Prime Minister
Callaghan1
Washington, September 25, 1978
Dear Jim:
When I thanked you for your letter of August 3 about North-South
issues, I had in mind also providing you with further comments about
the views you expressed in that letter and in the memorandum at-
tached to it.2
I agree on the need to provide greater opportunities for developing
countries to export to the industrial world, and I very much share your
view that there should be “safeguards against safeguards”. I know that
your representatives and ours will work closely together in the Multi-
lateral Trade Negotiations to help bring this about.
I made some progress this year in persuading the Congress to ap-
propriate increased funds for both bilateral and multilateral aid. I also
expect that next year the United States will create a Foundation for In-
ternational Technological Collaboration to help developing countries. I
commend your recent actions to soften the terms of past aid, and I be-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 20, United Kingdom: Prime Minister
under cover of a September 23 memorandum from Owen, who noted that State, Treas-
ury, and Fallows had all cleared the letter. (Ibid.)
2 Regarding Callaghan’s August 3 letter to Carter and its attachment and Carter’s
Carter (see footnote 1 above), Owen noted that “the State Department, in coordination
with other agencies, has prepared a detailed comment on a paper that Callaghan sent you
with his letter. I believe it would be useful to let Callaghan know that this U.S. comment
is being sent to his government, to make your own views known on the key issues that it
raises, and to suggest that we act on the suggestion Schmidt made at Bonn: that a small
group of officials from Summit countries get together to lay out a long-term strategy on
North-South issues.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
lieve we will soon have Congressional authority to do the same for the
poorest countries.
My views are similar to yours on most aspects of commodity stabi-
lization policy. With movement by developed and developing coun-
tries alike, I hope we can resolve differences on the Common Fund; but
the obstacles are formidable as far as we are concerned, not least be-
cause of Congressional attitudes.
Turning to the U.N. General Assembly’s Committee of the Whole,
let me say that Secretary Vance and other U.S. officials are making con-
siderable efforts to bridge the gap that emerged as the Committee sus-
pended its work.3 We hope that all members will contribute to a solu-
tion that is consistent with the Committee’s mandate.
To continue our cooperation on North-South issues I suggest that
we now act on the suggestion Chancellor Schmidt made at Bonn: to
have officials from Summit countries meet quietly to develop a strategy
on aid and other North-South issues that we could consider at the next
Summit. I have asked Henry Owen to get in touch with John Hunt on
this.
Meanwhile, our people will be transmitting to your staff more de-
tailed comments on the attachment to your letter of August 3.4
I hope that you and I can continue to stay in close touch about
North-South issues.
With my best regards,
Sincerely,
Jimmy
3 See Document 316.
4 No detailed comments were found.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
318.
Memorandum From the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget (McIntyre) and the Special
Representative for Economic Summits (Owen) to
President Carter1
Washington, October 18, 1978
SUBJECT
The Common Fund
1. State Proposal. In the attached memo (Tab A) Secretary Vance re-
ports to you on the results of the Congressional consultations about the
Common Fund that you directed, and seeks authority to take a new ap-
proach in the negotiations in Geneva. State would like to send out a
telegram of instructions tomorrow (Thursday), since preliminary dis-
cussions will conclude shortly.
The Secretary reports that Congressional consultations produced a
yellow light: Some members were skeptical, some friendly, and some in
between. In light of these diverse reactions, and since a proposal for a
Common Fund Treaty would not go to the Congress until the fall of
1979 or, more likely, early 1980, he concludes that it is impossible to
predict how the Congress would respond. He is clear, however, on one
point: The Congress would insist that a Common Fund only come into
being when an adequate number of commodity agreements are in
place and are working effectively. (This is not yet the case, but the US is
working on it; it will take time.)
The Secretary concludes that the US can proceed with caution to
the next step of negotiations. He recommends two changes in the US
position: The US should be prepared to make a direct contribution of
up to $60 million for the first window of the Fund, and should agree to
creation of a narrowly circumscribed second window to which the US
would not contribute, at least initially. Creation of the Fund should de-
pend on participation of an adequate number of effective commodity
agreements.
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
of the page. Brzezinski also initialed the memorandum. An attached undated note from
Hutcheson and “Bill” (not further identified) indicates that Schultze concurred with
McIntyre and Owen.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
2. Treasury View. Mike Blumenthal concurs (Tab B)2 with Secretary
Vance’s recommendation, making clear that he only does so because
(i) creation of the Common Fund is to be tied to the existence of four or
five effective commodity agreements, and (ii) any direct contributions
to the first window are only to be used to enhance the credit worthiness
of the Common Fund. (He mentions using direct contributions as a
contingency reserve, but agrees that this is only one of the ways in
which the Fund’s credit worthiness could be enhanced.) He recom-
mends further Congressional consultations as the negotiations evolve;
and this is intended. He believes that the proposals that Secretary
Vance is putting to you go to the limit of what would ultimately be sup-
ported by the Congress.
3. Our View. We also concur in Secretary Vance’s proposal.
Although there is always some risk that the tentative US commit-
ment to a direct contribution would become only a first bargaining
chip, to be followed by others, Secretary Vance clearly has this risk in
mind: He indicates in his memo that he assumes there will be no fur-
ther significant changes in the US negotiating position, and that he will
conduct the negotiations accordingly. We agree with him on both
points: The US should not go beyond this proposal, and this should be
made clear to LDCs. It would be less than honest, however, not to point
out that some risk of an unfavorable outcome to the negotiations is in-
herent in the course proposed in Tab A. There is also, of course, some
risk of an eventual Congressional turn-down of a Common Fund pro-
posal, even if the US does not go beyond Vance’s proposal.
While direct contributions to the Fund’s first window would not
have great economic value, the developing countries will not set up a
Common Fund without such contributions. And while the Fund is not
essential from an economic standpoint, it would significantly assist the
effective functioning of commodity agreements, which can be very
useful in stabilizing prices. Moreover, the Fund has acquired great
symbolic importance for LDCs. On balance, the advantages warrant
proceeding.
4. Frank Moore concurs.
RECOMMENDATION
That you approve the proposals in the attached memorandum
from Secretary Vance.3
2 Tab B, attached but not printed, is an October 17 memorandum to Carter in which
Blumenthal wrote that while he still harbored “serious reservations about the whole en-
terprise,” he could “generally concur” with the proposed amended Common Fund nego-
tiating instructions.
3 Brzezinski wrote at the bottom of the page: “I concur; this has become a test of our
ability to fashion a forthcoming North/South economic policy, matching the political
progress that you + Andy [Young] have made. ZB.”

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
Tab A
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter4
Washington, October 13, 1978
SUBJECT
Common Fund
Last August you approved the recommendation in our memo-
randum of August 185 that we move forward to achieve a timely and
successful conclusion of the Common Fund negotiations, but that we
take a firm position on the issue of a direct U.S. contribution only after
consultations with the Congress.
We have now carried out a portion of those consultations and the
response we have gotten is essentially a yellow light. The following
points emerged:
—The Senators, Representatives and staffers we have spoken with
all emphasize that it is impossible to predict the mood of the Congress
18 months ahead when a specific proposal for a Common Fund in-
volving a direct contribution to finance buffer stocks (first window)
and a voluntary second window might come up for consideration.
—Four Senators—Church, Ribicoff, Stevenson, and Javits—were
agreed that a Common Fund on the scale envisaged—that is, with a US
contribution of $50–60 million—would not jeopardize or compete with
our other foreign assistance programs.
—A condition of Congressional support for a Common Fund
would be making its entry into force—though not its negotiation—sub-
ject to the existence of an adequate number of effective international
commodity agreements prepared to accede to the Fund. There are now
four commodity agreements—coffee, sugar, tin, and cocoa (the U.S. is
not a member of the latter), and one in prospect, rubber. For diverse
reasons, none are functioning effectively.
—It would be easier to secure Congressional approval for a $40–60
million US contribution than $100 million, which would be much more
visible, but even a $40–60 million contribution would have to be seen to
offer specific benefits to the United States; it could not be sold on “polit-
ical” grounds alone.
4 Confidential. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page.
5 See Document 314

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
The Congressional consultations we have carried out so far are in-
conclusive in that we cannot predict the chances for success or failure
on the Hill. At the same time nothing we learned in the consultations
would preclude us from proceeding to adopt a negotiating position
that would meet the basic stipulations laid down by the ASEAN coun-
tries in our meetings with them last August, namely, scaled down di-
rect contributions to the first window, and a narrowly circumscribed
second window based on voluntary contributions.
We will have further informal consultations in Geneva October
19–20 to set the stage for a resumed negotiating conference beginning
November 14. Our preference is to cut a deal at that conference, but we
recognize this may not be possible and therefore anticipate subsequent
negotiating sessions.
To participate constructively in the meetings through November,
we need a negotiating mandate that will enable us to tell the 77 that we
are prepared to negotiate seriously, but that we are not going to move
unless they show convincing signs that they are able and willing to re-
ciprocate. We would not necessarily reveal our full position this month
or even in November but rather would adjust our tactics to our assess-
ment of the prospects for G–77 willingness to accept a package deal.
A flexible, forthcoming US position would permit us to regain the
initiative in seeking a successful outcome to the negotiations. Even so,
there is a good chance the 77 might not meet our position, either be-
cause they consider it inadequate or because they lack the flexibility to
compromise.
As necessary we will seek more specific authority from you on par-
ticular issues as the talks progress and possible trade-offs become clear.
Recommendations
I recommend you authorize us to negotiate a Common Fund with
a direct US contribution to the first window of up to $60 million. The
use of such a contribution would be tightly defined. This amount need
not be contributed all at once but could be linked to the establishment
of individual commodity agreements and their accession to the Fund.
In any case the Fund would only become operative on the condition
that an adequate number of agreements were prepared to join.6
I further recommend that you give us authority to accept a tightly
defined second window, based on voluntary contributions, with the
understanding that the US would not intend to contribute to such a
second window, at least at the outset.
6 Carter indicated his approval of both recommendations and initialed “J” in the
margin adjacent to each.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
If you approve these recommendations I will assume that no fur-
ther significant changes in the US negotiating position are intended,
and direct that our negotiations about the Common Fund be conducted
accordingly.
319.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the Special Representative
for Economic Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, October 21, 1978
SUBJECT
Invitation from Prime Minister Manley to Attend a North/South Summit:
Prime Minister Manley has sent you two letters (Tabs B and C),2 in-
viting you to Jamaica on December 28th and 29th to meet informally
with Chancellor Schmidt, Prime Ministers Fraser, Nordli, and Trudeau
and a few leaders of developing countries, including Nyerere and
Perez.
After weighing the pros and cons of your attendance, the State De-
partment recommends against your participation.3 We agree with
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 10, Jamaica: Prime Minister Michael
inski’s behalf. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Retype. J.” An unknown person wrote
2 Tab B, attached but not printed, is an October 4 letter from Jamaican Ambassador
Alfred Rattray to Carter transmitting a message from Manley. Carter initialed at the top
of Rattray’s letter and wrote: “Nice regrets.” Tab C, attached but not printed, is an Oc-
tober 13 letter from Manley to Carter. Carter initialed at the top of Manley’s letter.
3 In an October 14 memorandum to Brzezinski, Tarnoff discussed the Department
of State’s “view that it would not be in the best interests of the United States for the Presi-
dent to participate in a mini-summit on the North/South dialogue without detailed ad-
vance preparations—something the Jamaicans clearly do not have in mind. In addition,
we are uncertain how Jamaica’s fellow members in the Group of 77 feel about Manley as-
serting himself in a leadership role, especially now that Tunisia has replaced Jamaica as
leader of the New York contingent of the G–77. The meeting could foster negative reac-
tions among the non-invited major economic powers, particularly Japan and France. It
also seems unlikely that the President would be able to announce enough changes in U.S.
positions to improve the atmosphere of the North/South dialogue.” (Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
State’s judgment that the time and place are not opportune for you.
Your participation could raise international expectations that could not
be realized at this time.4
You have on several occasions expressed support for formal
North/South meetings. Your reply therefore indicates your support for
such meetings because of the contribution they can make to improving
North/South relations, while also indicating the risks.
You may wish to read Manley’s letters. The second of them (Tab C)
includes a personal note to you and Mrs. Carter as well as Manley’s
views on two issues—the mandate of the U.N. Committee that suc-
ceeded the Paris North-South Dialogue (Secretary Vance addressed
this issue in his speech to the U.N. General Assembly)5 and the
Common Fund.
The reply has been cleared with State and Jim Fallows.6
RECOMMENDATION:
That you sign the letter to Prime Minister Manley at Tab A.
Tab A
Letter From President Carter to Jamaican Prime Minister
Manley7
Washington, October 25, 1978
Dear Mr. Prime Minister:
I appreciate very much your invitation to visit Jamaica this De-
cember to participate with you and other Heads of State and Govern-
ment in an informal discussion of North/South issues. Although I take
seriously the points made in your letter of October 13, I deeply regret
that I am unable to accept your invitation.
4 In an undated memorandum to Brzezinski, Erb and Pastor suggested arguments
in favor of Carter’s attendance at the summit, but accepted Brzezinski’s “assessment that
this North/South Summit is not the right place or time for the President and perhaps has
not brought together the right combination of people.” (Ibid.)
5 For Vance’s September 29 address to the UN General Assembly, in which he en-
dorsed the Committee of the Whole, see the Department of State Bulletin, November
6 An unknown hand wrote “OK” at the end of this sentence and initialed the
memorandum.
7 No classification marking.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
As you know from our conversations in Panama earlier this year,8 I
am keenly interested in relations between developing and developed
countries. Improved communication among the parties to the North/
South dialogue offers the best hope for progress. Under Secretary
Cooper’s talk with you in Kingston9 provided me with insights that
were helpful during my discussions in Bonn.10
Although it will not be possible for me to join you in Jamaica, I
hope that the meeting, and others involving leaders of developed and
developing nations, will help each side understand the other.11
I look forward to hearing the results of your discussions, and to
continuing cooperation between developed and developing countries.
With my best wishes for a successful meeting.
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
8 See Document 306.
9 See Tab A to Document 311.
11 A draft of this letter contains two additional sentences at the end of this para-
graph: “I believe such meetings are useful, if they do not give rise to unrealistic expecta-
tions, or thoughts of earlier and more concrete results than are likely to occur. In my
country, at least, this is a risk that I have to bear in mind.” These sentences were crossed
out by hand; an unknown hand wrote in the margin next to the sentences: “JC hand
writing ‘scratches.’” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Pres-
ident’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 10, Jamaica: Prime Minister

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
320.
Memorandum From Thomas Thornton of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 8, 1978
SUBJECT
Outlook for North-South Matters
Attached is a paper that I have put together from the contributions
of the Tuesday morning North-South group (cluster plus Deal,
Mathews, Denend, Platt and Albright). It probably reflects nobody’s
view completely, but it is probably as close to a consensus as we could
come—and we would all agree that it is the most viable consensus.
While we and State both envision a Vance speech early in the year,
our approach differs from some of the thinking going on in the State
Planning Staff. Our outlook is bleaker; we are more inclined to focus
our approach on a few issues rather than go through a laundry list that
sounds like Kissinger’s Seventh Special Session speech; and we want to
see the speech specifically aimed at the US domestic audience.2
Erb and I will be working with State on the proposed Vance
speech. It would be very helpful if you could remind Vance or Lake at
some point that you want us to be thoroughly involved at all stages of
work. We don’t want to have to go through once again the coordination
problems associated with Vance’s UNGA speech.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 108, North-South Policy: 1978. Confidential. Sent for
information.
2 In this paragraph, Brzezinski underlined the phrases “outlook is bleaker,” “our
approach,” “on a few issues,” and “aimed at the US domestic audience.” He also wrote “I
tend to agree. ZB” at the bottom of the page and drew a line pointing to this paragraph.
For Kissinger’s speech to the Seventh Special Session of the UN General Assembly, see
footnote 3, Document 257.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
Attachment
Paper Prepared by Thomas Thornton of the National
Security Council Staff3
Washington, undated
NORTH-SOUTH AFFAIRS: THE OUTLOOK
While the impulse of the North-South relationship is political, its
content continues to be economic and is usually defined in terms of the
agenda set forth by the G–77 and in UNCTAD. By its nature, this
agenda is loaded against us—at least in terms of our short and
mid-range ability to respond effectively. The LDCs look to a different
distribution of the world’s resources and power—we find difficulties
here not only because we perceive ourselves to be pretty short of re-
sources at this time but also because we lack a strong base of public and
Congressional support for policies that affect international power rela-
tionships or cost money. Also, many believe that the demands being
put forth by the LDCs make little economic sense.
There are, however, bright spots in the picture. We have improved
our performance in some of the areas of concern to the LDCs. We came
out well on the aid budget this year; we will have a generally reason-
able posture in the next round of Common Fund negotiations; we have
pulled back from a potentially bitter confrontation over the COW
mechanism, and we have been forthcoming in a number of other spe-
cific areas. Movement in these areas, however, has not been sufficient
to offset growing LDC perceptions in the framework of the N/S dia-
logue that the United States has not altered its stance on NIEO issues.
But there are more bright spots when we move away from the
“G–77 agenda” items.
—On the political front, our actions in Southern Africa, the Middle
East and on the Panama Canal have been well received and bought us a
lot of support.
—In bilateral relationships we have made some significant steps
forward, especially in dealing with the emerging middle powers. While
this progress has been mainly in the political/psychological realm, it
has also been economic.
Unfortunately, there is relatively little feed-back among these
realms, except to the extent that the broad atmosphere of trust and con-
fidence generated by the Carter Administration on political issues has
3 Confidential.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
probably reduced somewhat the kind of bitterness our economic
“shortcomings” would otherwise have evoked.
The good will is wearing thin, however, and we will be con-
fronting a new range of challenges from the G–77 in the coming year.
In addition, continued budgetary stringencies in the US plus
run-up to an election year in 1980 will make it very difficult for us to
meet our own targets, let alone the G–77 demands. We could also en-
counter some very heavy political weather in the coming months, espe-
cially in Southern Africa, that would dispel much of the good will that
we have gained by our past policies. Also, we are once again increas-
ingly isolated in the UN on such issues as racism and mass media.
Thus, we expect things to get harder rather than easier.
Given the predictable distractions at home plus steady pressure
from the G–77, we generally agree that our North-South policies in the
multilateral economic area should be pursued cautiously and with lim-
ited involvement by the President—probably until after the next elec-
tion. Although there was some sentiment for the proposition that do-
mestic political capital could be found in an aggressive approach to
North-South matters, this was a minority view.
In our domestic public relations effort, we should continue to work
hard on long-term building of public and congressional attitudes and
mount major or dramatic programs only to meet particular legislative
goals; namely the final MTN package and perhaps foreign assistance.
We will have to assess very carefully what our capabilities are, and
carefully focus our rhetoric and actions in those areas that are (a) most
likely to produce results, (b) most likely to obtain effective domestic
support, or (c) salient in terms of the negotiating agenda. We have not
generally indulged in excessive rhetoric in the past, but an even more
cautious approach is indicated. There will be pressure for retrenchment
of explicit and implicit administration goals—e.g. growth in aid
levels—and we will have to give this a serious hearing.
In 1979, trade and commodities, including continuing negotiations
on a Common Fund, are the areas on which we will have to focus.
There will be important negotiations in these fields; they are probably
the most promising in terms of stimulating development; and they
should be saleable domestically since they can produce measurable
benefits for our economy. Of course, since they cause dislocations, they
also gore some specific oxen in a way that aid—paid for out of the gen-
eral revenue—does not. (Tactically, this suggests that we should key
our public relations efforts to groups that have a positive interest in our
programs—especially consumers.)
These, however, are not the only issues that we will be facing.
Macro-economic performance, monetary and financial issues, energy,
our IFI arrearages, technology transfer, WARC and Law of the Seas

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
issues will all need attention at the negotiating table and possibly ac-
tion by Congress. Our strategy, while concentrating on trade and com-
modities, must also include these. The entire agenda should be pre-
sented to the public and to Congress with special attention to matters
that will require Congressional support in the next session. We should
probably avoid setting public priorities for as long as possible in devel-
oping our legislative programs and rationales; we will, however, need
to have our priorities clearly set in our own minds as we elaborate a
strategy for the remainder of the session.
Putting across our policy, with all of its limitations, is going to be
hard. We will find it difficult to participate in any North-South debate
without either raising undue expectations or returning to the confron-
tations of previous years. We will have especially heavy going at
UNCTAD for failure to respond to the broad range of G–77 demands.
Under these circumstances, it will be a challenge to keep our rhetoric in
line.
There is an argument to be made that we should downgrade our
representation there (and in similar fora) as a symbol of our refusal to
accept them as the proper place for serious negotiation. This would
provide a certain cover for our inability to do much and, it is hoped,
force the LDCs to deal with us more bilaterally. This probably overesti-
mates our ability to define the scope and content of the North-South de-
bate, and given this Administration’s commitment to the UN and
North-South debate, most of us do not support such a step.
We will, however, need to focus much more attention on the
problem of getting economic discussion more into channels where we
have strong cards to play.
The proper vehicle to get this off the ground will be a major speech
by an Administration official in the U.S. to an American audience. The
speech should set out our approach to relations with LDCs (shared re-
sponsibilities), our accomplishments thus far, our objectives for the fu-
ture (both political and developmental), and the means with which we
intend to accomplish them. Vance is the likely candidate. It will have to
be very well advanced if it is to have an impact. By way of introduction,
there should be some reference to key North-South issues in the State of
the Union message.
Overall then, the prospect on the North-South economic front is
for concentration on things that we do best and/or are most important.
We continue to discuss among ourselves how we might be able to make
some gains on the political front, either through dealings with the
NAM or by shifting position slightly on some key UN-related issues.
Any such gains will, however, affect our overall position only
marginally.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
321.
Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Lake) and the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for
Economic and Business Affairs (Hormats) to Secretary of
State Vance, the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher), and
the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Cooper)1
Washington, November 9, 1978
SUBJECT
North-South Strategy for 1979
A US FRAMEWORK FOR NORTH-SOUTH POLICY
The North-South dialogue ranges over a wide spectrum of specific
political and economic issues. US policies must be designed to deal
with each. These policies should be consistent with, and indeed sup-
portive of, four central US North-South objectives:
—the alleviation of the worst physical aspects of poverty;
—the promotion of self-sustaining growth with equity;
—the encouragement of societies which value individual civil and
economic rights;
—the integration of the developing countries into an open and eq-
uitable international economic system.
These objectives are both altruistic and in our self-interest. They
were developed jointly between this Administration and the Congress
and became law in the International Development Assistance Act of
1978.5 They make sense and should be acceptable to the LDCs. We
should refer to them more actively in outlining our basic North-South
policies.
These are essentially long-term goals. The LDCs have established a
North-South agenda in various international forums which is much
more short-term in scope. The focus is on three issues:
3 Apparently a reference to the Colombo Plan Consultative Committee meeting that
took place in Washington November 28–December 6.
4 Attached but not printed is a paper entitled “The North-South Dialogue: A US
Agenda for the Future.” The paper was drafted on November 9 by Johnson.
5 Carter signed the International Development and Food Assistance Act of 1978 into
law on October 6. For his statement on signing the bill, see Public Papers of the Presidents of
the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book II, p. 1721.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—means by which the LDCs (often through rather dramatic inter-
vention by governments) can obtain more external resources through
trade in manufactures and commodities, through attracting for-
eign equity and debt financing, and through official development
assistance;
—means of encouraging the creation, transfer, and application of
technical knowledge needed for development;
—means to increase significantly the development orientation of
international economic institutions and to enlarge the decision-making
role of the LDCs in them.
This formulation has major flaws from our perspective. The issues
as couched above are all in terms of more—more resources, more tech-
nology, more power in international institutions—to the LDCs, with
little attention to the uses to which such additional resources, tech-
nology, and power will be put. Nor does this formulation address the
most central developmental issue—the question of how the LDCs can
effectively marshall and focus their own human and capital resources.
In fact, the central irony of the North-South dialogue is that while it os-
tensibly centers on development, development per se is almost never
discussed. Finally, the high flown rhetoric in North-South forums and
concentration on demands for concessions by the industrial countries
has also cost the LDCs considerable US domestic support, particularly
in the Congress. Both substantively and tactically, DCs and LDCs need
to find a better approach to North-South problems.
In our preparations for UNCTAD V, the COW, and the IDS, we
have tried to develop such alternative approaches. Hormats is chairing
an interagency group to develop a US approach to the IDS which fo-
cuses on four clusters of issues: the supply side of basic human needs
(food, education, housing, health and population); the demand side of
basic human needs (employment and income); effective utilization and
husbanding of resources (energy, commodities, deforestation and de-
sertification), and engineering and industrial science. This should pro-
vide a comprehensive and internally consistent basis for US develop-
ment policy and our international activities. For purposes of focusing
international and domestic attention, however, we suggest concen-
trating US proposals on a more limited number of specific substantive
areas in which the LDCs have clear interests, where we have particular
strengths, and where we can obtain domestic support for our actions.
We have identified five priority areas (under which many of the above
subjects can be subsumed) which seem generally to meet those criteria
and which we believe could provide focal points for US North-South
activities in the months ahead. These include:
—Energy;
—Food;
—Health;

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
—LDC Capacity for Development;
—Institutional Reforms for Development.
If handled properly, these substantive packages might marry our
long-term development objectives with the more immediate concerns
of the LDCs. Certainly each of the suggested areas of US concentration
involve questions relating to resources availability, knowledge, and in-
stitutions. The issues are of interest to all LDCs; specific proposals are
designed to meet the needs of different specific clusters of LDCs,
ranging from the poorer to upper tier countries. We will, of course,
have to be able to address specific LDC proposals and the existing
agendas of such forums as UNCTAD V and the COW. But if in our
speeches on North-South issues, in our legislative and domestic agency
priorities, and in our bilateral and multilateral activities, we can em-
phasize the themes suggested above, we may be able to slowly shift the
North-South dialogue from an almost exclusive preoccupation with
mechanisms to greater attention to specific goals.
We should note, of course, that our ability to conduct such a
North-South strategy will depend in large part on our performance in
meeting past obligations and living up to our own stated current pol-
icies. Thus our adherence to trade liberalization, our ability to meet
past commitments in commodity agreements and our moving forward
with new ones, our efforts in increasing our bilateral and multilateral
assistance along the lines of the Presidential commitment for 1982, and
our success in making up arrearages with the MDBs, will all have an
impact on the credibility of our leadership efforts in the North-South
dialogue and the interest with which initiatives such as those outlined
below are greeted.
ENERGY
Of the substantive areas we wish to highlight in the North-South
dialogue, energy offers the most scope for positive initiatives. This is
also an area where our domestic interest in helping LDCs reduce their
reliance on petroleum-based energy is clear. We have several sugges-
tions for action, of which the most important are:
—International Renewable Energy Program: We are taking the lead in
fulfilling the Bonn Summit commitment to coordinate individual
country bilateral programs on renewable energy for the LDCs. We are
encouraging particular attention to R and D programs on biomass con-
version, non-electrical applications of solar energy, and forestry pro-
grams which include firewood and charcoal as important components.
—Renewable Energy Financing Mechanisms:* As unconventional re-
newable energy technologies become more cost effective, there may be
a gradually increasing need for expanded or new mechanisms to assist
LDCs finance such technologies, which tend to have relatively high ini-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
tial costs and a long-term payback period. We could design and pro-
pose such a mechanism, which might involve such options as a special
window at the MDBs, a new bank or fund, or a special bond under-
written by an international institution or consortium of OECD and
OPEC countries.
—International Research Institutes: We might take the initiative,
perhaps through the FITC, to stimulate the establishment of several in-
ternational energy research institutes in the LDCs using the model of
the international agricultural centers. We would try to mobilize foun-
dation, MDB, and bilateral funding, plus a major commitment from
host LDCs.
—Nuclear Energy Program:* It is inevitable that LDCs will include
nuclear power as a component in their energy programs. We can take
some steps to try to limit the ways in which such nuclear programs can
complicate our non-proliferation effort. We might consider expanding
membership in the London Suppliers Group to LDCs with nuclear
technologies, establishing internationally controlled enrichment cen-
ters in upper tier LDCs, and pushing the Nuclear Fuel Bank concept.
FOOD
Although good weather in grain producing countries over the past
three years has reduced worldwide concern with ensuring adequate
food supplies and stocks, long-range projections, particularly for Africa
and Asia, point to large and growing food deficits over coming
decades. We need to include food as a central North-South issue. The
President’s Commission on World Hunger is an important vehicle, and
we should use it. Four specific initiatives we may wish to press are:
—World Food Security Reserve for LDCs: Should the current grain
negotiations fail, we could propose a world reserve of 13–15 million
tons of grain to be held by key producing countries which could be
made available to LDCs suffering from substantial crop shortfalls or
when world prices increase sharply.
—Food Aid: We should continue to push for an international food
aid commitment of 10 million tons annually, of which the US would
provide about half, even if we cannot achieve it through the Interna-
tional Wheat Agreement’s Food Aid Convention.
—Agriculture Research: We might announce a research package
geared to the crops (tubers and tree starch crops), livestock (goats and
sheep) and techniques applicable to the poorest rural populations.
FITC and domestic reserves could be used.
—LDC Public Policy: We could make a major effort through bilat-
eral programs and via international institutions to help LDCs develop
the public policies most conducive to increased agricultural produc-
tion, e.g. tax, investment, transport and price policies.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
HEALTH
Diseases in LDCs result in high infant mortality, adult disability
and lower productivity. Waterborne diseases are particularly preva-
lent, and children are still not immunized against most diseases for
which vaccines are available. We suggest two initiatives:
—UN Water Decade: A strong commitment might be made, using
projected AID resources, to support the UN Water Decade goal of
bringing clean water to one billion people in rural areas over the
1980–1990 period. A plan of this kind has been approved on behalf of
the Department by Undersecretary Benson.6
—Worldwide Immunization Program: We could announce we were
ready, in cooperation with other donors, to back a global WHO pro-
gram to innoculate children with multiple antigen vaccine for measles,
smallpox, yellow fever, tetanus, whooping cough, and diptheria. Cost
to donors per shot would be about $1.
LDC CAPACITY FOR DEVELOPMENT
LDCs have taken a renewed interest in the availability of tech-
nology appropriate to their development needs, and in their institu-
tional capacity to apply it. We want to steer them away from sterile ex-
ercises on international codes on technology transfer and focus
attention on building their capacity to obtain, generate, adapt, and uti-
lize technology. We suggest several initiatives; the two most important
being:
—Foundation for International Technological Cooperation (FITC): The
launching of the FITC will be the Administration’s main effort in the
technology area. We could ensure that the FITC emphasize our priority
subjects (energy, food, health), center its activities in LDC institutions
where feasible (to build local institutional capacity), and support
projects which include a regional focus, often located in upper tier
LDCs, but with participation by lower income LDCs.
—US Agency Mandates: We may wish, through executive and legis-
lative means, to broaden US agency mandates to allow greater activity
in R&D in our priority areas. For example, NIH and DOD could expand
their
research
in
tropical
medicine,
DOE
could
do
more
in
LDC-oriented non-conventional energy research, and USDA could in-
crease its tropical and subtropical research programs.
INSTITUTIONAL REFORMS FOR DEVELOPMENT
The international economic system has already undergone many
modifications to make it more responsive to LDC development needs.
6 Documentation on U.S. planning for the UN Water Decade is in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Successful resolution of the Common Fund issue would result in a new
institution believed important by the LDCs. There are additional
changes which could usefully be made, and we should have some con-
crete suggestions before UNCTAD V. We have over a dozen ideas for
alterations in international institutions or in the way we fund our mul-
tilateral and bilateral assistance programs. The most important are:
—GATT Special Assistance Unit: The US could support the continu-
ation of the GATT Special Assistance Unit after the end of the MTN to
assist LDCs in handling trade complaints within the GATT dispute set-
tlement mechanisms, particularly during the next two–three years
when new codes will be put into practice.
—Compensatory Finance Facility (CFF):* Successful commodity
agreements and a Common Fund may provide greater price stability
for a few commodities, but still leave some problems with income sta-
bilization for LDCs dependent on commodity earnings (during a reces-
sion or after a crop failure, stable prices will still mean lower incomes
for an LDC). Rather than bow to pressure for a new Stabex program, ei-
ther worldwide (the Schmidt proposal) or regional (ASEAN approach),
we could consider further modest changes in the IMF’s CFF, such as al-
lowing drawings when export earnings from specific commodities
suffer temporary shortfalls, gearing payback of drawings to restoration
of earnings from the affected commodities, and increasing the per-
centage of a country’s quota which may be borrowed in single year.
—IMF–IBRD Special Financial Assistance Unit: LDCs argue that the
IMF conditions are too tough and disrupt economic development. The
IMF complains LDCs approach them only when events have reached a
crisis stage and drastic measures are needed. A joint IBRD–IMF unit
could assist LDCs approaching debt difficulties with a mix of develop-
ment and financial advice, thereby encouraging LDCs to seek advice
earlier. Such a unit might also advise LDCs which are dealing with a
creditor club.
—IBRD Bond Guarantee Facility: Only a handful of upper tier LDCs
obtain long-term financing through international bond markets. The
IBRD has the authority to guarantee such bond issues, but technical re-
strictions have precluded use of this facility. We should examine
changes which would allow this facility to be utilized.
—International Development Cooperation Administration (IDCA):*
Depending on the final stance of the Administration on the establish-
ment of an IDCA, a new institution could have symbolic and real value
in demonstrating our commitment to development.
—Callable Capital: Appropriating callable capital (and some guar-
antees) in the same manner as funds to be disbursed inflates our for-
eign assistance bills and limits more imaginative uses of guarantee
schemes. We suggest establishment of a callable capital guarantee fund

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
whereby we would only appropriate a fraction (say 10%) of callable
capital to all the MDBs to go to a pooled guarantee fund in Treasury.
This parallels the approach to FMS credits. We might also try appropri-
ating large multi-year callable capital commitments, particularly for
the IBRD, at once in separate bills, to reduce the annual development
assistance appropriations.
STRATEGY
We suggest that an overall North-South tactical strategy covering
all of 1979 be developed. A speech by you or the President at an appro-
priate forum in early January might lay out our overall North-South
framework, touch on our substantive priority areas (particularly en-
ergy), and provide details on certain initiatives. Such a speech, before
the G–77 ministerial in Arusha in early February7 might help moderate
LDCs to ward off a hard-line G–77 platform. Another major address
might be delivered several weeks before UNCTAD V, again stressing
our overall approach and detailing a number of institutional initiatives.
By making such a speech in advance of UNCTAD V, we would avoid a
repeat of the tactical disaster at UNCTAD IV where US proposals were
delivered at the Conference itself. A speech by you or another US offi-
cial at UNCTAD V could review our overall North-South policy and
suggest priorities for future discussions.
A major food address might be geared to the President’s Commis-
sion interim report, which is due about June of next year, and is ex-
pected to contain a number of recommended policies. Proposals on
LDC development capacity, particularly regarding our program for the
FITC and any decisions to broaden US agency mandates, might be out-
lined at the UN Conference on Science and Technology for Develop-
ment next August.
By determining initiatives now and laying out a program of Con-
gressional consultations and public addresses for all of next year, we
can avoid many of the tactical problems which have plagued US North-
South activities in the past. We would also be able to coordinate our
efforts in various North-South forums (COW, UNCTAD, ECOSOC),
improve the effectiveness of bilateral and regional consultations, and
increase our chances of steering the dialogue in more constructive
directions.
Should this approach meet with your approval, we suggest that
you request the proposals in the attached memo to be fully staffed out
by the Department and then cleared with other agencies (Guy Erb has
seen all the preparatory work for this memo and agrees with its sub-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
stance. He has notified Brzezinski of this project). We could work
toward a final package by year end.8
8 In a December 5 memorandum to Department of State principals, Lake and
Hormats, noting that Vance had requested that they “more fully evaluate the proposals
contained in the memo sent him on November 9,” announced the establishment of a
series of working groups on North/South issues. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the
Secretariat Staff, Official Working Papers of S/P Director Anthony Lake, 1977–January
322.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, November 30, 1978
SUBJECT
Your Aid Query
At last week’s budget meeting,2 you asked what the increases in
US concessional economic assistance had been from FY 1977 to FY 1978,
and from FY 1978 to FY 1979—and how this related to our published
outyear aid goals.
1. Increases. In FY 1977 the Congress provided concessional eco-
nomic assistance programs totalling $5,718 million and in FY 1978
in real terms. In FY 1979 the Congress provided $6,945 million in con-
cessional economic assistance, or an increase of 7% in nominal terms,
which means no increase in real terms.
2. Goals. In November 1977, you decided that total concessional aid
you can see, we achieved none of this rise from FY 1978 to FY 1979.
3. Policy. I do not argue that FY 1980 should see a large aid increase.
Having been one of the first to press for deep budget cuts in the EPG, I
would be embarrassed to do so. But I do want us to be able to explain
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
information. Both Carter and Brzezinski initialed at the top of the page.
dential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No memorandum of conversation was found.
3 See Document 282.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
our position effectively at the Tokyo Summit. Simply saying that we
had to cut aid to fight inflation will not meet this need. The three other
main Summit aid donors achieved substantial aid increases when they
were following restrictive fiscal policies (See Tab A).4 To sell your posi-
tion at Tokyo, I believe we will need to do three things, in descending
order of importance:
—Go forward to the Congress with an aid reorganization, so that
FY 1980 can be portrayed as a year of qualitative improvement rather
than quantitative expansion.
—Keep the outyear aid goals at present levels, but let them slip one
year.
—Avoid identical FY 1979 and FY 1980 AID figures, by having a
modest increase in bilateral development aid.
I checked the US aid figures in this memo with OMB.
4 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated paper that notes that over the pe-
percent. (All figures are nominal.) The paper also indicates that “the UK and Canada said
that they would exempt aid from the deep current cuts being made in their overall
323.
Memorandum From Guy Erb and Robert Pastor of the
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, December 12, 1978
SUBJECT
The Summits at Guadeloupe and Jamaica (U)
Our Embassy in Kingston has raised some trenchant questions
about the way the Guadeloupe Summit2 will be seen by Jamaica—and
we would add, by other developing countries—in the light of the fact
that the President declined Manley’s invitation to a “North-South”
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Sent through Owen, who did not initial the memorandum. A copy was sent to Hunter.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Summit in Jamaica (see Tab A).3 The Embassy clearly feels that the
announcement of a four-power Summit to take place so soon after the
Jamaica meeting will have an adverse effect on our bilateral ties with
Jamaica and on the President’s relationship with Manley. In addition,
we are concerned that, unless we take steps to alter the first impres-
sions in Third World capitals of the Guadeloupe meeting, the four-
power Summit will affect negatively international perceptions of our
North-South policies. (C)
US-Jamaican relations have several aspects. Seen from one per-
spective, we could easily endure a worsening of relations with a small,
developing island state. On the other hand, Jamaica exercises a weight
in Third World forums out of proportion to its size. Although Henry
Owen feels that, “We do not want to make Manley our chosen instru-
ment for North-South dialogue,”4 we would argue that we will never
be able to choose an entirely satisfactory interlocuter on North-South
issues. The differences of perspective and real economic interests are
too great between rich and poor countries for us to be entirely satisfied
with anyone who emerges as a Third World spokesman. Manley, for all
the drawbacks that his activism entails, does lead a democratic and
progressive regime. He is, moreover, the only Caribbean leader with
any prospect of competing for regional leadership with Fidel Castro,
and his influence on events in the Caribbean could be substantial.
Aesop’s fable of the stork-king5 should be borne in mind when we con-
template who else might come forward as a proponent of Third World
interests. (C)
3 Not attached. When Manley invited Carter to a North-South summit in Jamaica
(see Document 319), the Embassy in Kingston argued in favor of Carter’s attendance “on
the grounds that: (1) only by attending can the U.S. affect the outcome of the meeting;
(2) he could use the meeting to express U.S. concern for African issues; (3) he might be
able to move Manley toward a more moderate stance in the North/South dialogue; and
(4) the breakdown of the Committee of the Whole requires some action to improve the
atmosphere of the North/South dialogue.” (Memorandum from Tarnoff to Brzezinski,
October 14; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 10, Jamaica: Prime Minister Michael
4 Owen wrote in a December 4 note to Brzezinski that he did “not believe it would
be in the President’s interest to upgrade the Manley mtg by receiving a special emissary
to hear its results. We do not want to make Manley our chosen instrument for
North-South dialogue.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Inter-
national Economics, Guy Erb File, Box 37, Manley (Prime Minister Michael) Summit:
5 Apparently a reference to an Aesop fable known as “The Frogs Who Desired a
King” or “King Log and King Stork.” In this fable, Zeus grants the wish of a colony of
frogs for a monarch by providing them a log as their new king. However, this monarch
was insufficiently animated for the frogs’ taste. The Log King not being to their liking,
Zeus gave the frogs a second monarch, a stork. The Stork King promptly set about eating
its way through the frog colony.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
Although we have made some advances on multilateral issues,
namely the common fund, we are still short of final agreement in that
negotiation, and we have taken a relatively hard line with regard to
technology, the MTN, and specific commodity negotiations with devel-
oping countries. These factors must be added to the publicity given to
shortfalls in our aid; Jack Gilligan has pointed out to the President that
on present indications the Carter Administration’s aid performance
will be worse than that of the Nixon/Ford years. In this context, the
failure to attend the Manley Summit, an unwillingness to receive a spe-
cially designated emissary from the Summit, and the Guadeloupe
meeting will have a very negative impact. Developing countries could
conclude justifiably that we are backing away from the Administra-
tion’s commitment to forthcoming North-South policies, just as prepa-
rations begin for the UNCTAD V in Manila next May. (C)
We really want to stress that we view this choice as a possible
turning point in the Carter Administration’s attempt to formulate a
North-South policy. Rejection of a North-South Summit in favor of a
“rich man’s club” in Guadeloupe and down-grading our aid levels will
symbolize a significant change of policy direction. (C)
We therefore request that you reconsider the guidance you pro-
vided on Guy Erb’s memo of December 2nd regarding an emissary
from the Jamaica Summit. That memo and Henry Owen’s comments
are attached at Tab B.6 (C)
RECOMMENDATION
That you approve one of the following alternative courses of
action:
(1) That we inform the Jamaicans that the President could meet an
emissary chosen by participants in the Jamaica Summit, either in Wash-
ington or in Guadeloupe itself, if the participants designated either
Schmidt, Callaghan, Manley, or someone else, who could travel di-
rectly from Jamaica to Guadeloupe.7
(2) That the President write a letter to Manley informing him that
he will have an opportunity to speak with both Fraser and Schmidt fol-
lowing the Manley Summit but that he would welcome a letter from
Manley on the result of North-South Summit.8
Thornton concurs.9
6 Tab B was not attached. For Owen’s comments, see footnote 4 above.
7 Brzezinski indicated his disapproval of this recommendation.
8 Inderfurth wrote “My suggestion” in the margin adjacent to this recommenda-
tion. Brzezinski indicated his disapproval of the recommendation.
9 A handwritten notation next to this sentence reads: “and still leans toward
Option 2.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
324.
Note From the Special Representative for Economic Summits
(Owen) to the President’s Assistant for National Security
Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, December 14, 1978
Zbig,
When I mentioned to my colleagues at the recent Summit Review
Group meeting in Bonn2 the idea of Manley sending a special emissary
to report the results of the meeting to the President, they were horrified
at the notion of thus dignifying a conference that most of them consid-
ered insignificant, at best. I asked: In that case, why is Schmidt going?
Answer: He wanted a Caribbean vacation (before Guadeloupe was
fixed).
Cooper gave me a report on his impressions of Manley that rein-
force my urge not to build him up as a figure in North-South dialogue,
even by inviting him to write a report (which we would then have to
answer). I suppose we could do worse than Manley, but we could also
do a lot better, and I’d rather gamble on the latter.
In short, I’d leave the matter alone. The President will hear reports
from Schmidt and Frazier.3 That’s enough.
Henry Owen4
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
at the top of the page: “agree. ZB.”
2 See Document 188.
3 Reference is to Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser, who visited Wash-
the Jamaica Summit from which he had just come, emphasizing the view of the confer-
ence that inflation is stagnating the world economy, including the LDCs. He urged estab-
lishment of a Common Fund and compromise to achieve this goal.” (Telegram 3865
4 Owen initialed “HO” above this typed signature.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
325.
Letter From Secretary of State Vance to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, December 26, 1978
Dear Zbig:
The United States will participate over the next two years in a
number of major international conferences on issues affecting the de-
veloping countries, including UNCTAD V, the World Conference on
Agrarian Reform and Rural Development,2 the UN Conference on Sci-
ence and Technology for Development (UNCSTD), UNIDO III,3 and a
special session of the UN to approve an International Development
Strategy for the next decade and beyond.4 The Tokyo Summit is also
likely to devote time to North-South issues. We will confront both old
and new demands from the developing countries to support policies
which they believe will enhance their development prospects and in-
crease their participation in the management of the world economy.
Realistically, we will be hard pressed over the same period to ful-
fill our current commitments on foreign assistance, meet our arrearages
on the multilateral development banks, and obtain Congressional ap-
proval of an MTN package and various commodity agreements. We
will have to be very cautious about making major new commitments
(particularly if the Common Fund is successfully negotiated).
Given the large number of North-South events, and the tight con-
straints within which we must operate, I believe we must plan an
overall approach to our North-South activities over the next two years,
relating possible initiatives to scheduled international conferences and
carefully managing our public statements. Such advance preparation
will enable us to play an active rather than defensive role, consistent
with our interests. Within the State Department I have asked Tony
Lake, Director of the Policy Planning Staff, and Bob Hormats, Senior
Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Bureau of Economic and Business Af-
fairs, to draft a statement of the Administration’s North-South policy
and a strategy to explain that policy over the next two years to the
American public, the Congress, and to developed and developing
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
2 The World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development took place in
3 The UNIDO Third General Conference (UNIDO III) took place in New Delhi
4 The Eleventh Special Session of the UN General Assembly, which considered the
International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
countries participating in the North-South dialogue.5 As part of this ex-
ercise, they are identifying US initiatives which might be feasible
within the financial and political constraints under which we must
operate.
We look forward to working very closely with other agencies in
the preparation of such an overall strategy and in the analysis of such
potential initiatives. Guy Erb of your staff has been involved in this
project from its inception, and we will value the continued participa-
tion of him and other members of your staff. When work has
sufficiently advanced to take stock, I would hope by mid-January,
I envision requesting that a PRC review progress and make recommen-
dations on our overall approach. Let me express my appreciation in ad-
vance for the cooperation of your staff in this exercise.
Sincerely,
Cy
326.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Cooper) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, January 9, 1979
Our Meeting on Common Fund
Wednesday, January 10, 19792
I thought it might be helpful to provide you with a summary of the
current status of our negotiations with the G–77, the major issues sepa-
rating Group B and the G–77, and our plans for dealing with key coun-
tries in the G–77.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot
2 No memorandum of conversation of this meeting was found.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
At the November negotiating session,3 Group B put forward a
comprehensive proposal that fully met our commitment to Asean Min-
isters last summer.4 The proposal provided for direct contributions to
the first window and a limited second window based on voluntary con-
tributions. Members of the Group of 77, while indicating in private
some areas of flexibility, were not able to respond formally to the
Group B proposal or to table a paper of their own. This immobility al-
lowed them to protect their basic position while apparently pocketing
the concessions we have already made. It also raises questions about
how much substantive progress was really made. (Widjojo, the Asean
spokesman on the Common Fund at the US-Asean Ministerial last Au-
gust, has suggested the need for “greater flexibility” by the U.S., even
though we have met all the conditions they expressed there.)
We still must get from the G–77 solid agreements on:
—the nature and function of the first window, to insure that it will
not be another resource transfer mechanism;
—the scope of the second window’s functions, to insure that it
does not duplicate the activities of the IFI’s, and the voluntary character
of contributions;
—a clear separation between the first and second window; and
—specific guidelines for voting and decision making so that
country voting weights will accord with country financial interests in
the Fund.
As agreement in principle on these major items falls into place, we
will be better positioned to negotiate on the dollar values associated
with each window.
The reports from the Jamaican Summit were positive, but some-
what unclear on important details.5 The Canadians, for example, indi-
cated that there seemed to be movement by LDC representatives
toward our position on the nature and function of the first window and
some recognition of the need for separating the first and second
window. Perez Guerrero, however, told Ambassador Luers in Vene-
zuela that he thought a consensus emerged to transfer a portion of the
funding from the first window to the second and that the U.S. would go
tions at the end of the session. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
summit at Runaway Bay, Jamaica, is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Book [III]. Erb and Hormats commented on the summit in a January 4 memorandum to
Brzezinski. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
beyond its position on the scope of activities for the second window.6
(Perez Guerrero also expressed appreciation for the forthcoming posi-
tion the U.S. showed in Geneva in November.) Some clarification of
these points should emerge at the OECD Executive Committee meeting
next week.7
Regional meetings of G–77 countries have now begun in prepara-
set their position for the next round of negotiations and for UNCTAD
V. We have already dispatched a message to selected Asian countries,
who are caucusing through the middle of next week, and will do so
with other regional groupings of G–77 countries prior to their caucuses.
African countries, who view success in the Common Fund in terms
of a broadly mandated and well-funded second window, will be key to
a successful negotiation. Yet, there are major problems in dealing with
the Africans. First, they are poorly organized; there are no two or three
individuals who can speak for the African countries as a group. Second,
many African countries do not understand the issues, and outside of
their Geneva representatives who frequently act on their own au-
thority, attach great importance to the negotiation but cannot address
the vital details. Third, we have little leverage that we can exert. We can
point out to the Africans that we can do more through the African De-
velopment Bank to meet their needs on some of their concepts of
second window activities than we can through a Common Fund, and
that the Bank’s ability to do so will increase significantly as the U.S. and
other non-regional countries subscribe to the shares of the Bank. Came-
roon Finance Minister Yondo will be here later in January. He is ca-
pable and is respected in African financial circles, so that will provide a
useful occasion for detailed discussion.8 We should not, however, de-
lude ourselves into thinking that this linkage alone will do the trick.
What may be necessary is a well-coordinated political approach by
Foreign Ministers of selected developed countries with their counter-
parts in Africa. If in the course of our meeting you concur, I can initiate
this at the OECD Executive Committee meeting next week.
with Pe´rez Guerrero. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790007–
0926)
USOECD Paris, January 22, reported on the discussion of North-South issues. (National
8 A memorandum of conversation of Cooper’s January 26 meeting with Yondo,
during which they discussed the Common Fund and financial and monetary issues, is in
the National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the Under Secre-
Memorandum of Conversation, Jan–June ‘79.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
327.
Memorandum From Guy Erb of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 19, 1979
SUBJECT
Secretary Vance’s Letter on North-South Issues (U)
Since receiving your guidance to support a PRC on the North-
South issues that Secretary Vance raised in his letter of December 26
(Tab A),2 we have reviewed the State papers within the NSC. I have
also had several conversations with Hormats, Lake and others at
The State approach focuses on constructive initiatives that could
build a record of modest but solid U.S. achievement on North-South
developmental issues. Owen, I, and others have reviewed each of these
proposed steps and concluded that most of the initiatives are already in
motion; a few are new ideas worth exploring. We will continue to mon-
itor each of the useful initiatives, new or old, to insure that they receive
needed support. On some issues, we may find that a PRC is necessary
to determine an Administration position on specific issues, but a deci-
sion on the need for and the timing of such a PRC can be deferred until
staff work has been completed. (C)
I have emphasized to State that the initiatives in support of internal
LDC development—useful as they might be—do not respond ade-
quately to the political dimension of the North-South dialogue. As the
North-South cluster has indicated to you previously (Thornton memo
response to the international reforms that LDCs call for if we are to have
a significant impact on our multilateral relations with developing na-
S/P is drawing up a strategy indicating how and when each of the
initiatives might be related to upcoming phases and events in the
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Brzezinski wrote at the top of the page: “Monitor closely. Don’t let it become a substitute
for NSC coordination of policy. ZB.” A separate handwritten notation below Brzezinski’s
2 Printed as Document 325.
3 See Document 320.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
North-South dialogue.4 S/P envisages one or more high-level Adminis-
tration statements this spring on the framework for North-South rela-
tions and the direction of U.S. policy. We will be in touch with you
about these later, as well as about an idea that Henry and I have been
discussing: for a Presidential speech to a U.S. audience that could be
beamed via satellite to the Manila UNCTAD. Gerry Rafshoon and
Bernie Aronson are mildly encouraging about the possibility of a Presi-
dential speech on North-South relations. (U)
Since we are working closely with State on this matter, there is no
need for you to send a written reply to Secretary Vance at this time. (U)
Thornton concurs.5
4 Lake and Hormats outlined a work program on North-South issues in a January 2
memorandum to Department of State officials (copies of which were sent to AID, NSC,
Treasury, and USDA). (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Official
5 Thornton initialed above this sentence.
328.
Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Lake), the Deputy Assistant Secretary of
State for Economic and Business Affairs (Hormats), and the
Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization
Affairs (Maynes) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, March 2, 1979
SUBJECT
North-South Strategy—Progress to Date
Summary:
We have now gained general interagency concurrence on a set of
basic themes on North-South issues which the Administration might
stress over the next year and a half, reached accord on a general sce-
nario as to how those themes could be related to the key North-South
events over the same time frame, and have agreed on several initiatives
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Official Working

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
we might take. We are preparing your Seattle speech for March 302 and
conducting final staffing on those initiatives on which there is some in-
teragency disagreement. We may want to consult with you on how to
finally resolve those differences.
Background:
At a March 1 meeting which included AID, NSC, OMB, OSTP, and
the relevant domestic agencies, we reviewed the themes, initiatives,
and the scenario for an Administration approach to North-South
issues.3 Other than minor caveats, agreement was reached on the major
themes of:
—encouraging the evolution of an international economic and po-
litical system which provides increasing decision-making power and
responsibility for the developing countries;
—shifting the dialogue away from an emphasis on resource
transfer mechanisms and toward specific development problems,
stressing four areas—energy, food, health, and LDC capacity to use
technology—which can be cooperatively tackled by developed and de-
veloping countries (see Tab A for details).
In addition, agreement was reached on a scenario for linking these
themes and a number of initiatives to the major North-South events of
the coming months, beginning with your Seattle speech and including
UNCTAD V, the World Health Assembly,4 the Tokyo Summit, the
UNCSTD, UNIDO III, and the special session of the UNGA scheduled
for next spring5 (see Tab B for calendar, Tab C for scenario).6 We should
have a draft of your speech in a week or ten days.
There was also general agreement on several potential initiatives,
including:
—GATT special assistance unit to help LDCs gain maximum ben-
efit from the agreement during the post-MTN period when new codes
are implemented;
—greater emphasis on US assistance to LDCs in assessing their en-
ergy requirements, and to energy research (particularly in renewable
energy technology) in LDCs.
2 Vance spoke in Seattle on March 30 before the Northwest Regional Conference on
the Emerging International Order; for the text of his remarks, see the Department of State
3 No memorandum of conversation of this meeting was found.
5 Reference is to the Eleventh Special Session of the UN General Assembly, which
6 Tab B, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Calendar of Major
North-South and Other Meetings.” Tab C, attached but not printed, is an undated paper
entitled “Possible North-South Scenario.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—a proposal by the US to explore the desirability of increased in-
ternational support for regional energy research and training centers
modeled after the successful international agricultural centers;
—heightened attention to US support for the concept of primary
health care delivery systems;
—stepped up programs in immunization and research on tropical
diseases;
—increased support for research on new food crops and post har-
vest loss problems;
—a greater US stress on assisting LDCs to design public policies
which promote food production and distribution, and better land
management.
We have asked for preparation of final detailed staffing papers on
these generally agreed initiatives within two weeks.
We have not yet reached agreement on whether the USG will be in
a position before UNCTAD V to indicate general support for further
liberalization for the Compensatory Finance Facility of the IMF, in-
creased public financing for LDC energy development, particularly for
unconventional renewable sources, or on whether to make a specific
Water Decade. We are also still grappling with what positive action we
could take to improve the functioning of existing mechanisms (mainly
the IMF and IBRD) with respect to how they deal with developing
countries having both short term financial and longer term structural
economic problems.
We have asked that additional papers on these latter issues also be
prepared within the next two weeks, and we will consult with Henry
Owen on how these matters might finally be decided. After talking
with Owen, we may request a few minutes with you to discuss this.
Overall, we are making steady progress. The OMB representative
commented that this effort by State to put together an overall strategy
for North-South would be very useful from their perspective. He urged
us to continue the exercise, and to integrate it into next year’s overall
budget cycle. The major problem we still face is a lack of concrete initia-
tives addressing international institutional reform, particularly re-
garding the complex of issues involving debt, balance of payments fi-
nancing and structural economic problems, which will be a key issue at
UNCTAD V. We believe there is a legitimate problem in this area; we
will continue to work with Treasury on this issue.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
Tab A
Paper7
Washington, undated
US THEMES FOR THE NORTH-SOUTH DIALOGUE
The US should stress two broad themes in addressing North-South
issues:
—The System: Both national and international institutions must be
flexible enough to respond to change. A major change in the world over
the post World War II era is the increasing importance, politically and
economically, of the developing countries. US security and economic
prosperity are increasingly affected by the domestic and international
policies pursued by developing nations, and by the rate and nature of
their economic growth.
We therefore wish to work with the developing countries to en-
courage the continuing evolution of an international economic and
political system which is supportive of development and provides in-
creased roles for the developing countries, both as regards decision-
making and responsibilities. We must see that the system both en-
courages the efficient use of scarce resources, and equitably distributes
the benefits of the system. As a country develops, and the benefits it de-
rives from the international system increase, both its ability to influence
the system and its responsibilities for maintaining it should increase
accordingly.
We have already made many reforms in the international political
and economic system to accommodate developing country interests.
When after World War II the UN, Bretton Woods institutions, and the
GATT were established, their primary role was to facilitate political
and economic relations among the industrial countries. Over the past
three decades, these institutions have increasingly become preoccupied
with development concerns and the relations between industrialized
and developing countries. Many of the specific changes which were
part of this evolution resulted from US proposals. The US will continue
to entertain and propose additional reforms which are economically
sound and mutually beneficial. Likewise, we will continue to support
domestic measures which allow our economy to adjust smoothly to
changing international conditions. Adjustment assistance and export
7 Confidential.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
promotion programs, for example, help us to deal positively with
shifting trade patterns.
—Specific Development Problems: While we should and must con-
tinue to address reforms of the international system, debate on
North-South forums has too often focused exclusively on such systemic
reform with little reference to actual development problems. This ap-
proach has often led to confrontational rhetoric and sterile debate,
which in turn has undercut US domestic support for development
assistance and other positive policies toward the LDC’s. We want to in-
crease the attention of the North-South dialogue to specific develop-
ment problems. We want to find specific means by which such
problems can be tackled through cooperative action by developed and
developing countries in ways which will contribute to the welfare of all
people, but particularly the most disadvantaged. Over the next year,
we would concentrate attention and suggest initiatives in the fields of
energy, food, health, and the institutional and human capacity of LDCs
to link technology to their development needs.
• Energy: The energy technologies selected by developing coun-
tries, the rate by which they increase their energy consumption, and
their success in meeting their own energy needs from indigenous
sources (and in having exportable surpluses), will have a direct impact
on US citizens. If we are faced with an increasingly tight energy market
this year, both developing countries and the Congress should be re-
sponsive to proposals in this area.
• Food: Good weather in grain producing countries over the past
three years has reduced worldwide concern with ensuring adequate
food supplies and stocks. However, long-range projections, particu-
larly for Africa and Asia, point to large growing food deficits over
coming decades. US economic and humanitarian interests are directly
involved in the functioning of international food markets, food assist-
ance, and the domestic food policies pursued by developing countries.
• Health: Diseases and malnutrition in LDCs result in high infant
mortality, adult disability and lower productivity. Both for economic
and humanitarian reasons, the US and other developed countries
should be willing to continue working with the developing countries to
improve health conditions in the developing world.
• LDC Capacity To Use Technology: LDCs have taken a renewed in-
terest in the availability of technology appropriate to their develop-
ment needs, and in their institutional capacity to apply it. We want to
de-emphasize unproductive exercises on international codes on tech-
nology transfer and concentrate on building their capacity to obtain,
generate, adapt, and apply technology to development needs.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
329.
Memorandum From Guy Erb of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the Special Representative
for Economic Summits (Owen)1
Washington, May 9, 1979
SUBJECT
UNCTAD V (U)
A major “North-South” event, the U.N. Conference on Trade and
Development, began this week.2 The U.S. approach to this meeting
(Tab A)3 reflects our straitened circumstances and a reluctance to let the
UNCTAD secretariat work in areas that are the provinces of other insti-
tutions, in particular, the International Monetary Fund and the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. (C)
Two previous UNCTAD meetings agreed on measures of some
significance: UNCTAD II (1968) launched the generalized system of
tariff preferences and UNCTAD IV (1976) agreed on a commodity pro-
gram that eventually led to the recently negotiated framework for the
common fund.4 This conference’s most likely results will be institu-
tional, for example, the establishment of an expert group that may sup-
plant the U.N. General Assembly’s Committee of the Whole. (U)
Reform of the IMF’s compensatory finance facility should receive a
boost from the Manila meeting. The U.S. delegation will resist any
UNCTAD incursion into this matter but can indicate our willingness to
consider liberalization of the facility. The conference may also give
some impetus to guarantees of LDC borrowings from private capital
markets. You can expect some fireworks about the “failure” of the
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 108, North-South Policy: 1979. Confidential. Sent for
information. A copy was sent to the North/South Cluster of the NSC Staff. A stamped
notation reads: “ZB has seen.”
2 UNCTAD V opened in Manila on May 7.
3 Tab A, attached but not printed, is a copy of telegram 115254 to selected posts,
May 5, on “U.S. Positions on Key UNCTAD V Issues.” Katz forwarded an UNCTAD
strategy memorandum to Vance under cover of an April 18 memorandum; Lake com-
mented on the strategy memorandum in an April 19 memorandum to Vance. (National
Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Official Working Papers of S/P Director
agreement on a framework for the fund. Telegram 4845 from Geneva, March 21, trans-
mitted the text of the conference resolution, an accompanying annex entitled “Funda-
mental Elements of the Common Fund,” and the U.S. statement on the annex and the ne-
gotiating conference. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790131–
1196)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
MTN to benefit developing countries. We will try to channel such criti-
cisms toward a constructive UNCTAD work program on trade while
encouraging the LDCs to join in the implementation of the MTN in
order to maximize their gains from the trade codes that were agreed in
5 The Tokyo Round of multilateral trade negotiations concluded on April 12 in Ge-
neva; see Document 209.
330.
Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Lake) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, June 22, 1979
SUBJECT
North-South Strategy After UNCTAD V
Summary:
UNCTAD V’s results were mixed, but on the whole, not incon-
sistent with our overall North-South policy.2 Several aspects of the
Conference reinforce the US approach: UNCTAD V took place in a non-
confrontational atmosphere; general demands for restructuring of the
world system were remanded for future consideration; energy was fi-
nally acknowledged to be an important development issue; and a con-
sensus was reached on several specific work programs and reform of
the secretariat.
Pursuant to your Seattle speech, we should now step up our own
efforts this fall in the areas of energy, food, technology, trade, and fi-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Official Working
Hormats and Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and Development Policy
Marion Creekmore. In a June 22 handwritten note to Vance, Lake commented: “While
UNCTAD V made little practical progress, at least the tone was not bad. This memo re-
views some steps we could take to support moderate LDC’s who would like to head off a
new, unproductive North-South confrontation. The steps are, of necessity, modest. But I
hope you get a chance to review this.” (Ibid.)
statement before the conference on May 11, which included a message from President

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
nance, and seek the support of other governments for specific pro-
posals. As suggested and explained in the body of the memorandum,
you may wish to take the following immediate steps:
—Instruct EB and IO to coordinate an effort to seek agreement
among the Group B governments, in as much detail as possible, on a set
of priorities and initiatives for the series of international conferences on
North-South issues to be held over the next 18 months.
—Hold a meeting with Dick Cooper, Jules Katz, Bill Maynes, and
me to discuss how we can:
• Get a prompt USG response on the Inter-American Development
Bank’s proposal for investment guarantees in the mineral and energy
sectors.
• Secure the support of industrial, developing, and OPEC coun-
tries for regional energy research and training centers in LDCs.
• Advance the idea of bond guarantees, including obtaining the
support of other countries for an IBRD study of a pilot project.
• Obtain a more positive US position on further liberalization of
the Compensatory Finance Facility.
• Look at the overall LDC debt/balance of payment funding ques-
tions we are likely to face over the next several years, and how we
ought to respond.
—Request EB and H to keep tabs on the Food Security Act and to
request intervention by you or other State officials if needed.
—Ask Dick Cooper to review with Tom Ehrlich the role his staff
might play in lobbying for domestic agency programs which support
our North-South goals.
UNCTAD V:
Several features of UNCTAD V deserve note:
—Sweeping resolutions demanding major restructuring of the
world’s economy went nowhere. Rather than try to paper over funda-
mental disagreements between the G–77 and Group B, the Conference
remanded the issues on which there was no agreement to the October
UNCTAD Trade and Development Board meeting.3
—Expectations for dramatic results were lower than at previous
ministerial level UNCTAD meetings, in part because progress on a
number of key issues—the Common Fund, results of the MTN, the dec-
laration on resource transfers in the COW, the negotiations on a rubber
agreement, etc.—had deprived LDCs of politically attractive rallying
points.
—The energy issue deeply divided the G–77. Manila may mark the
end of the taboo on discussing this issue in North-South fora, although
concluding session held on November 23.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
industrial countries will have to approach this issue with great caution.
If we get out front, we may drive the G–77 back together (OPEC’s first
instinct will be to try to limit discussion of the issue to intra-LDC
meetings).
—LDCs continued to exhibit strong sensitivity to the use of terms
such as “differentiation,” “graduation,” and “selectivity” by DCs. Their
concern is not so much economic, as that such concepts mask an at-
tempt to divide the G–77 politically.
—Agreement was reached on a resolution concerning protec-
tionism and restructuring, on a special program for the least developed
countries, on institutional reform of UNCTAD, and on work programs
for commodities, trade, and Economic Cooperation among Developing
Countries.
—In spite of the stalemate on some major issues (“global consulta-
tions” and evaluation of the world economy, evaluation of the MTN,
and several monetary/financial questions), UNCTAD V ended on a
quiet note with no strong recriminations on the part of the G–77 (al-
though we are likely to hear such recriminations at the ministerial
meeting of the non-aligned nations in September).4
The dialogue could go in one of two directions in the aftermath of
UNCTAD V. LDC radicals, including some OPEC states, may urge in-
creased militancy as a way to press for further structural reforms of the
international system and as a means to restore G–77 unity. This option
will probably be considered at the non-aligned meeting.
Alternatively, G–77 moderates will argue that the period of decla-
rations, action programs, and general debate may have about run its
course, and further progress for LDCs will depend on tackling specific
issues. We can support this view by:
—Doing everything possible within the Executive Branch and on
the Hill to keep development assistance and food aid at respectable
levels, to fight trade protectionism, and to secure legislation imple-
menting commodity agreements.
—Indicating that genuine progress has been and is being made on
North-South issues (MDB replenishments, the MTN, the Common
—Publicly noting that modest results from UNCTAD V were pri-
marily a result of lack of focus and priorities on specific issues.
—Making clear that we distinguish between the political unity of
the G–77, which the developing countries see as an important counter-
weight to the developed countries’ economic power, and the need for
4 The Non-Aligned Movement met at the Ministerial level in Havana September

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
differentiation among developing countries when it comes to specific
economic and development policies.
—Moving forward, preferably with other developed countries, in
proposing concrete programs in energy, food, technology, trade, and
finance.
The Next Six Months
Over the next six months, we need to continue the program we
launched this spring. Events we can use include the Tokyo Summit,
final approval and funding of the Institute for Scientific and Techno-
logical Cooperation (ISTC), launching of the IDCA, the release of a re-
port by the President’s Commission on World Hunger, the COW and
IDS in the UN, the UNCSTD and WCARRD (World Conference on
Agrarian Reform and Rural Development) conferences, approval of the
MTN package, and the opening address to the UNGA, presumably to
be given by you.5 Substantively, the following program is suggested:
—Energy: The current international energy situation makes more
timely than ever a major effort to assist LDCs with energy problems.
We should push forward our ideas regarding energy financing and re-
gional research centers, while increasing our current programs of en-
ergy assessments and technical assistance.
• Energy Financing: The IBRD’s new program to finance explora-
tion and development of mineral fuels is getting into gear. Response
from developing countries has been strong, and several proposals are
now in the pipeline. We believe the first projects under this program
should go to the Executive Directors within two to three months. In re-
sponse to your Seattle speech, Fred Bergsten has sent a letter to Ed
Fried officially requesting that the IBRD be asked to study what special
financial arrangements might be required to encourage investment in
renewable energy technologies in the LDCs.6 Funding of renewable en-
ergy technology will be aired at the Tokyo Summit.
Also in response to your speech, Treasury, through our executive
directors, has asked the regional banks to report on their current energy
activities with a view toward encouraging more activity in the field.
The Inter-American Development Bank staff has prepared a proposal
to provide investment guarantees and insurance for petroleum and
mineral exploration and development. The idea has aroused interest in
5 For Vance’s September 24 address to the UN General Assembly, see the Depart-
Maynes, Hormats, and Lake discussed “seven proposals in the area of North/South dia-
logue and how they relate to your UNGA speech.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of
the Secretariat Staff, Official Working Papers of S/P Director Anthony Lake,
6 The letter was not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Latin America and a positive response from Japan and several other in-
dustrial country members. We have prepared a favorable response
which should go to the IDB shortly.7
• Research Institutes: The President may reiterate at the Summit
your Seattle speech recommendation on regional LDC energy research
and training institutes. We also plan to test this idea in bilateral conver-
sations and at the UNCSTD. If the developing countries respond posi-
tively to this idea, we may make a specific proposal at UNCSTD for a
more detailed evaluation of this approach. We may also be in a position
by autumn to make specific proposals in your UNGA speech on this
and other energy initiatives.
• Conference on New and Renewable Energy: A US strategy paper is
now being drafted for the 1981 Conference.8 We would hope that the
Conference would endorse progress made in the expansion and cre-
ation of regional research centers and in experiments with energy fi-
nance (such as those undertaken by the IBRD and regional banks), and
might establish some kind of global coordinating mechanism to set pri-
orities and coordinate funding for research on LDC energy problems
(probably along the lines of that which exists for agriculture).
• Assessments: DOE has completed an assessment of national en-
ergy needs and resources for Egypt, is wrapping up the Peru assess-
ment, and is about to get one underway with Argentina. In addition, an
assessment program is probable for Portugal and possible for Yugo-
slavia and South Korea. AID is launching a major assessment project
with Indonesia, and assessment components are included in a number
of specific technical assistance projects (see Thailand below, for ex-
ample). More funds could be effectively used in these programs as well
as in the technical assistance and demonstration programs below.
• Technical Assistance and Demonstration Programs: AID is under-
taking a $26 million program in 30 countries this year, and plans to ex-
pand this to over $40 million in FY 80. A major new program in Thai-
land provides a good example of our bilateral activity—it will include
technical training, building institutional capacity to analyze energy
programs and formulate policies, and will particularly highlight rural
energy needs, including a fuelwood technology component.
• Tax Policy: Another idea that may warrant serious consider-
ation—but is likely to encounter domestic opposition because it could
appear to help the oil companies—is for the US to give more favorable
foreign tax credit treatment to income earned by US companies from
7 Not further identified.
8 The paper was not found. The UN Conference on New and Renewable Sources of
Energy met in Nairobi in August 1981.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
energy investments in non-OPEC LDCs than to income earned in
OPEC states.
—Food:
• Food Assistance: We may be heading for another difficult period
regarding availability of adequate food assistance. We anticipate a poor
Russian harvest and a mediocre one in Europe. The monsoon in India is
late, but it is too soon to predict whether there will be difficulties. It is,
however, realistic to assume that grain prices in FY 80 will be at least
FY 80 will be about the same level as FY 79, which implies a cut in
volume of food assistance of at least 25%. Egypt has requested a 500,000
mitment it already has from us. A detailed memo is being prepared for
you on this issue.
These developments increase the urgency of the kind of action
called for in your Seattle speech. The US had already pledged to meet
its higher levels of food aid commitments which were negotiated as
part of a new Food Aid Convention, and called on other countries to do
likewise, even though negotiations on a new International Wheat
Agreement are not complete. This week the EC announced it will
follow our lead and meet its higher commitments. We have also asked
other countries to agree to a new Food Aid Convention independently
of progress on the IWA. Finally, the Administration’s Food Security
Act has been introduced in the Senate and will be in the House. It
would allow the USG to set aside four million tons of wheat in an Inter-
national Emergency Wheat Reserve to meet our volume commitments
to the Food Aid Convention in times of short crops and high prices.
Chances for passage of the legislation this year are considered reason-
ably good, but we may need a push from you at some point.
• Research on New Crops and Marginal Lands: The establishment of
the ISTC in October will allow us to press forward in these areas. Fur-
thermore, USDA and Interior now seem more inclined to step up re-
search in these areas out of their own budgets. For example, USDA
hopes to expand its research program on guayule (a latex producing
lion in FY 81. This undertaking will involve cooperative work with
Mexico on new crops and dry lands agricultural techniques.
We need to find a way to insure that these kind of programs get a
fair hearing within the Administration’s overall budget planning. Do-
mestic and cooperative research programs such as these often have
trouble in fighting for budgets within their own agencies and with
OMB. Budgets for such activities are often relatively small and are low
on a domestic agency’s overall priority list. Programs which ran into
difficulty last year included tropical medicine and immunization re-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
search at NIH and cooperative energy research at DOE. The IDCA
might usefully devote some staff time to monitoring and lobbying for
such activities within the executive branch.
• WCARRD: Preparations are now moving into high gear for the
World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development next
month. Andy Young is slated to head the US delegation. His opening
address can set forth US priorities. The delegation’s position papers
will stress getting our points across in the Conference resolutions, par-
ticularly as regards the necessity for LDCs to pursue domestic policies
(such as land reform, adequate credit facilities, and technical extension
services) which encourage increased food production and distribution.
We do not intend to propose new multilateral programs. We will con-
tinue to press the issues of domestic policies in the COW and prepara-
tory work on the IDS.
• President’s Commission on World Hunger: The Commission now
plans to issue its final report in late August or early September. Our
preliminary indications are that the report will emphasize a number of
areas in which we are taking initiatives—new crops, research on mar-
ginal lands, post-harvest loss prevention, and food aid guarantees. We
will try to review preliminary drafts, and help assure that the report
gets heavy publicity overseas through our posts and ICA programs.
—Technology: Our main actions here still relate to the launching of
the ISTC, now scheduled to go into formal operation on October 1, and
the UNCSTD, now moving into an advanced stage of preparations.
—Trade: We want to obtain as many LDC adherents to the new
MTN package as possible. Only Argentina has initialed the package to
date. We believe the failure of others to do so largely reflects an effort to
maintain G–77 unity going into UNCTAD V. It also relates to the desire
of many LDCs to see how the negotiations on a new safeguards code
are resolved. They regard the demand by the EC for “unilateral selec-
tivity” as a direct threat to the ability of LDCs to increase their manu-
factured exports. (“Unilateral selectivity” would allow a country which
believes it is suffering injury to an industry because of imports from
one or several specific countries to take protectionist measures against
the sources of those imports, rather than on an MFN basis, without
prior consultations.) Up to now, the US has maintained a neutral posi-
tion, but shares many of the concerns of the LDCs. Should we move in
the EC direction, we may badly undercut our objective of integrating
the LDCs more fully into the GATT.
Assuming a satisfactory resolution of the safeguard issue, our own
legislative trade package may encourage the LDCs to accept the MTN,
as the legislation contains several liberalizing measures for GSP which
should particularly benefit regional grouping of LDCs such as ASEAN,
the Central American Common Market, and the Andean Pact. In addi-

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
tion, the US should play an active role in pressing for GATT respon-
siveness to LDC concerns, particularly through a strong GATT Special
Assistance Unit, which will be launched this fall.
—Finance: Prospects for the future include high oil prices, con-
tinued worldwide inflation, slow growth in the industrial countries
and stagnant aid levels. As a result, developing countries will again
have to choose between cutting their growth rates or borrowing
heavily to maintain growth and import levels. Private banks are al-
ready heavily exposed in some developing countries, and we do not
know if they will be able to respond as readily to LDC demands for
credit as they did in the mid-seventies. We can predict that financing
balance of payments and debt will again be major economic and polit-
ical issues in North-South relations. There are several possible
responses:
• Bond Guarantee Proposal: An innovative new way to substantially
increase resource flows to the LDCs without straining aid budgets
would be to provide official multilateral guarantees to support bond
issues in the private capital markets by credit-worthy LDCs. Under
such a scheme, bonds would be floated on the private bond markets,
and the IBRD, developed countries and surplus oil producers would
join together to provide partial or full surety for the borrowings. Such a
mechanism could be general or limited to certain types of bonds, such
as to support energy investments. Treasury has historically been nega-
tive on this concept, but Tony Solomon agreed that at UNCTAD V we
could support an IBRD study on the establishment of a pilot program
to determine the efficiency of such guarantees.
The opportunity to broach this issue did not arise at UNCTAD V,
and we must still find an appropriate forum to launch it. The World
Bank/IMF meeting in September9 offers the best platform. It would be
useful to discuss this idea informally with other industrialized coun-
tries and some LDCs before then. Although the bond guarantee idea is
not slated to come up at the Summit, if the issue should surface, you
may wish to note that we are exploring the concept and hope to ex-
change ideas before the Bank/Fund meeting.
• Compensatory Finance Facility: The question of a further liberaliza-
tion of the CFF will come up at the September Bank/Fund meeting. As
things now stand, the US will probably give grudging approval to
some enlargement of the share of quotas which can be borrowed from
the facility, while opposing any other liberalizing changes. The IMF
staff had made several other suggestions, such as including tourism in
calculating shortfalls in export earnings, allowing compensation for
9 The annual joint meeting of the IMF and World Bank took place in Belgrade
October 2–5.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
sudden surges in food imports, and providing a separate calculation
for export earnings shortfalls related to commodities. These sugges-
tions have generally been rejected out of hand in Treasury, and have
generated little enthusiasm in some parts of State. We need a fresh look,
and then ought to get behind whatever changes we decide upon.
• Other Financing Mechanisms: As usual, any movement in the fi-
nancial area is most difficult. Over our negative votes, resolutions were
passed in Manila asking the IMF to examine the need for a medium-
term balance of payments support facility and requiring the Secretary
General of UNCTAD to conduct a study of a possible complementary
facility to the Compensatory Finance Facility. We believe the Brandt
Commission will propose some mechanism to encourage surplus coun-
tries to lend on long-term conditions to developing countries.10 Our
bond guarantee proposal could be part of the answer to these demands.
—Launching the IDCA and ISTC: Unless blocked in Congress, the
IDCA and ISTC come into formal existence on October 1. We ought to
give major publicity to these events. The IDCA should be portrayed as
a US commitment not just to foreign assistance, but development per
se. Likewise, we should try to gain maximum exposure for the ISTC,
both domestically and internationally through ICA.
—Involving Other Foreign Governments in Our Efforts: Up to now we
have concentrated on pressing within our own government for a
North-South package. We should now step up our efforts to explain
our approach in developed and developing countries. The Summit will
be a start. However, as we prepare for the UNGA and UNCTAD TDB,11
we may want to do more in several key OECD countries and LDCs, to
explain our approach and solicit ideas on energy, food, and financial
issues. We will work with EB and IO on a separate memo on this topic.
10 In 1977, McNamara proposed that Brandt preside over an independent commis-
a letter from Brandt to Carter on the proposed commission, and telegram 19870 from
announced the formation of the Independent Commission on International Development
345.
11 The UNCTAD Trade and Development Board served as a preparatory committee
for UNCTAD V.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
331.
Memorandum From Benjamin Huberman and Guy Erb of
the National Security Council Staff and Nathaniel Fields of
the Office of Science and Technology Policy to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski), the Director of the Office of Science and
Technology Policy (Press), and the Special Representative for
Economic Summits (Owen)1
Washington, July 20, 1979
SUBJECT
PRC Meeting on Science and Technology and Development
A PRC meeting, chaired by Warren Christopher, on Science and
The lack of a PRC review of PRM–332 has left unresolved overall U.S.
policy on S&T cooperation with developing countries. This has also se-
verely hampered U.S. preparation for the UN Conference on Science
and Technology for Development (UNCSTD).
This meeting is being held at our insistence to wrap up PRM 33
and to get control over U.S. preparations for the UN Conference on Sci-
ence and Technology for Development (UNCSTD), which begins on
August 20 in Vienna. The PRM was intended to develop a coherent
policy on S&T for development but was overtaken in this regard by the
creation of the ISTC.3 Beyond this, State was hampered in its leadership
of the PRM by personnel turnover. On UNCSTD, State has so far
avoided not only interagency but also internal clearances on positions
and initiatives for the conference. This memo tracks the four agenda
items and gives you our recommendations.
Issues for PRC Action: The PRC has four items for consideration
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 48, PRC
2 See Document 297.
3 The International Development Cooperation Act of 1979, which Carter signed into
law on August 14, authorized establishment of the Institute for Scientific and Techno-
logical Cooperation. Executive Order 12163, issued on September 29, set out the organi-
zation and functions of the ISTC. For the text of Executive Order 12163, see Public Papers
4 Tab B, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Summary Agenda
Paper for PRC Meeting July 23, 1979.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Agenda Item #1
PRM 33. The PRC is asked to note the conclu-
(Tab B)
sions of the study,5 and to direct the follow-on
actions resulting from the study.
Agenda Item #2
UNCSTD. The PRC is asked to review and com-
(Tab B)
ment on the programs and initiatives that have
been proposed for presentation and discussion
at UNCSTD.
Agenda Item #3
Presidential Directive. The PRC is requested to
(Tab B)
approve a directive which would direct USG
technical agencies to devote increased attention
to enhancing the international benefits from
their technical programs.
Agenda Item #4
Funding of USG International S&T Activities.
(Tab B)
The PRC is asked to direct the completion of a
study on funding procedures for PRC review by
February 1, 1980.
Agenda Item #1 PRM 33—S&T for Developing Countries
(Agenda Item #1, Tabs B & C)6
State’s inability to bring the PRM 33 study to a close has been a
source of quiet embarrassment, as many within the Executive Branch,
Congress, and the public have awaited PRC consideration of the PRM
findings for a clearer understanding of Administration policy. Al-
though its usefulness has diminished somewhat, there are several re-
sidual action items to be dispensed.
of Tab C), and (2) to direct three recommended follow-on actions re-
sulting from the study. Although the actions appear to be minor, they
could provoke considerable disagreement between OMB and State
over the actual conclusions of the study. OMB has contended that the
PRM 33 was not conclusive, because many of the recommendations
were not substantiated with adequate analysis; with strongest dis-
agreement on specific “policy, (Tab J for Summary of PRM 33)7 direc-
tions” (pages 3–6, Tab C).
Recommended Action. The PRC is asked to note the conclusions of
the PRM. The PRC should avoid getting bogged-down in a dispute on
6 Tab C, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Agenda Item #1,
PRM–33—Science and Technology for Developing Countries: Conclusions and Action
Plan.”
7 Tab J, attached but not printed, is an “Action Summary” of the study prepared in
response to PRM 33.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
policy. You should try to minimize any such discussion. If the PRC ap-
pears unlikely to agree on this matter you should oppose any moves to
recommit the policy issues for another interagency study by noting that
the policy directions contained in the ISTC legislative mandate (pages
guidance.
Agenda Item #1.2
The second PRC action is to endorse and direct the plan for follow-
on actions from the PRM (page 3–6, Tab C, and Tab J) which could pro-
duce proposals for the FY 82 budget cycle.
The possible follow-on actions are:
Item #1.2.a. Instruct AID missions to assist host governments in
building indigenous S&T capacity.
This would be a new program authority for AID, which would
overlap with the ISTC mandate. Consideration should be given to
whether new AID involvement in capacity building will require new
legislative authority. Discussions are being held regarding the delinea-
tion of the AID role versus the ISTC role in capacity building and in
other program mandate areas. AID will probably oppose this recom-
mendation because of the uncertainty regarding the availability of
budget resources.
We should be careful not to load ISTC with all responsibility for ca-
pacity building also. ISTC will, particularly in the early years, have a
limited
budgetary
capability
for
undertaking
bilateral
capacity
building programs.
Recommended Action. Disapprove the PRM recommendation and
leave this decision for the IDCA Administrator.
Item #1.2.b. Direct interagency preparation of specific proposals
consistent with U.S. interests, for facilitating LDC access to private
technology. The PRM did not undertake a definitive analysis of the
issue, a study would be useful.
Recommended Action. Approve and ensure that the terms of refer-
ence for the study should be linked to UNCSTD and UNCTAD issues.
Item #1.2.c. Review of U.S. R&D activities to ascertain where devel-
oping country needs can be given greater weight in the areas of energy,
which was not included in the PRM recommendation—but deserves at-
tention, world population, international health, and world food and
nutrition.
8 Tab L, attached but not printed, is the text of the legislation establishing the Insti-
tute for Scientific and Technological Cooperation.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Recommended Action. This assignment should go to the IDCA
Administrator.
Agenda Item #2 UNCSTD—Proposals for U.S. Presentation
(Agenda Item #2, Tab B; Tabs D & I)9
The PRC is asked to review and comment on the proposed U.S. ini-
tiatives for UNCSTD; and to direct State to (1) promptly send to NSC
and OMB, under standard procedures regarding future international
program commitments a request for Presidential approval of any pro-
gram requiring such commitment; and (2) to note that the scope paper
and position paper will be submitted to interested agencies for
clearance.
The PRC will not be asked to review the U.S. position on all issues
to be discussed at UNCSTD; however presentation of those issues is
contained under Tab G.10
The major issues at UNCSTD and the general U.S. positions for the
UNCSTD have both been worked out slowly and grudgingly. There
has been much concern both within the Executive Branch and specifi-
cally within the Congress about the state of preparedness of the U.S. for
the UNCSTD Conference. The most contentious issues facing the con-
ference are (Tab G): (1) new financial mechanisms; (2) restructuring of
the United Nations system for science and technology; (3) restructuring
of the international system for transfer of technology; and (4) a global
information system for science and technology. These issues have
emerged from five preparatory committee meetings which have pre-
ceded the UNCSTD; many of the issues still do not have resolution and
will require further discussion at Vienna before the conference can con-
sider them.
The major U.S. initiatives at UNCSTD will be the ISTC, the on-
going programs primarily contained within AID (contained in Annex
B, Tab H),11 and the proposed new initiatives (contained in Annex C,
Tab I). The proposed new initiatives are important from the standpoint
of assuring an adequate damage limiting response by the U.S. to the
Conference. There is general USG concensus that the Conference con-
tains several very contentious issues which are not and would not be
sufficiently responded to by the U.S. if we only presented the ISTC and
the ongoing programs. If the Conference is to avoid a total collapse the
9 Tab D, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Agenda Item #2,
UNCSTD: Scope and Proposed U.S. Program Presentations.” Tab I, attached but not
printed, is a paper entitled “Annex C: Proposed Programs and Proposals for Discussion.”
10 Tab G, attached but not printed, is a paper entitled “Annex A: UNCSTD Scope
Paper.”
11 Tab H, attached but not printed, is a paper entitled “Annex B: Funded programs
(AID Activities in S&T).”

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
US must be prepared to respond to the contentious issues in a moderate
fashion. There are seven proposals which the PRC will be asked to con-
sider. These must be judged against their ability to defuse the political
rhetoric of the Conference and to assure that the Conference attains at
least the minimum acceptable level of success.
Most of the proposals would be targeted for the FY 82 budget
cycle. State has agreed to support the proposal for UNDP funding (Item
1, Tab I). OMB would probably question the need for any new funding
at this point.
Recommended Action. All proposals deserve serious consideration
and you should support a prompt request from State for a Presidential
decision. We can make our final determination on each initiative
(taking the PRC discussion into account) when State’s memo is re-
ceived. You should ask Christopher to state that adequate backstop-
ping will be provided in Washington during the time of the conference
proceedings.
Agenda Item #3 Presidential Directive
Strengthening U.S. International Science and Technology Pro-
grams (Agenda Item #3, Tabs B & E).12 The PRC is asked to approve the
draft directive and recommend that the President sign it. The statement
indicates that as a result of the PRM 33 and in furtherance of the Title V
objectives the President has determined that it is the policy of the U.S.
Government to engage in a broad range of S&T activities with other
countries. This would include both developed and developing
countries.
The Presidential Directive would state that both domestic and for-
eign policy agencies should devote increased attention to how their
R&D programs can contribute to the broadest range of international ob-
jectives, including strengthening U.S. economic competitiveness, pro-
moting closer ties with other countries, improving the capabilities of
developing countries, and utilizing finite global resources more effec-
tively. There are many unresolved questions regarding the implemen-
tation of such a directive and the specific criteria for various interna-
tional S&T programs.
The major concerns regarding the Presidential directive relate to
the technical implementation and the timing of such a directive. The
guidelines for this are yet undefined. They are being worked out within
the Executive Order for Title V (Tab K) and within the CISET funding
12 Tab E, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Agenda Item #3,
Draft Presidential Directive: Strengthening U.S. International Science & Technology
Programs.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
study (Tab F).13 The draft PD is not ready for transmittal to the Presi-
dent. The PD might be useful after a PRC review of recommendations
of the funding study (see Tab D).
State may argue the need for the PD to serve two functions:
(1) It would allow for presentation at UNCSTD; where the U.S.
would point to the broad openness of U.S. Government agencies
toward international cooperation and (2) it would be an explicit policy
statement regarding international S&T activity which is still somewhat
undefined.
Recommended Action: Defer preparation of a PD until PRC review
of the Funding Study. The PRC could approve a broad statement of
support for technical agency consideration of LDC R&D priorities and
recommend that the Presidential Message to UNCSTD include a refer-
ence to such support. The statement to be noted could be drawn from
the draft PD, as follows:
To this end, domestic and foreign policy agencies of the Govern-
ment should devote increased attention to how their research and
development programs can contribute more effectively to our major in-
ternational objectives such as strengthening U.S. economic compet-
itiveness, promoting closer ties with other countries, improving the ca-
pabilities of developing countries and utilizing finite global resources
more effectively.
Agenda Item #4 Funding of USG International S&T Activities
(Tab F)
The PRC is asked to: (1) take note of the Committee on Interna-
tional Science, Engineering and Technology (CISET) initiated funding
study and direct agencies to cooperate in its preparation; and (2) to di-
rect the chairman of CISET through the chairman of the Federal Coor-
dinating Council for Science, Engineering, and Technology (FCCSET)
to provide the results of the study with recommendations for their im-
plementation to the PRC by February 1, 1980.
Recommended Action. Support the recommendation that the PRC
direct the completion of this study and submit it for PRC consideration
by February 1, 1980.
13 Tab K, attached but not printed, is a paper providing “Instructions on Executive
Order to Implement Title V.” Tab F, attached but not printed, is an undated paper enti-
tled “Agenda Item #4, Funding of U.S. International S&T Activities.”

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
332.
Summary of Conclusions of a Policy Review Committee
Meeting1
SUBJECT
PRM–33, Science and Technology and Development
PARTICIPANTS
State
White House
Warren Christopher (Chairman)
Henry Owen
Lucy Benson, Under Secretary for
NSC
Security Assistance, Science,
Rutherford Poats
and Technology
Benjamin Huberman
Thomas Pickering, Asst Secretary,
OSTP
Bureau of Oceans and
Frank Press
International Environment
Nate Fields
and Scientific Affairs
Amb Jean Wilkowski, Coordinator
OMB
for UN Conference on
John White
Science and Technology
Randy Jayne
for Development
Domestic Policy Staff
Labor
Al Stern
Secretary Ray Marshall
CEA
Howard Samuel, Deputy Under
George Eads
Secretary
IDCA
Treasury
Thomas Ehrlich, Director
Deputy Secretary Robert Carswell
George Miller, Exec. Asst to
Commerce
Secretary for Economic Policy
Luther Hodges, Under Secretary
NASA
Agriculture
Administrator Robert Frosch
Quenton West, Sp Asst,
Staff Allen Lovelace, Deputy
International Scientific and
Administrator
Technological Cooperation
AID
ISTC
Robert Nooter, Acting
Ralph Smuckler, Director,
Administrator
Planning Office
HEW
ACDA
Peter Bell, Acting Director, Office
Barry Blechman, Asst Director,
of International Affairs
Weapons Evaluation and
Control
NSF
George Pimental, Acting Director
Bodo Bartocha, Director, Division
John Thomas, Asst NIO for
of International Affairs
Special Projects
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 65, PRC
Room 305 of the Old Executive Office Building.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Energy
OSD
Sarah Jackson, Deputy Assistant
Lt. Col Carl Groth, Acting
Secretary, International
Director, International
Policy Development
Economic Affairs
HUD
JCS
Donna Shalala, Asst Sec,
Col Robert A. Witter, Chief,
Policy Development and
General Policy Branch
Research
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
The purpose of the meeting was to review the conclusions of PRM
33 on Science and Technology and Development, and to review U.S.
preparations for the U.N. Conference on Science and Technology for
Development. PRC action was taken on four items. (C)
1. PRM 33 Conclusions and Follow-up. The PRC noted the conclu-
sions of PRM 33 without discussion. (OMB noted it would send a
memo to Christopher outlining its concerns with the analysis done for
PRM 33.) The PRC agreed on several follow-up activities: (a) IDCA
would organize and coordinate an integrated bilateral program to
strengthen S&T capacity in developing countries; (b) an interagency
group, jointly-chaired by State and IDCA, would prepare proposals for
facilitating LDC access to private technology; and (c) the ISTC would
undertake an overall assessment of R&D activities within USG agencies
to determine their usefulness to developing countries. (C)
2. UNCSTD—U.S. Proposal. In reviewing the US preparations for
the UNCSTD, the PRC endorsed US support for several multilateral
initiatives to be raised at the Conference. The PRC noted that the U.S.
should support the UNDP proposal to establish a special S&T fund to
be administered by UNDP which would target LDC needs in capacity
building and education and training; State proposed, but most other
agencies opposed, making a specific funding commitment at the con-
ference in view of the limited time to analyze the plan and hold con-
gressional consultation. The PRC also agreed that the following pro-
posals merited US support at UNCSTD: (a) a Council for Mobilization
of World Science and Technology, preferably as a function of the
UNDP, (b) a generalization of the Tokyo Summit agreement on energy
for LDCs,2 (c) doubling of support (in nominal terms) over 5 years for
CGIAR agricultural research centers, and (d) remote sensing discus-
sions with satellite operators and users. It was agreed that US bilateral
proposals for an S&T information access center and the space shuttle
sensor for geothermal exploration require further development. The
PRC noted that proposals to be presented or supported by the US at
2 See Document 222.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
UNCSTD should be promptly sent to NSC and OMB for staffing to the
President. (C)
3. Presidential Directive—Strengthening US International S&T Pro-
grams. Agreeing that a Presidential Directive was desirable, the PRC
endorsed the drafting of a directive which would serve to strengthen
US international science and technology programs by directing do-
mestic and foreign affairs agencies to examine ways to broaden contri-
butions of their R&D programs to US international objectives. The PRC
noted that analysis of the budgetary implications of such a directive
should be factored into the PD and that State will seek agency views
prior to submitting the PD for Presidential approval. (C)
4. Funding of USG International S&T Activities. The PRC directed the
completion of the State-led (CISET) study on this subject and its sub-
mission for PRC action by February 1, 1980. (U)
333.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, August 2, 1979
SUBJECT
S&T Cooperation with Developing Countries
This memorandum asks you to make certain decisions regarding
U.S. positions for the UN Conference on Science and Technology for
Development (UNCSTD) which begins August 20, 1979 at Vienna. The
primary focus of the U.S. presentation at this Conference will be the
proposed U.S. Institute for Scientific and Technological Cooperation
(ISTC), which has now been approved by the House and Senate. Three
other issues, which were reviewed by a PRC on July 23,2 require deci-
sions by you.
1. Bradford Morse, head of the UN Development Program, has
suggested that the UNDP create a special $250 million two-year fund to
provide scientific and technological aid to developing countries. (This
would be an alternative to the developing countries’ more grandiose
proposal for a $2 billion UN science and technology fund.) The PRC
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
2 See Document 332.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
consensus was that the U.S. Delegation should support the UNDP pro-
posal in principle, provided that the new program focuses on training
and other S&T activities that do not duplicate or overlap with ISTC’s
programs. However, the PRC did not reach a decision on the level of
U.S. financial support for such a program. Hence, the U.S. delegation is
not now in a position to make a commitment at UNCSTD on a U.S. con-
tribution to the fund.
After further consideration of the funding issue, I believe that it
would be preferable for the U.S. delegation to be able to state at the
Conference that the U.S. would be prepared to contribute up to $25 mil-
lion to the fund annually for two years, provided certain conditions
were met and subject to the approval of our Congress. The U.S. contri-
bution would in any event not exceed 20% of whatever total was
agreed upon for the fund.
I recommend that you authorize the U.S. delegation to indicate at
UNCSTD that the U.S. would contribute up to $25 million annually for
two years to a UNDP special fund for science and technology provided
that the following conditions are met:
—The fund’s activities would not duplicate ISTC, UNDP or other
multilateral assistance efforts in science and technology, and would
meet a legitimate need.
—The other donor states, including members of OPEC, contribute
a fair and reasonable share; and
—Consultation with key members of the Appropriations Com-
mittees indicates a generally favorable Congressional reaction.
These provisos will ensure that the U.S. does not commit itself
until it is clear that the fund will be of genuine value to the LDC’s. At
the same time being able to support the initiative will greatly
strengthen the hand of the U.S. delegation in shaping the nature of the
fund and inducing other nations to contribute their full share. Father
Ted Hesburgh, who will lead the U.S. delegation at Vienna, strongly
agrees with supporting the UNDP initiative; he wants the U.S. delega-
tion to be well equipped to exercise real leadership at the Conference.
Clem Zablocki, who will be a member of the delegation (which in-
cludes 20 Congressmen and 1 Senator) favors a specific U.S. commit-
ment to the fund and also counsels prior consultations with the Appro-
priations Committees. With a favorable decision from you we can
consult with key members and go forward if the Congressional reac-
tion is receptive.3
2. The PRC consensus was that the U.S. should propose that the
UN Conference call, as the seven heads-of-government did at the
Tokyo Summit, for:
3 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
—an increase in bilateral S&T aid to help LDCs expand their en-
ergy production; and
—the World Bank to coordinate these national aid activities, so
that they will add up to a coherent and concerted program.4
3. The PRC consensus was that the U.S. should urge the UN Con-
ference to call for greatly expanded national and multilateral aid for ag-
ricultural research in LDCs, as agreed at Tokyo. To this end, the
Chairman of the Consultative Group on International Agriculture Re-
search should be asked to develop plans for a significant increase in
real terms over five years in the support provided by the Group to the
highly effective International Agricultural Research Centers. In these
plans the Chairman would be asked to give particular attention to pro-
moting the application of research results in developing countries. The
U.S. would not commit itself, at this time, to a specific increase in its
CGIAR contribution. The FY 1979 U.S. contribution to the CGIAR is $26
million. In the future this contribution will come from the budget of the
ISTC.5
I intend to submit to you next week a proposed Presidential Direc-
tive to U.S. agencies to maximize their LDC-oriented S&T,6 which
could be cited by our delegation at the Vienna Conference as further
evidence of our commitment to doing more for the developing coun-
tries in this area.
4 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation.
5 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation.
6 Not found. No Presidential Directive on science and technology was issued.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
334.
Memorandum From the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget (McIntyre), the Director of the
Office of Science and Technology Policy (Press), and the
Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen) to
President Carter1
Washington, August 3, 1979
SUBJECT
S&T Cooperation with Developing Countries (U)
Cy Vance has sent you his recommendations on the US position at
the August 20–31 UN Conference on Science and Technology for De-
velopment.2 On two of his proposals there was agreement in the PRC:
increased and coordinated aid to developing nations in energy devel-
opment and, similarly, in agricultural research; both of these positions
were agreed at the Tokyo Summit. There also is agreement that we
should stress our creation of the Institute for Scientific and Techno-
logical Cooperation (ISTC). (C)
There is disagreement on Cy’s proposal that the US delegation, led
by Father Hesburgh, announce support for creation of a special fund of
up to $250 million in the UN Development Program and commit a US
commitment would be subject to a favorable pre-conference canvass of
key members of congressional appropriations committees and assur-
ance that the fund’s program would not duplicate ISTC. (C)
Press, Owen and Tom Ehrlich believe that the industrial countries
should support, in principle, a modest alternative to the developing
countries’ demand for a $2–$4 billion UN S&T fund. They believe, how-
ever, that we should not make a commitment to a specific US contribu-
tion until we can see how the fall budgetary situation stacks up, what
other donors are willing to do, and whether other countries will accept
our condition that the UNDP fund not duplicate our ISTC program.
They would notify other countries of the US position and express a
hope that they will take the same view, but refrain from spending polit-
ical capital in persuading our allies to support the fund. They recom-
mend that, with your approval and, if necessary, after notifying the
chairmen of the two relevant appropriations subcommittees, the US
delegation be authorized to say:
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 116, Scientific Matters: 1979. Confidential. Sent for ac-
tion. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page.
2 See Document 333.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
The US supports the proposal in principle, provided the Fund’s
functions are defined in ways that do not duplicate ISTC programs. A
US contribution of up to $25 million annually, or 20% of a two-year
fund of up to $250 million, will be considered in US budget planning
this fall for FY 1981 and 1982, but before making a firm commitment we
must know more about the size of the whole US aid budget, other
donors’ plans, and Congressional sentiment. (C)
OMB opposes both the Vance and the Press–Owen–Ehrlich pro-
posals. OMB recommends that the US delegation be instructed to avoid
creating expectations of US contributions to such a fund because there
is a strong probability that it will be found this fall to be a marginal
claimant on a tight aid budget for FY 1981. A modest UNDP fund, OMB
believes, is unlikely to satisfy the developing countries, whose de-
mands include mandatory technology transfer, control of transnational
corporations, and a vastly larger S&T fund. Several other OECD coun-
tries have taken a hard line in preparatory meetings against significant
new aid commitments at this conference, and we have higher priority
aid issues on which we must press them. OMB also fears that agree-
ment to a special fund at this conference will encourage similar pro-
posals at subsequent special purpose meetings. (C)
OMB recommends that the US delegation be instructed to give no
encouragement of US support of the proposed UNDP fund but, in-
stead, stress our contributions in the formation of the ISTC, our present
spending of $200 million annually in AID S&T activities, and your com-
mitment to double our development aid budget by 1983. (C)
Father Hesburgh urges approval of the Vance proposal or at least
the Press-Owen-Ehrlich statement. Otherwise, he says he and his dele-
gation (including 21 Congressmen) will have an inadequate US posi-
tion. Zablocki shares this view, but he would stop short of a flat com-
mitment
without
assurance
of
support
by
the
appropriations
committees. Such assurance is difficult to obtain through consultations
during the Congressional recess, which is one reason that OMB, Press,
Owen, and Ehrlich do not favor a firm commitment to a specific US
contribution now. (C)
Alternative A: Specific commitment (Vance)
Alternative B: No commitment (OMB)
Alternative C: Conditional support (Press, Owen, Ehrlich) (NSC, CL)3
3 Carter did not indicate approval of any of the three alternatives. In the margin
next to the alternatives, he wrote: “Get Approp. Committee sentiment. My own first pref-
erence is to emphasize ISTC, but if Cong commits, I’ll go with Alt (C).” The UNCSTD was
held in Vienna August 20–31. For the opening and closing remarks by Hesburgh, head of
the U.S. delegation, and Carter’s message to the conference, see the Department of State

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
335.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs (Bergsten) to Secretary of the
Treasury Miller1
Washington, November 9, 1979
SUBJECT
IDA VI—Completing the Negotiations
The Issue
Negotiations for the Sixth Replenishment of IDA are nearing a con-
clusion. When they began eighteen months ago, the Bank proposed a
$15 billion replenishment with a U.S. share of 31 percent—implying
initially reviewed the issue, in June 1978,2 he approved a range of
(then) effort to double U.S. concessional aid by FY 1982.
During the long series of negotiations, during which we have
made no money commitment, we have successfully argued that the
Bank’s proposal was too ambitious regarding both size and U.S. share.
A consensus has now emerged among the other donors on a $12 billion
replenishment. This amount would represent 5 percent real growth
over IDA V, thus fulfilling a Bonn Summit commitment.
At the same time, in response to a sense of the Congress resolution
attached to last year’s appropriation bill,3 we have made it clear that
our share cannot exceed 27 percent. Other donors are reconciled to ac-
cept this decline from our 31.4 percent share of IDA V. We have also
made it clear that we are not yet in a position to agree to the $12 billion
level.
The negotiations must now be wrapped up by mid-December so
that we, and other donors, can include the first installment of IDA VI
contributions in budgets for FY 81. It appears that the deal can be con-
cluded at the next IDA Deputies Meeting on December 12–13, if the
1 Source: Department of the Treasury, Office of the Secretary, Executive Secretariat,
Drafted by Department of the Treasury staff member Steven Tvardek. Reviewed by De-
partment of the Treasury staff members Joseph Winder, King (not further identified), and
Eva Meigher and Nachmanoff. Also reviewed by the Department of the Treasury Execu-
tive Secretariat on November 12.
2 Not found.
3 In October 1978, Congress passed and Carter signed into law the Foreign Assist-
ance and Related Programs Appropriations Act (P.L. 95–481). Attached to the legislation
was a sense of Congress resolution asserting that the United States’ IFI contributions
should henceforth be below various set percentages.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
United States is ready—which, because of our own budget timing, we
must be.
Proposed Position
I think we should support a $12 billion replenishment and a U.S.
share of 27 percent. This would result in an average annual contribu-
tion of $1,080 million which represents real growth of less than one per-
cent over our IDA V contribution. State, the White House and all other
agencies support this figure.4
billion annually, with a preference for the $1.4 billion midpoint). It is
less than the $1.2 billion figure in the spring budget review. It is far
lower than the Bank requested and the State Department thought was
appropriate. It is less than Congress appropriated for IDA in each of the
million for FY 80, though each of those numbers included IDA IV ar-
rearages as well as IDA V current payments).
In response to the expressed concern of Congressman Obey that
the IDA figure be kept below $1 billion in politically difficult 1980, we
have negotiated an arrangement to stairstep our actual payments. The
FY 81 total figure would thus be about $980 million. OMB would
greatly appreciate stairstepping, as it would help relieve the intense
budget pressure for next year.
Hill Considerations
We have carried out Congressional consultations on IDA VI, and it
is these—plus the difficulties of this year’s Hill battle and the overall
budget tightness—which have led us to cut back the proposed numbers
so sharply. The Hill reactions have ranged from cool to hostile, and
some of our leading supporters—including Senator Javits and Con-
gressman McHugh—counsel that we support the international con-
sensus but frankly tell the other contributors that we may not come up
with our full payments on time. There has, however, particularly in the
Senate, been strong support for our success in negotiating the sharp re-
duction in the U.S. share.
We have deliberately left Representative Obey, the most important
House member, until last—although we have had extensive discus-
sions with him on the subject earlier, and know that he has concern
about our numbers. We simply cannot risk consulting with him on IDA
VI until the current conference is completed, but will do so immedi-
ately thereafter.
4 Miller underlined this sentence and put a checkmark in the adjacent margin.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
You have suggested a meeting with McNamara and key Con-
gressmen prior to the final IDA negotiating session. We will try to set
up such a meeting, probably for the first week of December, although it
may be difficult in light of meshing everyone’s schedules.5 In any
event, we will convey our intentions to all key members with adequate
time to get their reactions prior to final action.
Conclusion
IDA is the centerpiece of U.S. North/South strategy. It is also the
largest source of concessional assistance to Black Africa. At a time
when the U.S. is being criticized internationally for its relatively low
level of foreign aid, we will be able to take credit for a successful con-
clusion to the IDA negotiations at very little increase in budgetary cost.
Indeed, almost all the real growth in IDA will come from other donors.
I therefore recommend a U.S. position of 27 percent of a $12 billion
IDA VI replenishment, as the basis for final Congressional consulta-
tions and inclusion in the FY 81 budget.
Approve6
Disapprove
Let’s meet
5 Miller put two checkmarks in the margin adjacent to the first two sentences of this
paragraph.
On January 17, 1980, the IDA announced the successful negotiation of its sixth replenish-
or 27 percent of the total replenishment. (Hobart Rowan, “World Bank’s Affiliate Gets Ex-

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
336.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, November 10, 1979
SUBJECT
Statutory Constraints on Foreign Assistance Which May Impede U.S. Efforts to
Counter Soviet-Cuban Adventurism
In response to your question on this subject, let me first briefly re-
view our accomplishments and setbacks on the “legislative con-
straints” front since my memorandum to you on this issue last year
(attached).2
Working closely with Henry Owen and AID, we have succeeded
in getting Congress to eliminate outright or ease a number of con-
straints on our use of development and security assistance in areas
where Soviet and Cuban activity is growing. These include:
—repeal of the prohibition on furnishing long-term development
assistance and short-term economic support (security supporting assist-
ance) to any country in a single fiscal year (Sec. 115 of the Foreign As-
sistance Act of 1961, as amended—the FAA);
—authorization for the President to draw on Defense Department
stocks for emergency military assistance needs involving vital U.S. se-
curity interests, without the former requirement for appropriation act
language each year before this authority is actually available to the
President (Sec. 506 of the FAA);
—repeal of the $40 million ceiling on aggregate military assistance
and foreign military sale (FMS) financing that can be provided to Af-
rican countries in a single fiscal year (Sec. 33 of the Arms Export Con-
trol Act);
—removal of limits on the amount of military assistance and FMS
sales and financing for Turkey in a single fiscal year (although the Pres-
ident must still first certify that defense articles provided are necessary
for Turkey to meet its NATO defense responsibilities) (Sec. 620(x) and
620(C) of the FAA);
—expansion of the President’s authority to transfer funds from the
Economic Support Fund account under the FAA to the Peacekeeping
account, and to use Peacekeeping funds to pay for Defense Department
expenses incurred in supporting UN activities.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
The memorandum was sent to Carter under cover of a December 3 memorandum from
Owen, who indicated his agreement “with Cy’s case-by-case approach to the removal of
constraints and will work with him, Tom Ehrlich, and others on a strategy for 1980.”
Owen also wrote: “This is an uphill battle but our achievements thus far show that some
headway can be made.” Carter initialed Owen’s memorandum. (Ibid.)
2 Printed as Tab A to Document 305.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
For FY 81, we hope to have established a $50 million Contingency
Fund. This is the single most significant new initiative in which we will
be engaged with the Congress to provide you with broader flexibility to
respond to rapidly developing threats to peace and security around the
world.
There are still a large number of statutory provisions which limit
executive flexibility. Some of these have been enacted in the past year.
They include:
—prohibitions in the FY 80 economic and security assistance legis-
lation on various forms of assistance, respectively, to Panama, Jor-
dan, Syria, and Afghanistan,3 in each case waivable under certain
conditions;
—a tightening of constraints on providing assistance to countries
in default on U.S. Government loans; and
—requirements for Presidential certifications before security
assistance may be proposed for Greece and Turkey, or before major
FMS sales may be made to those countries.
The FY 80 foreign assistance appropriations legislation, now in
conference, may contain further constraints, the most serious being a
prohibition on “indirect” assistance to certain designated countries. We
are continuing our efforts to defeat these.4
Our experience in working with Congress to reduce or eliminate
legislative constraints indicates that:
—we have been most effective to date in arguing, not against con-
straints per se, but that particular constraints are undesirable on their
own practical or policy merits;
—Congressional concern over real and perceived past abuses of
Executive authority in foreign assistance and other areas is likely to
continue to be reflected in a strong Congressional desire for close
scrutiny or limitation of contemplated foreign policy actions by the
Executive;
—many in Congress believe the need for “Executive flexibility” is
adequately addressed by existing waiver authority in many individual
prohibitions and by general Presidential authority to waive most prohi-
bitions against programs under the FAA.
Tom Ehrlich is leading an interagency study that will have as one
of its primary subjects of focus how to simplify U.S. development
assistance programs.5 I believe this should include a further review of
3 Carter underlined the words “Panama,” “Jordan,” “Syria,” and “Afghanistan.”
4 Carter highlighted this paragraph.
5 On October 18, Vance asked Ehrlich “to take the lead” on reviews of three issues:
“whether our bilateral or our multilateral assistance is most effective in the long run;”
“what can be done to eliminate restrictive legislative provisions and to simplify adminis-
trative practices with a view to improving the quality and flexibility of our aid;” and
whether the Carter administration had “been as effective as it should be in building Con-
gressional support for our foreign assistance programs, and particularly for our contribu-

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
how we should approach Congress in an effort to minimize statutory
constraints in this area. Everyone involved, including Henry Owen,
agrees that the issues must be thoroughly reviewed within the Execu-
tive Branch before we broach any proposals for wide-ranging reform
with the Congress. As this study proceeds, we will continue our efforts
to eliminate specific existing constraints and resist the imposition of
new ones.
For the immediate future, any constraints which stand in the way
of initiatives we may contemplate taking to counter specific threat-
ening acts of the Soviets and/or Cubans should, I believe, be addressed
on a case by case basis. We should consider making maximum use of
the broad waiver authority you already have with regard to many pro-
hibitions and be prepared to take our case to the Congress on specific
non-waivable prohibitions where we believe a good possibility exists
for sympathetic Congressional action.
Tom and I will provide you with periodic reports on the progress
of the IDCA-led study and ensure that it proceeds on a priority basis.
tions to the multilateral development banks (MDBs) and UN organizations.” Vance’s Oc-
tober 18 letter to Ehrlich and Ehrlich’s October 29 reply are in the National Archives, RG
59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Official Working Papers of S/P Director Anthony Lake,
337.
Memorandum From the Vice President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Clift) to Vice President Mondale1
Washington, December 17, 1979
SUBJECT
Preliminary Recommendations of the Presidential Commission on World Hunger
The following is forwarded in response to your request for a brief
review of the preliminary recommendations of the Presidential Com-
1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Material, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, National
No classification marking. Sent for information.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
mission on World Hunger.2 In its preliminary report, the Commission
presents only recommendations affecting the organization of the U.S.
Government, levels of development assistance, alleviation of famine
caused by war, and domestic feeding programs.
The Commission’s preliminary recommendations are that:
—The United States make the elimination of hunger the primary
focus of its relationships with the developing countries, beginning with
the decade of the 1980s.
—The Director of the International Development Cooperation
Agency be accorded Cabinet-level status, so that the objectives of equi-
table economic development can be more effectively integrated into
U.S. national security policy and planning.3
—The United States move as rapidly as possible toward the United
Nations’ goal of 0.74 percent of Gross National Product as this nation’s
net disbursement of concessional economic assistance. The Commis-
sion further recommends that this increase be limited to development
(not security or military) assistance, targeted selectively at poor nations
strongly committed to meeting basic human needs and rights through
self-reliant development, and that appropriations for this purpose be
funded on a multi-year basis, and “untied” from domestic economic or
political interests. In order to reach the target of 0.7 percent GNP as
quickly as possible, the Administration must propose a substantial in-
crease in its next fiscal year submission, with the intent of doubling5
economic development assistance within a few years. The Congress
must be prepared to approve the request for increased funding. The
Commission emphasizes that the increase must focus on the economic
and technical aspects of development assistance and not on security
assistance.
—The United States Senate ratify the Additional Protocols to the
1949 Geneva Convention, adopted by the International Conference on
Humanitarian Law in Armed Conflict.6
2 Linowitz submitted the Commission’s preliminary report to Carter under cover of
a December 6 letter. (Ibid.) Substantial portions of the preliminary report are printed in
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Document
263. It was released to the public on December 10. (Seth S. King, “U.S. Panel Asks Dou-
3 Mondale wrote “No” in the margin adjacent to this point.
5 Mondale underlined the word “doubling.”
6 Meeting in Geneva in June 1977, the Conference reached agreement on adding
two protocols to the 1949 Geneva Convention, one pertaining to foreign conflicts and the
other to domestic conflicts. (“Meeting on Revising Rules of War Ends in Geneva After

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980
—The Commission recommends that increased resources be pro-
vided to those domestic hunger programs which have a demonstrated
record of success, and that a systematic effort to assess the nutritional
status of Americans be undertaken. Congress and the Department of
Agriculture will have to take steps to assure that food assistance pro-
grams, particularly food stamps, respond to increases in inflation and
unemployment.
338.
Paper Prepared by the Department of State1
Washington, undated
Scope Paper on the First Phase of Global Negotiations
The Preparatory Work in the UNGA Committee of the Whole
SUBJECT
Foreign Policy and Country Aid Allocations (S)
This memorandum responds to your request that we review pro-
posed aid allocations to countries in light of their attitudes toward pri-
mary US foreign policy objectives, especially in the current Iranian and
Afghan situations.2 (S)
An NSC staff analysis last week found a high correlation between
recent trends in allocations of aid among countries and their support of,
or opposition to, major US foreign policy interests.3 (C)
We have considered whether reductions in aid to unhelpful coun-
tries would be likely to improve their political behavior or influence
other aid recipients to be more helpful. (S)
I. Security Assistance
This type of assistance is geared primarily to support of short-term
foreign policy purposes, and so changes in it to take account of the re-
cipients’ changing foreign policy attitudes are not only appropriate but
desirable. (U)
In security assistance, negative political factors were found in the
cases of three recipients: Zambia, Syria, and Mozambique, and incon-
sistency between low aid allocations and high political support ratings
was noted in the cases of Oman, Morocco, and Lebanon. (U)
Of the three countries frequently at odds with US policy, only
Syria has been particularly unhelpful in the current crises. On Iran,
while the Syrians have indicated the possibility of their playing a medi-
ator’s role, their public pronouncements have been strongly pro-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
of the page.
2 In a January 8 handwritten note to Brzezinski and McIntyre, Carter rquested: “Ad-
vise me what changes we should make in foreign aid pkg—today.” (Ibid.) In November
1979, Iranian Islamic militants overran the U.S. Embassy in Tehran and took the U.S. per-
sonnel as hostages. In December 1979, the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan.
3 Reference is to a January 5 memorandum from NSC Staff members Rutherford
Poats and Robert Kimmitt to Brzezinski entitled “Correlation of Aid Levels and Support
of US Objectives.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Out-

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980
Khomeini and pro-revolution. On Afghanistan, Syria has endorsed the
Soviet action and has issued statements of support for the new gov-
ernment in Kabul. We find the accumulation of Syrian actions contrary
to US interests unacceptable in a recipient of security assistance. (S)
No other current recipient of US aid has taken a stance on the Af-
ghanistan issue comparable to Syria’s. (C)
If action were to be taken against Syria on this account, we would
million to continue our educational scholarship and training projects,
which may be useful ultimately in gaining Syrian political cooperation.
We believe that the Congress is likely to cut out all aid to Syria if a large
program is proposed. The reduced proposal contrasts with our re-
We would propose applying the $10 million “saving” to ESF aid to
a more supportive country or countries, such as Lebanon. It is too late
in the budget process to shift the funds to the FMS account. They could
be added to the Contingency Fund proposal, but this might simply in-
crease the Congressional cut of this controversial account. (S)
Options
—Leave Syrian ESF program at $15 million. (C)
—Reduce the Syrian program to $5 million and apply the $10 mil-
lion to a more supportive country or countries. (Our recommendation;
State concurs)4 (C)
II. Development Aid
Development assistance is, by its nature and legislative history,
geared more to long-term goals than to influencing immediate political
behavior. The Congress made clear, in amending your aid reorganiza-
tion plan last year and in previous amendments to the Foreign Assist-
ance Act, that development aid should be insulated from short-term
political considerations. The Nixon Administration was strongly criti-
cized by the Congressional and private constituencies (especially
church leaders) on which we rely for support of development aid for
moving in the opposite direction. (It reportedly had a “hit list” of coun-
tries which were to be punished for their UN votes, and which was
kept up to date in the State Department by White House direction.) (U)
In development assistance, the NSC staff study found some diver-
gence between development aid allocations and recent political atti-
tudes—notably in the cases of India and Mali. (C)
4 Carter indicated his approval of this option and initialed “J.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
We believe Mali can be set aside for the present as inconsequential.
Our development aid of $16 million is an integral part of the multi-
country Sahel recovery program. Mali’s pro-Soviet tendencies don’t
seem likely to be contagious in Africa or troublesome in international
organizations. (C)
India has deplored the taking of US hostages in Iran, but the in-
terim government has not been as outspoken and active as we wished
in working for their release. Both that government and candidate
Gandhi have criticized Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan.5
After first being quoted in an Indian newspaper as seeing some merit in
Moscow’s excuses for its action, Mrs. Gandhi made a forthright state-
ment of criticism of Soviet aggression yesterday: “There is no excuse for
Soviet troops to go into Afghanistan . . .” (C)
As you know, India is a unique case: practitioner of a peculiar
brand of non-alignment that sometimes is biased toward Soviet in-
terests (such as in Kampuchea), the central theater in the war on hunger
(along with Bangladesh and Pakistan), and increasingly effective in ag-
ricultural development. (U)
India’s positions on the current crises and its longer-term political
posture do not, in our judgment, warrant a punitive reduction of pres-
ently programmed aid. (S)
That aid consists of a constant program of PL–480 Title-II food
grants for voluntary agency feeding projects and a rising program of
AID development loans, primarily to support food production through
fertilizer imports. (U)
In the reprogramming caused by Congressional cuts in the overall
AID appropriations, our FY 1980 AID program in India has been re-
For FY 1981 if the entire AID appropriation requested were granted,
India would receive $170 million—high in absolute terms but among
the lowest (30 cents) in per capita terms among AID recipients. As in FY
1980, a substantial reduction in this figure will occur in the reprogram-
ming that will follow Congressional cuts. (We can take account of what
India does between now and then in reprogramming, without the dis-
advantages cited below that would attend a change now.) (C)
Our current efforts to build resistance to Soviet-sponsored destabi-
lization of Pakistan would be greatly aided by India’s cooperation,
even if tacit. Conversely, heightened Indian hostility toward Pakistan
could undermine our efforts. India’s sensitivity to the resumption of US
1980. Indira Gandhi was the Congress Party candidate for Prime Minister in the January
election.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980
arms aid to Pakistan could be inflamed if that resumption were cou-
pled with a simultaneous reduction in the projected economic aid pro-
gram for India, whose general growth course is known to that gov-
ernment. This is the more true since the $170 million figure is now
widely known and an order to change draft Congressional presentation
papers at the last moment might well leak. (S)
Such a change would cut across the signal that we are trying to
give India by our action on Tarapur and our intended discussions of
Pakistani arms aid with the Gandhi government. It would seem to be
directed at Mrs. Gandhi, starting our relationship with her on a sour
note and making it more difficult to establish tacit cooperation on secu-
rity in the subcontinent. (S)
A cut in projected aid for India, following your endorsement of the
Hunger Commission’s call for commitment of our development aid to
overcoming world hunger without regard to political considerations,
would be criticized by the Commission and other pro-aid and
anti-hunger citizen groups. As Sol Linowitz wrote to you, India—with
about half the population of the less-developed nations, dire poverty,
and a very serious food problem—epitomizes the need the Commis-
sion was addressing.6 Finally, if we desire to substantially increase
PL–480 as a response to the grain embargo,7 India is one of the most
likely candidates for large increases.
On the other hand, if Mrs. Gandhi makes frequent strong anti-US
statements or reinstitutes her previous repressive policies, Congres-
sional hostility to India and pressures for cutting aid to India will re-
Options
—Stick with the India aid level in your pending FY 1981 budget
these figures bear at least their fair share of likely Congressional
cuts; reconsider whether even deeper cuts8 should be made then in
light of intervening events. (Our recommendation; State and IDCA
6 Linowitz’s letter was not found.
7 On January 4, Carter announced an embargo on grain sales to the Soviet Union in
response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. For the text of Carter’s announcement,
see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pp.
Agriculture effecting the embargo, see ibid., p. 32.
8 Carter underlined the phrase “even deeper cuts.”
9 Carter indicated his approval of this option and wrote “But cut if warranted” in
the adjacent margin. A note in an unknown hand in the opposite adjacent margin reads:
“[illegible] both India programs per the P’s instructions to ZB.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—Cut the AID program for India in FY 1981 back to the FY 1980 re-
quest level ($135 million).10 (C)
Bangladesh, currently a member of the Security Council, supported
the resolution demanding withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghani-
stan and abstained—as did the other Moslem member, Kuwait—on the
Iran sanctions vote.11 It took this decision in the face of very strong US
pleas to act differently. Otherwise its policy has been moderate in
North-South forums and independent of communist powers. (C)
This Islamic nation of 87 million is at the depths of poverty, and
our aid there is very important to human survival and nutrition. The
planned FY 1981 program consists of $117 million in AID projects, and
$102 million in PL–480, both focused on food production. (C)
A reduction at this stage in the process of drafting the Congres-
sional presentation papers could only be explained on grounds of
Bangladesh’s abstention on the Iran sanctions vote. Such a decision
might leak and provoke a sharp reaction from supporters of the war on
hunger and from third world countries on which we rely for support in
the present crisis. They would cite such a decision—basing long-term
development aid on a recipient’s UN vote of abstention—as evidence
of hypocrisy in our policy statements on North-South development co-
operation. (C)
We understand that Cy Vance may be sending you a memoran-
dum recommending that we reduce our development assistance be-
low the presently planned FY 1981 level while allowing a moderate
increase. (C)
Options
—Stick with the presently planned FY 1981 Bangladesh program
IDCA concurs.)12 (C)
—Cut Bangladesh back to the FY 1980 AID request level of $105
million, without altering the planned PL–480 program.13 (C)
10 Brzezinski wrote “I lean this way” and initialed in the margin adjacent to this
option.
ghanistan. The Soviet Union vetoed a resolution condemning the invasion. The Security
Council also met on January 11 and 13 to consider the situation in Iran. A U.S.-sponsored
draft resolution calling on member states to impose sanctions on Iran pending the safe re-
lease of the hostages was not approved.
12 Ehrlich discussed his opposition to a reduction in assistance for Bangladesh in a
January 10 memorandum to Owen. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
13 Brzezinski wrote “I lean this way” and initialed in the margin adjacent to this op-
tion. Carter indicated his approval of the option and wrote “& refuse FMS request” in the
adjacent margin.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980
Other Countries
The other non-communist country which has been pro-Soviet with
its comments on Afghanistan is Ethiopia. It will receive no US aid in
Title-II program in 1981. We recommend no change at this time.14 (C)
14 Brzezinski wrote “I would cut” and initialed in the margin adjacent to this option.
Carter indicated his approval of the option and initialed “J.”
340.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, January 10, 1980
SUBJECT
Foreign Policy Aid Allocations (U)
Attached are State’s comments on yesterday’s joint memorandum
from Zbig Brzezinski and Jim McIntyre to you on this subject.2 These
comments have been reviewed and altered by Cy Vance to reflect his
personal views. (C)
1. Cy favors a cut in ESF aid to Syria, as recommended in the joint
memo.
2. Like the joint memo, he opposes a cut in aid to India despite its
unhelpful policies in the present crisis, “in view of the election of a new
government in India and our interest in dampening Indian concerns
about our approach to Pakistan. . . .” To cut back planned aid programs
for India at this time would get us off on the wrong foot immediately
with the new government, negate any benefit from settling the Tarapur
license issue and, most seriously, be a double blow when coming on
top of our increased arms assistance for Pakistan. (S)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
zinski initialed at the top of the page.
2 Attached but not printed is a January 10 memorandum from Tarnoff to Owen on
“Reconsidering Aid Levels for Countries Not Supporting the U.S. on Iran and Afghani-
stan.” The joint memorandum from Brzezinski and McIntyre is Document 339.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
lion back to the FY 1980 request level of $105 million, and refusing their
request for FMS aid. (S)
This last recommendation, the arms supply sanction, was a spe-
cific threat in Cy’s message to Zia;3 its fulfillment would make the pun-
ishment fit the crime; and it would not alienate our domestic aid con-
stituency—e.g., the church leaders whom you called to the White
House to lobby for development aid a year ago,4 the Hunger Commis-
sion, and others who believe that we will insulate development aid
from short-term political purposes (and whom we will be calling to the
White House again in a few months to help us if the aid bill is in
trouble). (S)
State also opposes cuts in projected aid to Zambia and Mozam-
bique and suggests how funds freed by aid cuts to Syria and Bangla-
desh could be used. Such alternative uses can be accomplished through
reprogramming and do not require Presidential approval. (S)
3 Not found.
4 Not further identified.
341.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, January 11, 1980
SUBJECT
Aid Review (C)
An additional last minute fact that you should be aware of in re-
viewing aid allocations to specific countries: We have just launched an
inter-agency exercise to see whether large additional amounts of grain
(up to 1 million tons) could be moved quickly as PL–480 shipments
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
note to Brzezinski, under cover of which he sent the memorandum for forwarding to
Carter, Owen wrote that he was “hopeful we can come up with large increases in PL 480
for both FY 80 + FY 81, which will help to calm farmers’ fears. But OMB is far from per-
suaded.” (Ibid.)

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980
overseas, in light of recent events. Agriculture says that this would help
reassure farmers. (C)
I don’t know what recommendations will emerge, since there are
some arguments against such a program, but I do know that it would
be impossible to move this additional amount of PL–480 grain without
very large additional shipments going to India and Bangladesh, as well
as other countries. South Asia is where most of the hungry people
If we do go forward with additional PL–480 shipments to India
and Bangladesh, and if we also cut back programmed AID develop-
ment assistance to these countries, we will seem to be increasing their
food shipments and decreasing aid to help them grow food at the same
time. I suppose we could figure out how to answer questions from the
media and the Congress as to why we were moving in these seemingly
contradictory directions, but it would be hard. (C)
The problem would be less difficult if we made any development
aid cuts after the Congressional appropriations reductions later in the
year—when the announcement of additional PL–480 (if there is to be
one) will have faded from peoples’ minds. (C)
342.
Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of the
Treasury for International Affairs (Nachmanoff) to Secretary
of the Treasury Miller1
Washington, January 15, 1980
SUBJECT
U.S. Policy on Debt Relief
In light of recent discussions of debt relief for Pakistan, Fred
Bergsten suggested we give you a background paper on current U.S.
Government policy.
A decade ago, there was no coherent U.S. policy on debt relief.
Since then, partly in response to Congressional concerns and partly in
the context of North/South negotiations, a fairly elaborate policy has
Rieffel (IDN) and reviewed by Robert Pelikan (IDN). Sent through Solomon, and this
copy bears his stamped initials.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
emerged. It is designed to ensure that debt relief is a financial policy in-
strument with enough flexibility to be supportive of our broad foreign
policy objectives. Flexibility requires that Congressional constraints on
the use of debt relief be minimized. Key elements of our policy—which
are strongly supported by OMB—include the following:
1. Debt relief should not be used as development aid.
If extended as aid, debt relief encourages disregard for contrac-
tural repayment obligations. Also, debt-relief is “no strings” aid com-
pared to project and program aid which give us some continuing le-
verage on policies and administration.
There is also a compelling practical argument. The Executive
Branch has the authority to extend debt relief without prior Congres-
sional approval even though it decreases federal receipts and therefore
has a clear budget impact. If the Executive Branch uses this authority
too freely, Congress is likely to take it away. Congressional constraints
progressively imposed on our authority include: (a) requiring that loan
repayments return to Treasury instead of allowing the creditor
agencies to reprogram them; (b) prior notification of debt-rescheduling
negotiations; (c) a 30-day waiting period for possible Congressional ac-
tion before rescheduling agreements go into effect; and (d) an annual
report to Congress on debt relief operations. (See Tab A for further
details.)2
2. Debt relief should only be extended in a situation of default or
imminent default.
Otherwise, debt relief will be requested by every country we aid
whenever it wants larger assistance flows. While we do have some flex-
ibility in determining when a default situation exists, we have not ex-
tended debt relief except where it is clear that payments due in the near
term will not be made.
3. The effective implementation of a comprehensive economic sta-
bilization program is a precondition for debt relief.
This is designed to ensure that debt relief restores the debtor
country’s creditworthiness as quickly as possible so it can resume
scheduled debt-service payments and normal borrowing activities.
An IMF standby arrangement is usually the test for meeting the
precondition.
4. Debt relief should only be provided on a multilateral basis in a
creditor-group operation (e.g., the “Paris Club”).3
2 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Recent Legislation
on Foreign Debts.”
3 The Paris Club, an informal and voluntary consortium of creditor countries that
develops coordinated policies to help countries having trouble repaying their debts, first
convened in 1956.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980
This has been a key issue in North/South negotiations. LDCs have
sought a new international mechanism that would provide debt relief
“on demand” in effect. This element was reaffirmed in discussions
leading up to a PRC meeting in February 1978 on U.S. debt policies.4
5. The terms of debt relief are determined on a case-by-case basis.
The case-by-case approach provides another important source of
flexibility. It is possible to show more generosity when the political
stakes are large (e.g., Indonesia in 1970, Chile in 1974, Nicaragua under
discussion).
6. Private creditors (e.g., banks) should extend comparable relief.
Three years ago, during the hearings on U.S. participation in the
IMF’s Supplementary Financing Facility, concern was expressed (espe-
cially by Congressman Cavanaugh) that governments would “bail out”
banks that were heavily exposed abroad. The most formal statement of
our policy on debt relief dates to that time when we made “comparable
treatment” an explicit part of our policy. (See attached NAC Action at
Tab B.)5
4 See Document 300.
paper on “Proposed Policy Statement on Debt Reorganization.”
343.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, January 17, 1980
SUBJECT
International Program Uses of Excess Grain (U)
1. Introduction. In your speech announcing the cutback in Soviet
grain purchases, you said that “we will also increase amounts of grain
devoted to the alleviation of hunger in poor countries”. To fulfill this
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
page: “I concur. ZB.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
pledge Cy Vance, Jim Williams,2 and Tom Ehrlich recommend, as do I,
an increase in PL–480.3 OMB is opposed. (C)
They also recommend, as do all your advisers, pressing ahead
with our existing proposal to establish the Food Security Reserve, an
earmarked four million ton portion of CCC holdings of wheat, for re-
stricted use in meeting severe food supply shortages under our PL–480
food aid program. (C)
Agriculture recommends, in addition, increasing commercial term
export sales under the CCC credit program. (C)
Memoranda from Vance, Williams, and Ehrlich on the PL–480 pro-
posals and from Williams on the Food Security Reserve and CCC credit
sales proposals are at Tabs A, B, and C, respectively.4 Jim McIntyre is
submitting an analysis of the budget implications.5 (C)
If you approve any of these recommendations, we would like to
announce on Saturday.6 (U)
2. Food Security Reserve. All of your advisers believe that we should
try to use the present situation to reinforce our previous request to the
Congress to establish the Food Security Reserve. It would not increase
the federal budget. It is a long-sought assurance of US readiness to re-
spond to food crises and to maintain our food aid to needy countries
when there is a short US grain crop. The Reserve will not work to de-
press US wheat prices because releases from it are restricted to situa-
tions of severe shortages. (C)
Establishment of this reserve will not generally be seen as fulfilling
your pledge to “increase amounts of grain devoted to alleviation of
hunger in poor countries”; it would simply assure that we will be able
to meet our minimum food aid commitments, whatever may be agri-
cultural conditions. (C)
3. PL–480. All of the agencies concerned, except OMB, agree that
increased PL–480 food aid should be part of our disposition of the
2 James Williams was the Deputy Secretary of Agriculture.
vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs.
4 Annexes A–C are attached but not printed. Annex A is a January 17 memorandum
from Vance to Carter entitled “PL 480 Allocations.” Annex B is a January 17 memo-
randum from Vance, Williams, and Ehrlich to Carter entitled “Request for Additional PL
480 Food Assistance.” Annex C is an undated memorandum from Williams (as the
Acting Secretary of Agriculture) to Carter entitled “Options for Using CCC Credit and
Credit Guarantees to Expand Exports and Help Offset Effect of the Soviet Sales Suspen-
sion.” A January 18 memorandum from Eizenstat to Carter entitled “P.L. 480—Food As-
sistance” is also attached but not printed.
Budget Increases for PL 480” is in the Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff
6 January 19.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980
excess grain. It is important that this not be seen as reversion to the dis-
carded policies of using PL–480 as a dumping ground; therefore the in-
crement should be limited to clear cases of need, especially humani-
tarian programs and food imports that will not displace domestic
production in developing countries. In order to avoid displacing grain
exports by other countries whose cooperation we need in imple-
menting the Soviet embargo, the increase in PL–480 should not rad-
crease should be largely in food other than wheat, because wheat is the
primary grain export of these other countries. (C)
I believe that the 800,000 ton add-on proposed by the agencies,
which would get us back to the recent level of 6.8 million tons, meets
these criteria. Most of it is corn. Such an expanded program can be
managed without sacrificing the PL–480 emphasis on development
that you have directed. It is true that sizeable PL–480 reserves already
are planned, but these reserves are for unforeseen emergencies, not for
programmed needs such as proposed by the agencies. (C)
The agencies illustrate the possible uses of this additional 800,000
specific possible Title I and II FY 1980 and 1981 programs; they also
suggest an FY 1981 effort to help LDCs build up national stocks, which
I believe makes good sense. (C)
The agencies’ attached memorandum lists two other options
which none of them recommends: PL–480 aid for Israel, which would
displace commercial sales and lead to Israeli expectations of continuing
PL–480 aid in future years; and increasing existing PL–480 programs by
cluding a mention of possible needs in India and Bangladesh. Cy notes
his objection to such an allocation; in fact, no one recommends this. (C)
To the extent that increased PL–480 exports are additional to other-
wise likely US commercial exports, they strengthen US prices and thus
reduce CCC’s net grain acquisitions and outlays. I believe that at least
two-thirds of the proposed add-on in FY 1980 and FY 1981 meet this ad-
ditionality test: all of the Title II add-on, most of the Title I increase for
poor African and Latin American countries, and the increased vege-
table oil for Pakistan. Shipments for overseas food stocks in FY 1981
would also meet the additionality test. Thus the real cost of 800,000 ad-
ditional tons would be very small—perhaps $50–$75 million annually;
the rest of the nominal cost would be offset by reduced CCC outlays.
Unfortunately, OMB concludes that it cannot show an offsetting reduc-
tion in the CCC outlays and therefore must score 100% of any PL–480
increase as an additional overall budget outlay. This means that the
course recommended by the agencies would add nominally $150 mil-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
These budgetary constraints, plus the desirability of minimizing
use of wheat, suggest an additional option below the agencies’ recom-
mendation, that is, an increase of $100 million in FY 1980 and the same
tons). Another reason for this more modest option is to avoid over-
loading the international affairs account, thus prejudicing rapid Con-
gressional action on foreign aid, including Pakistan. This is my recom-
mendation and Bob Beckel’s.7 (C)
4. CCC Export Credits. Some of the same international consider-
ations apply to expanding CCC credit sales as to PL–480. Budget
analysis of USDA’s options here is more complex. From a foreign
policy perspective, the USDA proposal contains assurances that avoid
serious disadvantages. Your decision on this can be based on other
considerations. (C)
RECOMMENDATIONS
1. Food Security Reserve
That you reiterate your strong support for this long-standing Ad-
ministration proposal and seek its early enactment. Suggested by all
the agencies concerned.8 (C)
2. PL–480. OMB disapproves of the recommendations below.
a. That you approve an increase of approximately 450,000 tons,
indicated in the State-IDCA–USDA memorandum, with priority
for programs likely to increase US grain exports. (This is my
recommendation.)9 (C)
Alternative: That you approve the State-USDA–IDCA proposal
tons. This, too, would use commodities other than wheat, where
possible. (C)
b. That you approve an increase of approximately 450,000 tons,
those indicated in the State–USDA–IDCA memorandum, with priority
for the emergency feeding program and the building of stocks in devel-
oping nations if feasible stocking programs can be arranged. (This is
my recommendation.)10 (C)
7 Robert Beckel was Carter’s Special Assistant for Congressional Liaison.
8 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation.
9 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation and his disapproval of the
alternative below.
10 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation and his disapproval of the
alternative below.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980
Alternative: That you increase the FY 1981 program by 800,000 tons,
$200 million, as proposed by State-USDA–IDCA.
c. That you not now pass on the allocation of PL–480 among spe-
cific countries, but require that all such proposed allocations be re-
viewed by the Executive Office (OMB, NSC, and me), with any dif-
ferences of view being brought to you, if necessary, for resolution
3. CCC Credit Sales
a. Continue with current CCC credit program for FY 1980 as
planned. (Recommended by OMB.)12 (C)
b. Provide additional direct CCC financing for additional exports
to Korea and selected other countries: $150 million. (Recommended by
Agriculture and opposed by OMB.)13 (C)
c. Be prepared to offer additional direct credit for financing of ad-
ditional corn exports to China if this turns out to be necessary to con-
summate additional sales: $240 million. (Recommended by Agriculture
and opposed by OMB.) (C)
4. Announcement
That you authorize us to announce on Friday any decisions you
make on the basis of this memorandum.14 (U)
Bob Beckel, Congressional Liaison, supports my recommendations.
11 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation.
12 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation.
13 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to recommendations b and c.
14 Carter wrote “Sat.” above the word “Friday” and indicated his approval of this
recommendation. On the January 19 White House announcement see, for example,
Robert Reinhold, “U.S. Will Purchase Much of Grain Owed to Soviet but Halted at

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
344.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Cooper) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, February 18, 1980
Preparations for Global Negotiations
Over the past two months we have been preparing actively for the
COW preparatory talks March 31 to April 11 on Global Negotiations.
There is more work to be done, however, to develop further our posi-
tions and to map out tactics.
Strategy and Positions
Our strategy for the Global Negotiations is to use them as a means
of making progress on a few specific issues which we believe are of
global concern while working to prevent their undercutting ongoing
negotiations in specialized fora. To that end, we have selected three
specific issues—trade policy (protectionism), energy, and food and ag-
riculture—on which we believe progress can be made in a framework
that, despite our efforts, will inherently be highly politicized.
Through a discussion of trade policy, we want to see steady pres-
sure brought to bear on all nations to resist protectionist forces, recog-
nizing that industrial countries in particular have a responsibility for
keeping their markets open. We would like to encourage stronger posi-
tive adjustment policies, and urge LDCs to participate more actively in
the GATT.
In the area of energy, we would like to see discussion of the impact
of oil price increases on world economic growth, promotion of meas-
ures to conserve energy, and agreement on measures to increase energy
production, particularly in oil importing LDCs.
With respect to food policy, we would like to emphasize the need
for LDCs to develop food sector strategies, discuss the establishment of
food aid reserves by all donors, and push for increased assistance, espe-
cially by OPEC, for food aid and agricultural development.
We will urge that the sessions in New York negotiate general reso-
lutions on these issues, but then pass responsibility for negotiating spe-
cific technical agreements to the appropriate forum. In the case of en-
ergy, we may urge a new forum be created.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot
Drafted by Cooper’s Special Assistant, Barney Rush. A typed notation at the top of the
page reads: “(Not reviewed by Mr. Cooper).” Rush initialed the memorandum on
Cooper’s behalf.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980
Tactics
We are aware that the G–77 have not yet themselves formulated a
precise strategy or developed specific positions, and that tension be-
tween oil-importing LDCs and OPEC on the energy issue will exacer-
bate G–77 difficulties in developing a unified position. All we know is
that they would generally like to discuss a certain number of issues
under each of the five categories listed in the resolution: energy, trade,
raw materials, money and finance, and development. It is our intent to
take advantage of the disarray within the G–77 by stating early on our
views toward Global Negotiations, in the hope this will influence them
to steer a more moderate and pragmatic course.
At the first COW preparatory session in January, we gave a brief
speech outlining our views and listing the three issues in which we
hope to make progress.2 Since then, we have made demarches in major
LDC capitals that elaborated our position. We wanted these made prior
LDC Ministerial meeting, now scheduled to be held in New York. We
will shortly be sending out an additional message specifically to the
moderates—both in capitals and in New York—discussing our concern
over the collapse of the UNIDO Conference3 and stating that a less rhe-
torical approach will be necessary if the Global Negotiations are to be
successful.4
On Monday, February 25, the Ad Hoc Group B meeting on
North-South issues will be held in Paris, just prior to the XCSS. At that
time we will present position papers on our three issues, and one on
tactics over the short term, and plan to receive the views of our col-
leagues. (The EC intends to speak with one voice during this exercise,
much as they did during CIEC.) There will be another Ad Hoc meeting
prior to the COW preparatory session, and we will be pushing to have a
unified Group B position at that time.
the Committee of the Whole organizational session. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D800034–0356)
3 At the UNIDO III Conference, which took place in New Delhi January
dustrial development fund. Telegram 2834 from New Delhi, February 11, which trans-
mitted the U.S. delegation’s summary report on the conference, asserted that “specula-
tion that radicals in the G–77 (Algeria, Cuba, Iran, Mexico) were pushing for a UNIDO III
blow-up was confirmed a few hours before the close of the conference when the Mexican
delegate told the US rep he was pleased with the confrontational conclusion they had
achieved because they wanted to use this failure as a means of pressuring the West to be
more forthcoming during the Global Negotiations.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D800073–0188)
4 Telegram 56459 to Belgrade, Brasilia, Jakarta, Nairobi, New Delhi, Abidjan,
Bangkok, Manila, and Colombo, March 1, is entitled “Global Negotiations—Lessons of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
USG Coordination
I have twice chaired meetings of an interagency group that in-
cludes Henry Owen, Tom Ehrlich, Fred Bergsten and Bob Hormats, as
well as Don McHenry, Bill van den Heuvel,5 Tony Lake, Bill Maynes
and Deane Hinton. I am using this group to establish interagency
agreement on our general policy. We have scheduled a third meeting
for March 6. Meanwhile, a working group has been formed under
Chuck Meissner, EB Deputy Assistant Secretary, that includes counter-
parts from IDCA, Treasury, STR, and from within State, IO and S/P.
This group is responsible for the specific position papers, although on
energy, DOE will also be involved. In addition, Tony Lake and Tom
Ehrlich will be putting together a list of possible additional initiatives,
and may also suggest health and population measures as a fourth area
that we might raise in the negotiations.
5 William vanden Heuvel was the Deputy U.S. Representative to the United
Nations.
345.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs (Bergsten) to Secretary of the
Treasury Miller1
Washington, February 25, 1980
SUBJECT
Brandt Commission Report
The Willy Brandt Commission (officially, the Independent Com-
mission on International Development Issues), which was established
to take a fresh look at development issues and North/South relations,
has released its final report. The Report is wide-ranging, making some
eighty recommendations on the whole spectrum of development, eco-
on February 19 by J. Fox (IDP) and reviewed by Leddy on February 19 and John Hartzell
(IDP) and Nachmanoff (ID) on February 20.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980
nomic and financial issues. It was adopted unanimously by its mem-
bers, including Pete Peterson and Katherine Graham.2
The Report’s main conclusion is that there is a crisis in North/
South relations, and that both developed and developing countries
have a mutual interest in finding ways to restructure the international
economy to end the crisis. The main thrust of the recommendations is
on transferring additional resources to LDCs.
A compilation of the recommendations in the Report is at Tab A.3
Major proposals include:
—an increase in industrial country concessional aid to 0.7 percent
—an international energy package, including commitments on oil
supply and price, and new investment in new energy sources;
—introduction of some form of “automatic” international taxes
(e.g., on trade and tourism) to finance development;
—a doubling of the legal borrowing-to-capital ratio for the IBRD,
to take place in addition to the just-negotiated General Capital Increase,4
to allow it to lend up to $160 billion compared with the present ceiling
of $40 billion;
—consideration of creation of a World Development Fund that
would fill the alleged gaps—particularly for program lending—in pro-
grams of the existing institutions (IMF, IBRD);
—an SDR/aid link;
—use of the IMF gold stock as collateral for loans to middle-
income LDCs;
—an international summit meeting of 25 or so heads of gov-
ernment to launch the program
The Report could improve the public and Congressional climate
for foreign assistance to developing countries. On the other hand—by
endorsing numerous demands of the developing countries that there is
no realistic expectation of meeting—the Report may create false expec-
tations which will lead to future disappointments. Most likely, it will
have little or no effect on public opinion in this country and marginal
effect in a few places abroad (Germany, U.K.).
2 Peter G. Peterson was President Nixon’s Assistant for International Economic Af-
fairs from 1971 until 1972. Katherine Graham was the Chairman of the Board of The
Washington Post Company. The book-length report of the Brandt Commission is entitled
“North-South: A Programme for Survival.”
3 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Annex I, Summary
of Recommendations.”
4 Bergsten discussed the U.S. position on the IBRD General Capital Increase in a
February 5 memorandum to Miller. (Carter Library, Anthony Solomon Collection,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
U.S. Government Reaction
We are reacting cautiously to the report, emphasizing that the U.S.
Government was not involved in its preparation, that we have just re-
ceived it, and that review and analysis of its many recommendations
will require some time.5 We will have to formulate a position for pre-
liminary discussion of the Report at the Development Committee
meeting in Hamburg in late April.6
I will convene an interagency discussion in the NAC on the mone-
tary and financial issues. IDCA plans to coordinate an interagency
study of all the recommendations and prepare a U.S. position on the
development aspects of the Report.
Background
The Brandt Commission was established in 1977 at the request of
IBRD President McNamara to provide a new assessment of the possi-
bilities for progress on North/South issues. Brandt chose 16 commis-
sioners with a wide diversity of backgrounds and nationalities to assist
him, including Peter Peterson and Katherine Graham of the United
States. Other notables on the Commission include Edward Heath, Olof
Palme and Eduardo Frei.7
5 In his February 14 Evening Report to Carter, Vance noted that he had “had a
useful meeting this morning with Willy Brandt. His report is interesting and has a
number of stimulating and prodding proposals.” Vance explained to Brandt “the very
real problems we face in raising our aid levels and told him 7 percent is simply not a real-
istic figure. Brandt probably will not press the point with you.” Carter initialed Vance’s
memorandum. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject
Daily Diary) No memorandum of conversation of this meeting was found.
6 The IMF/IBRD Development Committee met in Hamburg on April 24.
the Swedish Prime Minister from 1969 until 1976, and Eduardo Frei was the President of
Chile from 1964 until 1970.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980
346.
Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Christopher to
President Carter1
Washington, June 27, 1980
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Common Fund.]
7. Common Fund. Developed and developing country negotiators
in Geneva are expected to adopt tonight articles of agreement for the
Common Fund.2 The Fund will have two accounts: one to support in-
ternational commodity stabilization agreements (such as the tin and
rubber buffer stocks); and the second to back R&D-type commodity
measures. The Common Fund will receive $470 million in assessed con-
addition, the second account would seek $280 million in voluntary con-
tributions. We have said the U.S. will not make a pledge to this account
for the foreseeable future.
The agreement will be opened for government signature in Oc-
tober. We have told Congressional leaders, however, that we will not
seek ratification or an appropriation until there are an adequate
number of commodity arrangements ready to associate with the Fund’s
buffer stock account (which will probably not occur before FY 82).
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Common Fund.]
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
2 The initialing ceremony for the Common Fund articles of agreement took place on
Policy File, D800311–0290)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
347.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs (Bergsten) to Secretary of the
Treasury Miller1
Washington, July 21, 1980
SUBJECT
Common Fund for Commodities
SUBJECT
Brandt Commission Report
As you directed, the International Development Cooperation
Agency (IDCA) has led an interagency review of the Report of the Inde-
pendent Commission on International Development Issues chaired by
Willy Brandt.2 A preliminary report on this review was submitted to
you before the Venice Summit.3 The attached memorandum summa-
rizes the conclusions of the interagency review.4
Based on the review, we now plan to develop several initiatives for
consideration at the start of your next term. These include:
—a program of increased concessional assistance for low-income
countries to meet specific food, energy and population objectives.
—A Coal for Peace and Development Program which, in the con-
text of expanded U.S. coal export capacity, would help developing
countries increase their use of coal as an alternative to high priced oil.
—New ways to help increase food and agricultural productivity in
developing countries and to provide support to help meet rising food
import needs over the period required for development efforts to take
effect.
—An international population initiative aimed at doubling in the
1980s the availability and use of family planning and related health
services in developing countries.
In addition, we are reviewing our position on a new international
wheat agreement, and will be considering additional measures that
may be needed to promote greater world food security.
We should continue to support actively an increased role for the
International Monetary Fund and World Bank in promoting adjust-
ment and growth and seek the changes needed to increase their fi-
nancing roles.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside
2 Carter’s instructions were not found, but see Document 345.
3 The preliminary report was not found. The Venice G–7 Summit was held June
4 Attached but not printed is a September 15 IDCA paper entitled “Interagency Re-
view of the Report of the Independent Commission of Development Issues under the
Chairmanship of Willy Brandt—Report to the President.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Finally, we should continue to take actions that foster a more open
trading system. Thus, in addition to implementing agreements reached
in the Multilateral Trade Negotiations, we should consider revision
and extension of the Generalized Scheme of Preferences, renegotiation
of the Multifiber Arrangement,5 and a request for new authority from
Congress to engage in further bilateral tariff negotiations with indi-
vidual developing countries after current authority expires in 1981.
Some of the measures being considered—particularly those
dealing with change within the international financial institutions and
with trade—would not require any substantial new, budgetary outlays
on our part. Indeed, in the long-run, trade and financial reforms should
contribute to greater U.S. and global economic growth. We cannot
hope, however, to make the full amount of progress that is both needed
and feasible—in such important areas as food and energy—without
taking other actions that will require additional funds. Much of the in-
cremental funding can and should come from OPEC countries, but we
and other developed countries will have to provide some additional re-
sources ourselves.
The reports of both your Commission on World Hunger6 and Task
Force on Global Resources and Environment7 address from different
perspectives a number of the same issues explored by the Brandt Com-
mission. The common problems include hunger, population growth,
resource depletion, and environmental degradation. A call to eliminate
widespread poverty is the central recommendation of all three reports.
It is the cause of world hunger and it contributes to the most acute envi-
ronmental dangers, such as the loss of soil and forests.
All three Reports also emphasize the need for greater public un-
derstanding of the long term issues and greater support for foreign
assistance. We are closely coordinating our efforts on review of the
Brandt Report with the work of the Task Force and with follow-up on
the Hunger Report to ensure the presentation to you of a consistent set
5 See Document 8.
6 In March 1980, the Presidential Commission on World Hunger issued its final re-
port, “Overcoming World Hunger: The Challenge Ahead, Report of the Presidential
Commission on World Hunger—March 1980.” For the text of Carter’s April 26 statement
on the report, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1980–81,
Book I, p. 777. Documentation on the Commission and its report is printed in Foreign Rela-
tions, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs.
7 On July 24, the Department of State and the Council on Environmental Quality is-
sued a joint report on environmental issues, “Global 2000 Report to the President.” Docu-
mentation on the report is ibid. On that same day, Carter issued a statement on the report
and also announced the establishment of a Presidential Task Force on Global Resources
and Environment. (Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1980–81,
Book II, pp. 1415–1416) The Presidential Task Force on Global Resources and Environ-
ment released its final report, “Global Future: Time to Act,” in January 1981. (“Ideas &

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980
of recommendations. In cooperation with Anne Wexler and various
agencies we have also begun a series of public information efforts that
stress the importance of our economic relations with the developing
world. In association with the White House Press Office, we are
working to increase the attention that Administration officials give to
foreign assistance in their public speaking activities, as well as the pri-
ority given to this subject in the full range of public affairs activities.
The effort is a long-term one and we will continue to rely heavily on
your interest and public support.
These measures are in the U.S. national interest. Taken together,
they should help to shape the world’s future, as Willy Brandt has said,
“in peace and welfare, in solidarity and dignity.”
Thomas Ehrlich8
8 Ehrlich signed “Tom Ehrlich” above this typed signature.
352.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Miller to
President Carter1
Washington, November 12, 1980
SUBJECT
Pending Legislation for the Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs)
The prospects for final passage of an FY 1981 Appropriations Bill
for foreign assistance appear to be very limited during the post-election
session of Congress.2 The various MDBs can be adequately funded
under a Continuing Resolution but only if the Congress first enacts the
“IDA Authorization Bill” (H.R. 6811) during the post-election session.
That legislation provides not only authorization for IDA VI3 but also
provides for U.S. membership and entry into the African Development
Bank.
1 Source: Department of the Treasury, Office of the Secretary, Executive Secretariat,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
The Senate has approved this legislation4 so only lack of House ac-
tion now prevents U.S. participation in IDA VI. Lack of Congressional
action has already prevented the replenishment from taking effect on
October 1, as scheduled, and the “bridge loan agreement” arranged
with other donors to minimize disruptions in IDA lending would be
undermined by further U.S. delay.
Deferral of finalization until next summer would jeopardize im-
portant IDA lending programs (particularly major energy projects) and
could be a disaster from a foreign policy viewpoint. It would also be
particularly embarrassing when Tom Clausen is assuming the presi-
dency of the World Bank.5
Finally, United States membership in the African Development
Bank has a relatively modest cost but is important for U.S. bilateral rela-
tions with African countries and for our growing strategic and eco-
nomic stake in the region.
After discussing the situation with Secretary Muskie, we both be-
lieve that H.R. 6811 should be given the Administration’s top foreign
policy priority in the post-election session. I will be talking to both the
Democratic and Republican Congressional Leadership trying to gen-
erate bi-partisan support for the legislation. We recommend that you
discuss the matter with the House Leadership as well.
G. William Miller6
5 Alden Winship “Tom” Clausen served as the President of the World Bank from
July 1981 until June 1986.
6 Miller signed “Bill” above this typed signature.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980
353.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Miller to
President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Your Meeting with President-Elect Reagan2—Passage of IDA Legislation
Despite major efforts by a number of Republican members of the
House, and indications of support from potential members of the
Reagan cabinet (particularly Bill Simon and George Shultz), there was
insufficient indication of Republican support for the IDA legislation to
persuade the Democratic leadership to bring the bill to the floor today.
Chairman Reuss of the Banking Committee summarized it succinctly:
“With Reagan yes, without Reagan no”.
As you will recall, passage of the IDA legislation in this session is
critical. Without it, IDA will be out of funds for most of next year and
the United States will be blamed (correctly) for a major breach in
North-South relations. In addition, it will be very difficult to halt PLO
involvement in the institution, and Tom Clausen’s nomination, if it
proceeds, will do so under a very dark cloud. Pushing the bill into next
year would also add substantially to an already full legislative plate in
this area (World Bank callable capital, completion of authorization for
the regional development banks, the normal appropriation bills, the
Common Fund, etc.).
All this suggests that it is clearly in the interest of the President-
Elect for the IDA legislation to be passed in the current session. I
strongly recommend that you lay out the situation for him and urge
him to take a firm position—publicly if possible, perhaps immediately
after your meeting—in support of moving ahead on the legislation im-
1 Source: Department of the Treasury, Office of the Secretary, Executive Secretariat,
November 19 cover memorandum from Bergsten, who wrote: “The attached explains to
the President the status of the IDA legislation, concludes that only direct intervention by
the President-Elect can save the bill, and recommends that the President seek such action
at their meeting tomorrow. Henry Owen has already alerted the President to the possi-
bility that such a step will be needed. You may prefer to call the President rather than
send this memo, and Don [not further indentified] and I strongly recommend that you do
so.” Miller wrote on Bergsten’s memo: “11/21, Handled by phone call to President on
Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No memoranda of conversation
of these telephone calls were found.
3:32 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No memo-
randum of conversation of this meeting was found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
mediately. Congressional action could be taken as early as Friday3 of
this week, or certainly during the first week of December before the
Congress adjourns.4
G. William Miller5
3 November 21.
4 The House of Representatives did not pass the bill, H.R. 6811, before the end of the
year. According to Congress and the Nation: “The House was to have taken up HR 6811—
H Rept 96–1015 during the lame-duck session, but proponents of the bill could find no
more than 25 to 30 Republicans who would vote for it—not enough to ensure a majority.
And C.W. Bill Young (R–Florida), threatened to offer amendments that could have
snarled the bill in lengthy floor fights. At that point, the House leadership decided to
5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
354.
Paper Prepared by Thomas Thornton of the National
Security Council Staff1
Washington, undated
NORTH-SOUTH AFFAIRS: EVALUATIVE COMMENTS—
RETROSPECTIVE AND PROSPECTIVE
The United States was not ready during the past few years for a
forward policy across the broad range of North-South affairs. The
Carter Administration occurred during a time of tight resources. Had
resources been more abundant we could have made more of an impact,
but even in a time of plenty it is questionable whether the United States
would be willing to devote the kinds of resources required to make a
qualitative change in North-South relations. And this is a vital
consideration:
1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 34, (NSC
Accomplishments—North/South Policy: 12/80). No classification marking. On De-
cember 5, Thornton sent Brzezinski another paper entitled “The Carter Administration
and North/South Issues: The First Year (The View from the NSC).” In his cover memo-
randum, Thornton wrote that he had “put together a history of the first year of
North-South policy in the Carter Administration. This was the formative period and the
one where I was most concerned;” he also indicated his uncertainty as to whether “this is
exactly what you wanted but it is the most useful thing that I could put together.”
Thornton concluded his cover memorandum to Brzezinski: “Having been put into a re-
flective mood by all of this (and, more important, having had time for reflection for the
first time in four years) I may also do a shorter, more evaluative piece. If so, I will send
you a copy.” (Ibid.)

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980
—Resources are key;
—the amounts required to make a qualitative impact are of dimen-
sions that would, even in the best of time, result in some reduction in
the growth rate of well-being for significant numbers of Americans.
(Even the long range outlook is not clear. The thesis that the LDCs can
provide the engine for enhanced growth in the DCs remains neces-
sarily unproven), and
—unless America leads the way on this, the rest of the developed
world will not, probably cannot, make the necessary inputs.
Many of us believe that this sacrifice should be made for humani-
tarian or other reasons but we are probably a very small minority.
Americans resist this kind of thinking within their own borders and no
doubt have still less sympathy for it when applied to distant parts.
Nevertheless, the administration failed to test the proposition since the
President was never mobilized to argue the foreign assistance case to
the American public in the opening months of the Administration
when he had his best chance to make a decisive impact. By the time he
recognized the need himself it was too late and there were other prior-
ities. Vance’s speech was a case of too little and too late.2
The difficulty of finding public support for positive North-South
actions is reflected in the fact that even in the political area, where we
were most successful, the Administration had to shed inordinate
amounts of blood to get the Panama Canal Treaty ratified and to keep
the US from doing something harmful in Zimbabwe. The Middle East
initiative was readily accepted because it postponed indefinitely the
hard part of the bargain for Americans (and Israelis) to swallow—the
Palestine issue.
There is also an important psychological problem. Most Amer-
icans simply do not see the need to treat LDCs with the same kind of
respect that we do our European allies, Japan and even China. We do
not take them very seriously and this is painfully evident. Clearly we
cannot devote equal attention to 150 countries but among the regional
influentials at least, there are several countries (Brazil, India) that
simply have to be given the same kind (if not always amount) of atten-
tion that we give to the Europeans. If we systematically degrade these
countries on even simple protocol matters—to which they are inordi-
nately sensitive—our protestations of concern will not be taken seri-
ously. The President’s LDC grand tour3 was an excellent demonstration
of our interest; some of the imperial attitudes of the President’s staff
during the trip—and even more when visitors come here—undercut
much of the benefit.
Brazil, Nigeria, and Liberia.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
There is little doubt that, ultimately, the United States will have to
make a major readjustment to the global south, both psychologically
and materially. We have already taken one step in massive resource
transfer—but unwillingly and inefficiently through the mechanism of
OPEC price gouging. It would obviously be in our advantage to make
future readjustments voluntarily and, hence, more on our own terms.
There is no prospect that this will happen in the foreseeable future.
There is certainly a strong humanitarian streak in the American
people and this can frequently be tapped on an ad hoc basis. What is
lacking is a willingness to make a systematic commitment to change
and, even more, to accept the fact that the recipient nations (and it is na-
tions, not poor people, with whom we must deal) will have the major
voice in determining the use of our largesse. (There are obvious do-
mestic parallels.) The clearest reflection of this attitude was the “basic
human needs” policy which was seen as patronizing, if not interven-
tionist, by most of the poorer countries with whom we deal. The BHN
policy was also, ultimately, not a convincing rationale for selling a sys-
tematic program of foreign assistance to the American people and
Congress. Similarly, the liberal desire to funnel funds through the IFIs
came up against some hard realities as the Congressional and popular
mood began to shift in the opposite direction. Most Americans want
their foreign aid to have some visible foreign policy impact and, short
of massive resource transfers that would change the basic image of the
US in the global south, this can be done only (if at all) through tar-
getted, bilateral, politically-motivated programs.
Our BHN strategy reflected a condescending American attitude
and was therefore especially ill-suited to mesh with a key aspect of our
North-South strategy—the attempt to cultivate regional influentials.
There are plenty of poor people in regionally influential countries but
(a) these countries are particularly determined to accept aid only on
terms that they see as consistent with their sovereignty, (b) a number of
them are, at the macro-economic level, not among the poorest of the
poor, and (c) by definition, most of them have relatively large econ-
omies so that even very generous US aid programs make only a mar-
ginal impact on them—politically or economically. Thus foreign aid
was not a significant policy tool in dealing with these countries.
Other aspects of our global policies (human rights, arms transfer,
non-proliferation) were also resented by LDCs, particularly the more
influential of them who inevitably came more into conflict with us over
them.
In addition, of course, the Carter Administration began with the
assumption that our political and strategic competition with the Soviet
Union was inexorably resolving itself in our favor. The future would be
determined by our immensely more attractive economic and moral

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980
assets. Since a major problem in our dealing with the nations of the
South had in earlier years been our need to look first to the Soviet rela-
tionship—and in the process frequently neglect Southern interests—we
thought that we had pretty clear sailing. This estimate regrettably
turned out to be wrong. The Soviet challenge, which had been in a
quiescent building period, broke forth in full flower in the middle of
the Carter years, forcing us to reassess our priorities—not infrequently
to the detriment of our Southern interests as we had originally per-
ceived them.
Overall, there is probably no greater impediment to our pursuit of
a fruitful North-South policy than the persistent conflict between our
global objectives (whether humanitarian or strategic) on the one hand,
and the demands of our relations with individual countries or of re-
gional problems. This has weighed on our policies since the mid-1950s.
As long as the United States must (or believes it must) assume responsi-
bility for global stability, this tension will continue. (The contrast with
the relative success of the Europeans is instructive; the Soviets increas-
ingly face the same problems that we do.)
Inability to interrelate the economic and political aspects of our
North-South policy was at the core of our problems at home. In one
sense, this happened because of the bureaucratic separation of these
factors, not only as between agencies but also within agencies. The eco-
nomic bureaucracy in State was never really under political control and
S/P was never able to coordinate policy effectively. Within the NSC,
the bureaucratic arrangements made it very unlikely that a coherent
policy could be pursued. Brzezinski never got sufficiently involved in
LDC economic affairs to follow up on his ideas. Hence there never was
an effective “ground strategy” for North-South affairs.
There is, of course, a more fundamental question—whether a
“North-South policy” is viable in the United States. Sweden and the
Netherlands, for instance, have a happy combination of public support
for significant resource transfer and a lack of responsibility for events
in the Third World. They are able to take positions across the economic
and political spectrum that are in line with the “Southern” approach;
hence, they have a credible and coordinated policy.
The United States lacks that kind of public support and carries re-
sponsibility for events elsewhere in the world. At this stage in our his-
tory it is probably impossible to take the kinds of policy positions that
would be “successful”—in the sense that the Southern countries would
see these positions as an adequate response to their concerns.
And, of course, there is no reason to assume that it would be in
anybody’s long-term interest for us to take such positions. We have to
be the judge of our own actions.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Conclusion
About a year into the administration, David Aaron mused that
“North-South policy was an idea whose time had not yet come.” If he
was wrong, it was only in the confidence that its time in the United
States would come. To be sure, we will have to adjust to international re-
ality in one form or another—but it is far from certain that this will be
the result of conscious policy choices, as opposed to having the situa-
tion forced on us (the process that OPEC has begun).
There is a good case to be made for the proposition that the Amer-
ican people, because of historical and geographic peculiarities, will
never come to the conclusion that a positive North-South policy, in-
cluding some short-term sacrifices, makes sense to them. Personally, I
do not despair of building that realization, but for the next several years
at least—and probably most especially during the Reagan presi-
dency—there will be no effective moves in that direction. We will not
be able to make the key politico-economic linkage required for such a
strategy. Since these years are likely to be a time of very tight resources,
that may not make much difference.
These years can be used for educational purposes within the
American public—a task that the government should do but probably
won’t. The burden will fall on private organizations as it has in the past.
One can only hope that they will be more successful than they have
been in the past.
In policy terms, there is not much left beyond handling
North-South issues on a case-by-case basis. This is of course how the
Carter Administration—and Kissinger before then—handled them.
What may be lacking, however, is an overall concept relating these in-
dividual cases. Again, neither Carter nor Kissinger was able to con-
struct a compelling single concept; yet there were some useful ideas for
the operators to keep in mind. An early task of the Reagan administra-
tion should be to enunciate some of its own ideas as a means of mini-
mizing the likely chaos.
At a minimum, we should ensure that we do not slip backwards
during this difficult time. Thus policy planning for North-South affairs
over the next several years should probably concentrate on developing
good defensive strategies, in contrast to the more hopeful but often ir-
relevant constructs of the early Carter years. Since the operators
(Treasury, State/EB) have taken a defensive posture all along, this
should be a welcome change to them. The key, however, will be sup-
plying the overall rationale which the operators have lacked and will
probably continue to lack.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980
355.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, December 6, 1980
SUBJECT
Your Last Aid Budget (U)
The FY 1982 AID budget will be your legacy in a field in which you
have demonstrated effective leadership. This memo deals with the few
areas in which I believe that a change in the OMB mark is needed to
strengthen this legacy. (U)
1. Agriculture and Energy. One of your main accomplishments has
been to focus bilateral development aid on helping LDCs produce more
food and energy. Increases in our aid for these purposes should be a
main feature of your FY 1982 aid budget. These increases are needed to
meet urgent problems; they will leave a clear signal to the Congress, the
public, and our successors that this is the right direction for the future.
There is also a good chance they would be approved by the Congress:
Support in America for aid for food production is widespread, spear-
headed by your Hunger Commission and explicitly reaffirmed by
spokesmen of the new Administration. The benefits of helping LDCs
increase energy production are coming increasingly to be recognized
on the Hill, as a means of reducing pressure on global prices. (C)
a. Agriculture. The AID program for assisting food production
within the OMB mark involves an increase of $74 million over our FY
1981 aid request to the Congress. IDCA’s “leadership proposal”, sup-
ported by State, recommends an additional increase of $380 million.2
This commitment would, if continued, significantly reduce the number
of malnourished people in the world. It would enable AID to give
enough aid to certain key countries, e.g., Bangladesh, to enable them
soon to attain food self-sufficiency. I support this proposal. If it is not
fiscally feasible to provide the full $380 million, I propose a more
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Proj-
information.
2 On December 4, Muskie sent McIntyre a proposal for “a significant increase in our
development assistance programs.” In his cover letter, Muskie argued for the proposal,
which expanded on a “leadership proposal” advanced by the IDCA, on the basis that it
was “essential to protect increasing American interests in the Third World, to capture the
initiative for our policies there, and to gain additional efforts by other industrial nations.”
(National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Official Working Papers of S/P

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
modest add-on, either of $140 million for the African part of the pro-
gram (since Africa is where the food problem is worst) or of the $80 mil-
lion that IDCA proposes for increased support of agricultural research
in LDCs. Our most important contribution to LDCs since World War II
has been the research aid which has enabled these countries to develop
new rice and wheat strains; we might achieve equally important break-
throughs for hundreds of millions of poor people by a modest addi-
tional effort. (See Frank Press’ attached memo.)3 (C)
b. Energy. Within the OMB mark the FY 1982 aid program for
helping LDCs produce energy is an increase of $30 million over FY
1981. IDCA and State propose an additional $100 million, to carry out
the recommendations of an interagency task force chaired by Ed Fried,
whom you may remember from Brookings. Ed’s report calls for in-
creased bilateral aid in a vital area that will not be adequately ad-
dressed by the proposed World Bank energy affiliate: increased pro-
duction of fuelwood, which is the main energy source for many LDCs.
If continued for four years, the $100 million fuelwood aid program that
Fried’s task force proposes, coupled with action by other donors,
should produce a big increase in LDC energy production, which in-
volves a much more favorable rate of return than projected for most
intended energy investments, at home and abroad. Through exten-
sive reforestation, this program will also yield large environmental
benefits. (C)
2. Science and Technology; Population. In addition to the food and en-
ergy, I recommend:
a. $6 million for the central AID program of scientific and techno-
logical cooperation with LDCs. The Congress appropriated $12 million for
comparison with the $35 million we had proposed for the ISTC, whose
purposes the Congress instructed us to achieve within AID. (C)
b. Additional funds for family planning. IDCA and State propose an
increase of $133 million for family planning over the OMB mark. They
point out that FY 1981 is the first year in which demand for US family
planning services in LDCs has exceeded supply. They estimate that the
proposed extra aid will elicit a comparable increased effort from other
donors and LDCs that could mean a billion less people forty years from
now. If fiscal considerations preclude such a large add-on, we could fall
back to the additional $55 million OMB wants to add by means of re-
ducing other development programs now proposed by IDCA and State
3 Not attached; however, a December 5 memorandum from Press to Carter entitled
“Foreign AID Budget: Science and Technology” is in the Carter Library, National Secu-
rity Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects, Henry Owen, Box 1, Budget Appeals Session

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980
within the OMB mark. Nothing that has happened in the Third World
in the last twelve months justifies such a reduction in these country
programs; any increase in aid for family planning should be an add-on
to the OMB mark. (C)
Summary. The IDCA-State proposals for increased aid (over the
OMB mark) for agriculture, energy, and population add up to $613 mil-
lion. A more modest package that included $140 million (Africa) for ag-
riculture, $100 million for energy, $55 million for family planning, and
$6 million for science and technology would total $301 million. This
could be reduced to $241 million by including only research ($80 mil-
lion) in the agriculture portion. A cut in the energy program to the
amount ($50 million) needed for Africa would bring the total down fur-
ther to $191 million. At this point, however, the add-on would probably
be too small to generate increased effort by others. I would argue for at
least $241 million. (C)
mark that you approved this spring, with the understanding that it
would be reviewed, as necessary, in light of price increases. It turns out
you envisaged in approving the $1.68 billion figure. State is seeking
MT). To go below this figure would be irresponsible, in light of the very
bad world food situation that crop estimates suggest will confront us
next year. IDCA wants $1.875 billion. (C)
4. Conclusion. Jim McIntyre said at one of your past aid budget
meetings that the hard-core constituency for foreign aid was one
person: you. While there is more support for foreign aid than Jim’s re-
mark suggests, in a sense he is right: Foreign aid serves the general na-
tional interest, rather than specific interests of the local and occupa-
tional groups that support domestic programs. McGeorge Bundy4
voiced the same thought when he said that one can judge how presi-
dential a White House occupant is by how he acts about foreign aid. By
this criteria, you have a good record. (C)
This budget will cap and symbolize that record. US interests in the
Third World, and in overcoming the global food and energy problems,
will be well served if the budget includes an adequate attack on these
problems. Whether the budget is cut or accepted by the next Adminis-
tration, you will be leaving a legacy of which you can be proud. (C)
4 McGeorge Bundy, the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs from

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
356.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, December 16, 1980
SUBJECT
Foreign Aid—For the Last Time (U)
1. Discussions at the Summit Preparatory meeting in Paris last
week2 lead me to believe that the other Summit countries might well be
willing to match modest add-ons to US aid for food and energy produc-
tion, and for family planning. If such US add-ons are presented as our
response to the Venice Summit call for increased bilateral aid by
Summit countries in these three fields,3 the Canadians will urge our
allies to join us in forming food, energy, and family planning aid con-
sortia. These consortia would be an important Carter legacy, in a field
in which you have a good record. (C)
2. I therefore propose that your FY 82 bilateral development aid re-
quest to the Congress include a modest increase over the OMB mark, in
response to the Venice Summit. Your budget message would state that
this add-on was being proposed in the expectation that it would evoke
a comparable increase in other Summit countries’ aid for these pur-
poses, and that final Congressional action should hinge on whether
such a response seems likely to occur. OMB tells me that such a contin-
gent approach is feasible, and that at least one other item in the FY 82
budget (IFAD replenishment) will be handled in the same way. (C)
3. I propose the following:
a. A $65 million energy add-on, for increased production of fuel-
wood, as proposed by State and IDCA in the “leadership package”. Ac-
cording to IDCA, DOE, and World Bank estimates, this expenditure, if
continued for several years and matched by others, would reduce LDC
oil imports and reverse a growing deterioration in the energy supply
available to the world’s poor countries.
b. $40 million for aid to national agricultural research institutes in
food deficit countries and $60 million for food production aid to Africa,
half of the amounts proposed for these purposes in the leadership
package. Research has the highest pay-off of any agricultural aid; Af-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects,
2 See Document 252.
3 See Document 247.

North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980
rica is included because it is the region of greatest interest to our Euro-
pean allies and the area with the greatest need for famine prevention.
c. $55 million for family planning aid, the additional amount that
OMB has approved; but not in lieu of existing country development aid
projects, as OMB proposes. (C)
This total proposed add-on would be $220 million, or $33 million
in FY 82 outlays. It would leave total bilateral development aid still
below the $2 billion mark, and is far below State’s compromise package
of $500 million, which is focused on the same three fields. (C)
4. This add-on might well be acceptable on the Hill, and for good
reason: Increased LDC food and energy production would reduce pres-
sure on global food and oil prices, which generate inflation in the US.
Humanitarian aid to avert starvation and to restrain population growth
have traditionally been supported by the Congress. The fact that this
add-on package would be conditional on comparable additional effort
by other industrial countries would be well received. (C)
5. I know that you are besieged with requests for international af-
fairs budget add-ons. Secretary Muskie said at your December 8 budget
meeting that international development aid deserved the highest pri-
ority among these appeals.4 In development assistance, all agencies
agree that top priority should go to food, energy, and family plan-
ning—because of their importance, their popularity on the Hill, and the
likelihood that they would evoke a response from other countries. The
program I propose would pave the way for a new phase in foreign aid
marked by increased emphasis on aid in these three fields, to be pro-
vided through functional consortia among bilateral aid donors. All this
for an increased FY 82 outlay of $33 million seems to me a good bar-
gain, the more so since the increase in real terms over last year’s request
level would still be only 15% (as compared to about 1% for the OMB
in the Cabinet Room. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No
memorandum of conversation of the meeting was found. Muskie made this point pub-
licly in a January 15, 1981, speech to the American Foreign Policy Association and the
World Affairs Council. He discussed, among other things, the importance of North-South
issues and foreign aid to the future of U.S. foreign policy. For the text of his speech, see
cluded a request for a 14 percent real increase in foreign aid over the amount allotted for
FY 1981. In his transmittal message, Carter noted that “[t]he bilateral development aid
budget includes a U.S. response to the 1980 Venice Summit agreement that the major in-
dustrial countries should increase bilateral aid for food production, energy production
and conservation, and family planning in the developing countries,” a proposal put forth
“in the expectation that the other Summit countries will also increase aid in these sectors,
in response to the Venice Summit agreement.” For the text of the message, see Public
(Quotations are on p. 2899.)

References are to document numbers
Aaron, David L.:
Agriculture—Continued
Dollar crisis, 88, 118
Soviet bloc role in, 267
German Federal Republic economic
Agriculture, U.S. Department of (see also
growth concerns, 113
Bergland, Robert S.):
Jamaica Summit (1978), 319
Automotive industry, 245
Japanese trade surplus, 206
Common Fund proposals, 284
National Energy Plan, 25
Countervailing duties, 150
OECD Financial Support Fund, 6
Footwear import relief, 10, 231
U.S. economic aid policy, 253, 278
International debt, 300
U.S. North-South policy:
Steel industry import relief, 90, 234,
Brzezinski memoranda, 261, 263
Erb memoranda, 295
Hormats/Hansen memoranda, 257
Airline Deregulation Act (1978), 222
International debt, Policy Review
Alberger, Bill, 246
Committee discussions, 300
Albright, Madeleine, 320
Policy Review Committee
Alexander, Tom, 228
discussions, 273, 276
Alm, Alvin, 119
Thornton memoranda, 354
American Iron and Steel Institute
ACTION, 293
(AISI), 90
Afghanistan, Soviet invasion of, 247,
Andreotti, Giulio:
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
Africa, 283
African Development Bank (see also
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
International financial institutions),
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
Agency for International Development
(AID) (see also Gilligan, John J.; U.S.
U.S. anti-inflation program, 174
economic aid policy):
Andrus, Cecil D., 4, 297
Brzezinski memoranda, 282
Anti-Dumping Act, 64, 79
Erb memoranda, 278
Fried/Owen memoranda, 253
Arita, Keisuke, 12
International debt, 300
MacLaine documentary, 293
U.S. economic aid policy, 263, 302,
Arms Export Control Act (1968), 305,
U.S. North-South policy, 270
Aronson, Bernard, 190, 327
Agricultural Trade Development and
Asian Development Bank (see also
Assistance Act (1954), 289
International financial institutions),
Agriculture:
EC Common Agricultural Policy, 4,
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 22,
(ASEAN), 283
Atkinson, Richard C., 297

Bergsten, C. Fred—Continued
Auto rebate, 20
German Federal Republic economic
growth concerns, 113
Automotive Products Trade Agreement
IDA support, 335
(Auto Pact) (1965), 102
IMF substitution account proposals,
Baker, Howard H., Jr., U.S. economic
International investment agreement
aid policy, 305
proposals, 49
Balance of payments (see also U.S.
Japanese television exports, 12
balance of payments), 24
Monetary policy, 48
Balance of trade. See Japanese trade
Most Favored Nation status, 201
surplus; U.S. balance of trade; U.S.
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 9, 45,
trade policy.
Ball, George, 256
Schmidt U.S. visit (1977), 44
U.S. balance of payments, 48
Barber, E., 220
U.S. economic aid policy, 258, 279
Barco, Virgilio, 306
U.S. import relief, 11, 36
Barraclough, William, 193
U.S. North-South policy, 270, 273,
Barry, Robert, 316
Berlin, 21
Bartocha, Bodo, 332
Bethlehem Steel (see also Steel industry),
Basic Human Needs (BHN) approach.
See under U.S. economic aid policy.
Biemiller, Andrew, 62
Beaudry, Robert M., 228, 247
Birnbaum, Philip, 276, 279
Beckel, Robert, 343
Black, Eugene R., Jr., 23
Behr, Peter, 246
Blake, Robert, 347
Belgium, 44
Blech, Klaus, 44
Bell, Griffin, 4, 164
Blechman, Barry, 332
Bell, Peter, 332
Blumenthal, W. Michael:
Bellescize, Gabriel de, 54
Balance of trade, 53
Bennet, Douglas J., Jr., 68, 260
Barre U.S. visit (1977), 54
Benson, Lucy Wilson, 332
Bentsen, Lloyd, 203, 208
Collective economic action proposals,
Bergland, Robert S.:
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Common Fund proposals, 263, 281,
Ohira U.S. visit (1979), 212
DISC (domestic international sales
U.S. economic aid policy, 260, 264,
corporation), 132
U.S. North-South policy, 254, 261
Bergsten memoranda, 155
U.S. trade policy, 4
Callaghan U.S. visit (1978)
War on hunger, 298
discussions, 121, 122
Bergsten, C. Fred:
Carter IMF/World Bank speech
Brandt Commission, 345
Collective economic action proposals,
NSC discussions, 156
Policy Review Committee
Common Fund proposals, 285, 286,
discussions, 119
Presidential Review Committee
Dollar crisis, 155
discussions, 118
U.S.-Japanese discussions/
Exchange markets, 55
correspondence, 129
References are to document numbers

Blumenthal, W. Michael—Continued
Blumenthal, W. Michael—Continued
Domestic economic policy
National Press Club speech (June 30,
coordination proposals, 57
European Monetary System, 143
North-South relations, 1
Exchange market policy, 98, 116
Ohira U.S. visit (1979), 212
Brzezinski memoranda, 106
Oil cargo preference legislation, 13
Callaghan U.S. visit (1978)
Oil prices, 213
discussions, 121, 122
Resignation of, 224
IMF substitution account
Schmidt U.S. visit (1977), 44
proposals, 126
Owen memoranda, 109
Schultze memoranda, 104
Steel industry task force report, 80
Solomon memoranda, 46
U.S.-British discussions, 120
U.S.-Bundesbank currency swap,
U.S. economic aid policy, 258, 260,
U.S.-German Federal Republic
U.S. economic policy, 167
discussions, 50, 111
Fastener industry import relief, 102
U.S. North-South policy, 254, 261,
Fukuda U.S. visit (1978), 130
U.S. trade policy, 37
G–5 finance ministers meetings, 23,
Bergsten memoranda, 9
Export promotion proposals, 53, 74,
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
STR overview papers, 4
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Strauss textile program, 193, 195
Witteveen Facility, 23, 50
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
Boeker, Paul H., 258
Boelling, Klaus, 44
German Federal Republic economic
Bolts/nuts/large screws industry. See
Fastener industry.
German Federal Republic visit (1977),
Bonn Summit. See G–7 Bonn Economic
Summit.
German Federal Republic visit (1978),
Boughton, James M., 226, 233
IMF conditionality policy, 56, 58
Boulin, Robert, 28, 57
Boumediene, Houari, 303
IMF SDR allocation, 162
International financial institutions,
International investment agreement
Brandt, Willy. See Brandt Commission.
proposals, 49
Japan visit (1979), 203
Brazil, 11, 24
Brewster, Kingman, Jr., 121, 122
Brezhnev, Leonid, 28
Middle East trip (1977), 66
Brill, Daniel, 36, 48
Mondale Europe/Japan visit (1977), 1
Bronheim, David, 300
Monetary policy, 48
Most Favored Nation status, 201
Multifiber Arrangement, 8
Brown, Gen. George S., 273, 277
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 28,
Brown, Harold:
Dollar crisis, 118
References are to document numbers

Brown, Harold—Continued
Brzezinski, Zbigniew K.—Continued
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
North-South relations—Continued
U.S. economic aid policy, 264, 297
U.S. North-South policy, 270, 277
Panama multilateral meeting
U.S. trade policy, 4, 164
Brzezinski, Zbigniew K.:
Soviet bloc role in, 267
Balance of trade, 41
Soviet role in, 267
Barre U.S. visit (1977), 54
U.S.-Jamaican discussions/
Cabinet changes (1979), 224
correspondence, 294, 307
Venezuelan UN proposal, 275
Carter IMF/World Bank speeches,
OECD Financial Support Fund, 6
Oil cargo preference legislation, 7, 38
Carter Japan trip proposals, 67
Oil prices, 213, 217
Collective economic action proposals,
U.S. economic aid policy, 263, 282,
Common Fund proposals, 263
Erb memoranda, 280, 284
Assessment studies, 264
Hormats/Hansen memoranda, 257
Carter-Congressional leadership
Owen memoranda, 314
meetings, 260
Policy Review Committee
Erb memoranda, 278
discussions, 281, 286
Hormats memoranda, 259
Vance memoranda, 318
Human rights and, 290
NSC papers, 277
Owen memoranda, 291
Economic growth targets, 99
Policy Review Committee
discussions, 279
Exchange markets, 100, 105
Public education strategy, 296
Export credit guidelines, 110
Science and technology
Fukuda U.S. visit (1977), 12
cooperation, 297, 331
Fukuda U.S. visit (1978), 130
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
U.S. energy policy, 100
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
U.S.-Japanese economic relations, 215
G–7 Ottawa Economic Summit (July
U.S. North-South policy, 261, 263,
1981), Planning, 252
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
Carter Venezuela speech (Mar. 29,
G–7 Venice Economic Summit (June
German Federal Republic economic
Global Negotiations, 350
growth concerns, 2, 113
Japanese television exports, 18, 19
Hormats/Hansen memoranda, 257
International debt, 299, 300
NSC papers, 277
Mondale Europe/Japan visit (1977), 1
Pastor memoranda, 272
Most Favored Nation status, 201
Policy Review Committee
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 93,
State Department overview paper,
North-South relations:
Carter-Callaghan correspondence,
Thornton memoranda, 296, 320,
References are to document numbers

Brzezinski, Zbigniew K.—Continued
Canada—Continued
U.S. North-South policy—Continued
G–7 Venice Economic Summit (June
UNCTAD V meeting (1979), 329
U.S.-Venezuelan discussions, 303
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 137
Vance memoranda, 325, 327
U.S. anti-inflation program, 174
Caribbean, 283
War on hunger, 298
Carrington, Lord (Peter Carington), 222
Bundy, McGeorge, 355
Carswell, Robert, 332, 334
Burney, Derek, 252
Carter, Jimmy:
American Society of Newspaper
Butler, Landon, 231, 246
Editors speech (Apr. 11, 1978),
Butler, Michael, 266
Byrd, Robert C., 203, 305
Barre U.S. visit (1977), 54
Caddell, Patrick, 202, 203
Cabinet changes (1979), 224
Calderon Fournier, Rafael Angel, 306
Callaghan discussions/
Caldwell, Philip, 245
Calhoun, Jesse, 34
Califano, Joseph A., Jr., 297
Callaghan, James:
Carter discussions/correspondence,
Collective economic action proposals,
Domestic economic policy, 57
Common Fund proposals:
Blumenthal memoranda, 313
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
Callaghan correspondence, 312
Christopher memoranda, 346
Cooper memoranda, 310
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
G–7 economic summit discussions,
German Federal Republic economic
Manley correspondence, 294
McIntyre/Owen memoranda, 318
Guadeloupe Summit (Jan. 1979), 179,
Owen memoranda, 65, 314
U.S.-Venezuelan discussions, 303
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 28,
Vance memoranda, 314, 318
Democratic National Committee
U.S. anti-inflation program, 174
DISC (domestic international sales
corporation), 132
Canada:
Dollar crisis, 94
Automotive Products Trade
Blumenthal memoranda, 123
Agreement (Auto Pact) (1965),
Brzezinski memoranda, 176
Callaghan U.S. visit (1978)
Economic situation, 65
discussions, 121
Fastener industry exports, 102
Carswell memoranda, 158
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
IMF/World Bank speech (Sept. 25,
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
NSC discussions, 156
Policy Review Committee
G–7 Ottawa Economic Summit (July
discussions, 119
Presidential Review Committee
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
discussions, 118
References are to document numbers

Carter, Jimmy—Continued
Carter, Jimmy—Continued
Dollar crisis—Continued
G–7 Venice Economic Summit (June
Schmidt correspondence, 88, 93,
German Federal Republic economic
U.S.-Japanese discussions/
correspondence, 129
EC currency snake plan, 127
Giscard discussions/correspondence,
Economic growth targets, 99, 103
Economic renewal program, 249
Guadeloupe Summit (Jan. 1979), 179,
Europe trip (Jan. 1978), 84
European Monetary System, 143, 146
Illicit payments, 35, 65
European protectionism, 89
IMF conditionality policy, 56, 58
Exchange market policy:
IMF quota increases, 162
Callaghan U.S. visit (1978)
IMF SDR allocation, 162
discussions, 121
IMF substitution account proposals,
International Monetary Group
discussions, 116
IMF/World Bank speeches:
Miller memoranda, 227
Owen memoranda, 109
Schultze memoranda, 104
U.S.-British discussions, 115, 120
International financial institutions,
U.S.-German Federal Republic
Japan trip proposals, 67, 70
Japanese trade surplus:
Fastener industry import relief, 102,
Blumenthal discussions, 208
Brzezinski memoranda, 76, 77
Callaghan U.S. visit (1978)
discussions, 121
French monetary policy proposal, 239
Economic Policy Group
discussions, 72
Fukuda U.S. visit (1978), 130
G–5 finance ministers meetings, 24
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
1978) follow-up discussions,
Follow-up, 171, 188
Ohira U.S. visit (1979) discussions,
Planning:
Blumenthal German Federal
Republic visit discussions,
U.S.-Japanese Subcabinet meeting
Giscard correspondence, 140
discussions, 55
Ushiba visit discussions, 81
Vance discussions, 77
Schmidt correspondence, 88, 101,
Jenkins meetings, 186
Mondale Europe/Japan visit (1977),
Schultz/Owen memoranda, 131
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Multilateral Trade Negotiations:
Askew memoranda, 251
G–7 economic summit discussions,
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
Giscard discussions/
References are to document numbers

Carter, Jimmy—Continued
Carter, Jimmy—Continued
Multilateral Trade
Steel industry import
Negotiations—Continued
relief—Continued
Jenkins discussions, 186
Eizenstat/Ginsburg memoranda,
Mondale Europe/Japan visit (1977)
discussions, 1
Eizenstat memoranda, 80
NSC staff papers, 189
Jenkins correspondence, 238
Owen-Deniau discussions/
Miller memoranda, 232, 236
Schultze memoranda, 237
Solomon memoranda, 235
Strauss memoranda, 90, 218
Tripartite Advisory Committee
recommendations, 238
Tokyo Round finalization, 209
Vance/Klutznick/Askew
U.S.-British discussions/
memoranda, 234
correspondence, 137
Strauss Japan visit (1978), 99
U.S.-Canadian discussions/
Television industry import relief, 244
correspondence, 137
U.S.-German Federal Republic
discussions/correspondence,
Trudeau correspondence, 137
UN General Assembly speech (Oct. 4,
U.S. implementation, 219, 223
U.S.-Japanese discussions/
U.S. anti-inflation program, 47, 119,
National Energy Plan, 20, 25
North-South relations:
U.S. balance of trade, 52, 53
Brandt Commission, 345, 351
U.S. economic aid policy:
Callaghan correspondence, 307,
Brzezinski memoranda, 282
Jamaica Summit (1978), 319
Congressional leadership meetings,
Owen memoranda, 309, 311
Panama multilateral meeting
Erb/Owen memoranda, 282
Foreign Policy Association speech
U.S.-Jamaican discussions/
Fried/Owen memoranda, 253
Human rights and, 260, 262
Ohira correspondence, 190
International financial institution
Oil cargo preference legislation, 7, 13,
Iran/Afghanistan crises and, 340
Oil prices, 213, 217
Legislative constraints, 305, 336
Palais de Congre`s speech (Jan. 4,
Protectionism, G–7 London Economic
Summit (May 1977) discussions,
Public education strategy, 295
Vance-Congressional leadership
meetings, 265
Vance memoranda, 282, 333
Young memoranda, 283
Steel industry import relief:
U.S. energy policy:
Blumenthal memoranda, 108, 119
Blumenthal-steel executive
Collective economic action
meetings, 51
proposals and, 124
References are to document numbers

Carter, Jimmy—Continued
Chaikin, Sol, 133, 200
U.S. energy policy—Continued
Chapman, William, 182
Crude oil import fees, 112
China, People’s Republic of (PRC), 181,
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
1978) discussions, 145
China, Republic of (ROC). See Taiwan
G–7 London Economic Summit
Chirac, Jacques, 159
Christopher, Warren M., 59
Common Fund proposals, 346
Owen memoranda, 109, 229
Dollar crisis, 175
Policy Review Committee
Footwear import relief, 16
discussions, 119
G–7 Venice Economic Summit (June
U.S.-Japanese economic relations, 12,
Japanese trade surplus, 55, 81
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 216
U.S. North-South policy:
Brzezinski memoranda, 263
U.S. economic aid policy:
Conference on International
Economic Cooperation, 265
Cooper memoranda, 310
G–7 London Economic Summit
Policy Review Committee
(May 1977) discussions, 28
discussions, 279
Global Negotiations, 350
Public education strategy, 295
International debt, 299, 300
Science and technology
Mondale Europe/Japan visit (1977)
cooperation, 332
discussions, 1
Owen memoranda, 184
Chrysler Corporation, 246
Policy Review Committee
discussions, 273
Clappier, Bernard, 239
Soviet role in, 267
Clark, Joe, 222
State Department overview paper,
Clausen, Thomas, 74
U.S.-Venezuelan discussions, 275,
Clift, A. Denis, 83, 337
Cochrane, James, 205, 212
Venezuela speech (Mar. 29, 1978),
Cohen, William S., 219
Collective economic action proposals:
U.S. trade policy, 37, 216
Blumenthal memoranda, 120
Export promotion proposals, 52,
Brzezinski memoranda, 115
Callaghan U.S. visit (1978)
discussions, 121
Strauss textile program, 195, 196,
Carter-Fukuda correspondence, 124
Carter-Giscard correspondence, 124
Owen memoranda, 125
U.S.-German Federal Republic
Witteveen Facility, 50
discussions/correspondence, 124,
Carter, Lillian, 293
Carter, Rosalynn, 265
Collins, Nancy, 293
Case, Clifford P., Jr., 260
Colombia, 306
Castro, Fidel, 323
Commerce, U.S. Department of:
Cavanaugh, John, 342
Automotive industry, 245, 246
Cederberg, Elford C., 260
Common Fund proposals, 284
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) (see
Dollar crisis, 139
also Turner, Adm. Stansfield), 270,
Export promotion proposals, 52, 74,
References are to document numbers

Commerce, U.S. Department
Common Fund proposals—Continued
of—Continued
PRM 8 on, 254
Fastener industry import relief, 102
State Department overview paper,
U.S.-Jamaican discussions/
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
correspondence, 294, 311
U.S.-Venezuelan discussions, 303, 326
Japanese trade surplus, 70, 72
Vance memoranda, 314, 318
Oil cargo preference legislation, 38
COMPACT, 244
Oil imports, 119
Compensatory Financing Facility (CFF),
Steel industry import relief, 29, 90,
Conable, Barber Benjamin, Jr., 192
Television industry import relief, 244
Conference on International Economic
U.S. economic aid policy, 263
Cooperation (CIEC), 265
Commodity Agreements. See
Brzezinski memoranda, 263
Commodity price stabilization.
Cooper memoranda, 266
Commodity price stabilization (see also
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Common Fund proposals):
Blumenthal memoranda, 263
Hansen memoranda, 256
Cooper memoranda, 310
Hormats memoranda, 42
Erb memoranda, 295
Mondale Europe/Japan visit (1977)
G–5 finance ministers meeting
discussions, 5
discussions, 24
NSC discussions, 1
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Owen memoranda, 65
Congress, U.S. (see also Countervailing
Owen memoranda, 35, 309
duties):
Soviet bloc role in, 267
Adjustment assistance, 133
State Department overview paper,
Commodity price stabilization, 309
Common Fund proposals, 312, 313,
Common Fund proposals:
Bergsten memoranda, 285, 347
Dollar crisis, 119
Blumenthal memoranda, 263, 313
Export promotion proposals, 192
Brzezinski memoranda, 263
Fastener industry import relief, 102,
Carter-Callaghan correspondence,
Footwear import relief, 10
Christopher memoranda, 346
IDA support, 335
Cooper memoranda, 310, 326
IMF substitution account proposals,
Japanese trade surplus, 203
G–5 finance ministers meeting
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 185,
discussions, 24
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
Oil cargo preference legislation, 7, 39
1978) discussions, 148
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Steel industry import relief, 90, 218
1977) discussions, 28
Strauss textile program, 200
Hormats/Hansen memoranda, 257
U.S. economic aid policy:
International debt and, 299
Brzezinski/McIntyre memoranda,
McIntyre/Owen memoranda, 318
Owen-Congressional leadership
Carter-Congressional leadership
discussions, 312
meetings, 259, 260
Erb memoranda, 278
Erb/Owen memoranda, 282
Policy Review Committee
Fried/Owen memoranda, 253
discussions, 281, 286
Human rights and, 262, 290
References are to document numbers

Congress, U.S. (see also Countervailing
Cooper, Richard N.—Continued
duties)—Continued
U.S. North-South policy, 310, 315
U.S. economic aid policy—Continued
Erb memoranda, 301
IDA support, 259
International financial institution
Hormats/Hansen memoranda, 257
support, 260, 302
Owen memoranda, 305
Lake/Hormats memoranda, 321
Science and technology
Policy Review Committee
cooperation, 334
discussions, 273, 276
Vance-Congressional leadership
U.S. trade policy, 37, 164
meetings, 265
World economic outlook, 225
U.S. energy policy, 118, 119
Corea, Gen. Gamani, 299
U.S. North-South policy,
Costa Rica, 306
International debt, 310
Costanza, Margaret, 293
U.S. trade policy, 216
Council of Economic Advisers (CEA)
Connor, John, 74
(see also Schultze, Charles L.):
Consalvi, Simon Bottaro, 303, 306
Automotive industry, 245, 246
Cooper, Richard N.:
Export promotion proposals, 135, 149
Balance of trade, 41
Fastener industry import relief, 102
Cabinet changes (1979), 224
Collective economic action proposals,
IMF quota increases, 162
Oil cargo preference legislation, 38
Common Fund proposals, 281, 284,
Oil imports, 119
Steel industry import relief, 29, 90,
Exchange market policy, 105, 157
Television industry import relief, 244
Footwear import relief, 16
U.S. economic aid policy, 263
Council on Environmental Quality, 247
Council on Wage and Price Stability,
IMF substitution account proposals,
Countervailing duties:
International investment agreement
Bergsten memoranda, 9
proposals, 49
McDonald memoranda, 173
Japanese trade surplus, 70, 203
NSC staff papers, 189
Monetary policy, 48
Owen memoranda, 177
Most Favored Nation status, 201
Rivers/Strauss memoranda, 150
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 45,
STR overview papers, 4
North-South relations, 249
Strauss textile program and, 193
Conference on International
U.S.-German Federal Republic
Economic Cooperation, 266
discussions/correspondence, 153
Jamaica Summit (1978), 326
Vanik memoranda, 170
Long discussions, 165
Couzens, Kenneth E., 121, 122
UN Committee of the Whole, 316,
Creekmore, Marion V., 330
U.S.-Jamaican discussions/
Crosbie, John, 222
Ohira U.S. visit (1979), 212
Cuba, 306, 323
U.S. balance of payments, 48, 86
U.S. economic aid policy, 270, 279,
Dale, Edwin L., Jr., 10
Dale, William B., 23
U.S. economic policy overviews, 241
Danforth, John, 133, 185
U.S. energy policy, 241
References are to document numbers

Dollar crisis (see also Exchange market
policy)—Continued
Katz memoranda, 117
De Onis, Juan, 294
NSC discussions, 156
NSC staff memoranda, 128
Defense, U.S. Department of (DOD), 10,
Owen memoranda, 171
Policy Review Committee
discussions, 119
Presidential Review Committee
Denend, Leslie G., 320
discussions, 118
Renner memoranda, 100, 139
Solomon Group report, 139
Denman, Sir Roy, 61, 153
U.S.-German Federal Republic
Denmark, 44
discussions/correspondence, 88,
Derian, Patricia, 289
Developing countries. See North-South
U.S.-Japanese discussions/
policy; U.S. economic aid policy;
U.S. North-South policy.
Domestic economic policy coordination
Development Coordination Committee
proposals, 57
Domestic Policy Staff (DPS):
Automotive industry, 246
DISC (domestic international sales
Export promotion proposals, 135, 149,
Footwear import relief, 231
Dollar, status of. See Dollar crisis;
Oil imports, 119
Exchange markets.
Steel industry import relief, 234, 236
Dollar crisis (see also Exchange market
Donaldson, John C.L., 150, 185
policy):
Bergsten memoranda, 155
Blumenthal/Schultze memoranda, 98
Eads, George, 238, 332
Brzezinski memoranda, 105, 176
East-West trade. See Soviet bloc
Callaghan U.S. visit (1978)
Economic aid to less developed
discussions, 121, 122
countries. See North-South
Carswell memoranda, 158
relations; U.S. economic aid policy.
Carter IMF/World Bank speech
Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), 283
Carter memoranda, 94
Economic growth targets (see also
Carter-Schmidt correspondence, 88,
German Federal Republic economic
growth concerns; Japanese trade
Collective economic action proposals
surplus):
and, 124
Barre U.S. visit (1977) discussions, 54
Cooper memoranda, 83
Blumenthal Europe visit (1977)
Economic Policy Group discussions,
discussions, 50, 51
Domestic economic policy
Eizenstat/Schirmer memoranda, 85
coordination proposals and, 57
European Monetary System and, 143
Eizenstat/Ginsburg memoranda, 52
Fukuda visit (1978) discussions, 129,
European Monetary System and, 143
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
1978) discussions, 148
1978) discussions, 146
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Hormats memoranda, 175
IMF substitution account proposals
References are to document numbers

Economic growth targets (see also
Ely, Michael, 175, 198
German Federal Republic economic
Emminger, Otmar, 227
growth concerns; Japanese trade
Energy, U.S. Department of, 119, 139
surplus)—Continued
Energy crisis (see also Oil prices), 6, 37,
Mondale Europe/Japan visit (1977)
discussions, 1, 5
Energy policy:
Owen memoranda, 69, 91
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Renner memoranda, 149
Schmidt U.S. visit (1977) discussions,
G–7 Ottawa Economic Summit (July
1981) discussions, 252
Strauss Japan visit (1978) discussions,
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
Economic Policy Group (EPG):
Automotive industry, 246
G–7 Venice Economic Summit (June
Dollar crisis, 119
Footwear import relief, 10, 14
Mondale Europe/Japan visit (1977)
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
discussions, 1
Soviet bloc role in, 267
International investment agreement
UNCTAD V meeting (1979)
proposals, 49
discussions, 330
U.S.-Jamaican discussions/
Multifiber Arrangement, 8
correspondence, 311
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 136
U.S. North-South policy and, 321,
Oil cargo preference legislation, 13
Steel industry import relief, 29
Environmental issues, 79, 247
U.S. economic aid policy, 268
Erb, Guy F.:
Common Fund proposals, 274, 280,
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
Eidenberg, Gene, 246
Most Favored Nation status, 201
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 186,
Eizenstat, Stuart L.:
Automotive industry import relief,
Carter H.R. 9937 veto, 178
U.S. economic aid policy, 278, 282
Human rights and, 290
Exchange market policy, 106
Export promotion proposals, 52, 152,
Policy Review Committee
discussions, 279
Footwear import relief, 40
Science and technology
IMF substitution account proposals,
cooperation, 331
U.S. import relief, Selective import
Oil cargo preference legislation, 13,
safeguard proposals, 201
U.S. North-South policy, 274, 278,
Carter Venezuela speech (Mar. 29,
U.S. balance of payments, 85, 86
U.S. balance of trade, 52
International debt, 299, 300
U.S. economic aid policy, 297, 343
Policy Review Committee
discussions, 276
U.S. North-South policy, 277
Thornton memoranda, 296
UNCTAD V meeting (1979), 329
War on hunger, 298
U.S.-Venezuelan discussions, 303
References are to document numbers

Erb, Guy F.—Continued
Exchange market policy—Continued
IMF substitution account proposals,
U.S. North-South policy—Continued
Vance memoranda, 325, 327
International Monetary Group
Esaki, Masumi, 222
discussions, 116
Ethiopia, 339
Miller memoranda, 227
European Community (EC) (see also
Mondale Europe/Japan visit (1977)
Jenkins, Roy):
discussions, 5
Carter Europe trip (Jan. 1978), 84
Owen memoranda, 109
Carter-Jenkins meetings, 186
Schultze memoranda, 104
Common Agricultural Policy, 4, 22
SDR creation, 107
Currency snake plan, 88, 127
Solomon memoranda, 46
DISC GATT complaint, 192
U.S.-British discussions, 115, 120
Economic situation, 42
U.S.-Bundesbank currency swap, 94,
Enlargement proposals, 42
European Monetary System, 140, 142,
U.S.-German Federal Republic
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
U.S.-Japanese currency swap, 154,
International debt, 299
U.S.-Japanese monetary
consultations, 129, 130
Japanese trade surplus, 4
Exchange markets (see also Dollar crisis;
Multilateral Trade Negotiations:
Exchange market policy):
Cooper-Long discussions, 165
Cooper memoranda, 225
Mondale Europe/Japan visit (1977)
Currency snake plan, 88, 127
discussions, 1
European Monetary System, 140, 142,
Multilateral planning talks (June
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
Negotiating mandate, 141
NSC staff papers, 189
Hormats memoranda, 175
IMF borrowing proposals, 23
Strauss-Jenkins meetings, 43, 61
Owen memoranda, 229
Tokyo Round finalization, 209
Solomon memoranda, 46
Exchange Stabilization Fund, 122
Protectionism, 42
Export Administration Act (EAA)
Simonet Plan, 4
Steel industry import relief, 29, 64,
Steel industry program, 89
Export price stabilization. See
U.S. countervailing duties, 150, 153,
Commodity price stabilization.
U.S. trade relations with, 127, 133
European Monetary System (EMS), 140,
Farney, Dennis, 170
Exchange market policy:
Farnsworth, Clyde H.:
Bergsten memoranda, 9, 107
Automotive industry, 246
Blumenthal/Schultze memoranda, 98
Callaghan U.S. visit (1978), 122
Brzezinski memoranda, 105, 106
Dollar crisis, 94
Callaghan U.S. visit (1978)
Fastener industry import relief, 187
discussions, 121, 122
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 137,
Collective economic action proposals
and, 120
Steel industry import relief, 237, 238
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
U.S. trade policy, 53, 151
1978) discussions, 146
Fastener industry, 102, 187
References are to document numbers

Federal Preparedness Agency (FPA),
France—Continued
Guadeloupe Summit (Jan. 1979), 179,
Federal Reserve Board, U.S., 94, 158
Illicit payments, 35
Feinberg, Richard, 269
Monetary policy proposal, 239
Multilateral Trade Negotiations:
Fields, Nathaniel, 331, 332
Brzezinski-Schmidt
Figuerido, Reinaldo, 303
correspondence, 169
Carter-Giscard discussions/
Finley, Murray, 133, 200
Fisher, Richard W., 212
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
Foley, Thomas, 260
1978) discussions, 147
Hartman memoranda, 159
Food assistance. See U.S. economic aid
NSC staff papers, 189
policy, P.L. 480; War on hunger.
Owen-Deniau discussions/
Footwear import relief:
Askew memoranda, 231
Owen memoranda, 183, 197
Bergsten memoranda, 11
Strauss memoranda, 179
Blumenthal memoranda, 33
Wolff visit discussions, 45
Brzezinski memoranda, 15
U.S. anti-inflation program, 174
Carter announcement, 17
Cooper memoranda, 16
Frank, Charles, 255, 273
Eizenstat/Ginsburg memoranda, 40
Fraser, Douglas, 245
Hormats memoranda, 10, 14
Fraser, Malcolm, 324
STR overview papers, 4
Frei, Eduardo, 345
Strauss memoranda, 10, 32
Fried, Edward, 253
Forbord, Thomas A., 175
Froment-Meurice, Henri, 54
Frosch, Robert A., 297, 332
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (1977),
Fukuda, Takeo:
Foundation for International Technical
Collective economic action proposals,
Carter correspondence, 124
Fowler, Henry, 121
France:
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
Barre U.S. visit (1977), 54
Carter-Giscard discussions/
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
China nuclear reactor sales, 181
Economic situation, 24, 44
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
1978) discussions, 145
Owen memoranda, 182
G–7 Ottawa Economic Summit (July
U.S. visit (1978) discussions, 130
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 45,
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
Political situation, 43
G–7 Venice Economic Summit (June
U.S. anti-inflation program, 174
Global Negotiations, 350
References are to document numbers

G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
1979)—Continued
1978):
Planning—Continued
Exchange markets and, 142
U.S.-Japanese discussions/
Follow-up, 171, 188
G–7 Venice Economic Summit (June
Panama multilateral meeting (1978)
discussions, 306
Follow-up, 247
Planning:
French monetary policy proposal, 239
Blumenthal German Federal
Republic visit discussions, 111
Gale, Hazen, 285
Brzezinski-Schmidt discussions, 88
Gandhi, Indira, 339
Callaghan U.S. visit (1978)
Gardner, Richard, 221, 240
discussions, 121, 122
Garn, Edward Jacob, 248
Carter-Schmidt correspondence, 88,
Garten, Jeffrey, 273, 281
General Agreement on Tariffs and
Cooper memoranda, 310
Trade (GATT) (see also Multilateral
Economic Policy Group papers, 136
Trade Negotiations):
Hunter memoranda, 113
Automotive industry, 245
Cooper-Long discussions, 165
Countervailing duties and, 4
Schultz/Owen memoranda, 131
On DISC, 192
Strauss memoranda, 141
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
U.S.-Jamaican discussions/
1978) discussions, 147
correspondence, 311
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
1977) discussions, 21
1977):
McDonald memoranda, 133
Most Favored Nation status and, 201
Minutes, 27, 28
Special Assistance Unit, 321
Planning:
Geneva Convention, 337
Brzezinski memoranda, 15, 26
Economic Policy Group paper, 20
Mondale Europe/Japan visit (1977)
German Federal Republic (FRG) (see
discussions, 1, 5
also German Federal Republic
Owen memoranda, 21, 25
economic growth concerns):
Presidential Review Memoranda, 3,
Blumenthal visit (1977), 88
U.S. economic aid policy, 28, 282
Carter-Schmidt correspondence, 60,
G–7 Ottawa Economic Summit (July
Collective economic action proposals,
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
1979):
Minutes, 222
Economic aid to Portugal, 24, 42
Planning:
Carter-Ohira correspondence, 190
Ohira U.S. visit (1979) discussions,
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
U.S.-British discussions/
G–7 Ottawa Economic Summit (July
correspondence, 221
U.S. business community input,
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
References are to document numbers

German Federal Republic (FRG) (see
Gilligan, John J.—Continued
U.S. economic aid policy—Continued
also German Federal Republic
Science and technology
economic growth
cooperation, 297
concerns)—Continued
U.S. North-South policy, 261, 270,
G–7 Venice Economic Summit (June
Global Negotiations, 350
Guadeloupe Summit (Jan. 1979), 179,
Giraud, Andre, 222
Giscard-d’Estaing, Vale´ry:
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 45,
Carter discussions/correspondence,
Collective economic action proposals,
Stimulus plan (1978), 171
Carter correspondence, 124
U.S. anti-inflation program, 174
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
U.S.-Bundesbank currency swap, 94,
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
U.S. Cabinet changes (1979), 224
German Federal Republic economic
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
growth concerns:
Blumenthal FRG visit (1978)
Guadeloupe Summit (Jan. 1979), 179,
discussions, 111
Blumenthal visit (1977) discussions,
Illicit payments, 35
Monetary policy proposal, 239
Brzezinski memoranda, 2
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 168,
Callaghan U.S. visit (1978)
discussions, 121, 122
U.S. anti-inflation program, 174
Carter-Schmidt correspondence, 60,
Gleysteen, William H., Jr., 130
Global 2000 report to the President, 247
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
1978) discussions, 145
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Godley, Gene, 258
1977) discussions, 25
Gold, Ruth S., 117, 247
Mondale Europe/Japan visit (1977)
Gonzalez Revilla, Nicolas, 306
discussions, 5
Gotbaum, Joshua, 238
NSC discussions, 2
Gradison, Willis David, Jr., 185
Graham, Katherine, 345
Renner memoranda, 113
Schmidt U.S. visit (1977) discussions,
Great Britain:
Schultz/Owen memoranda, 131
Schultze memoranda, 112
Carter/Callaghan discussions/
Getler, Michael, 131
Gilligan, John J.:
Common Fund proposals, 281, 286
Collective economic action proposals,
U.S. economic aid policy, 323
Economic situation, 24, 44
Carter-Congressional leadership
Exchange market policy, 115, 120
meetings, 260
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
Development Coordination
Committee, 268
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Erb/Owen memoranda, 282
Policy Review Committee
G–7 Ottawa Economic Summit (July
discussions, 279
References are to document numbers

Great Britain—Continued
Heginbotham, Erland H., 212
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
Heinz, Henry John, III, 133
Hernandez, Valentin Acosta, 303
Global Negotiations, 350
Hesburgh, Theodore, 334
Guadeloupe Summit (Jan. 1979), 179,
IMF reform proposals, 120
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 28,
Hiss, Dieter, 44
Hodges, Luther, 332
North-South relations,
Carter-Callaghan
Hormats, Robert:
Balance of trade, 41
Stabilization plan, 5
Barre U.S. visit (1977), 54
U.S. anti-inflation program, 174
Dollar crisis, 175
Greenwald, John, 170
Footwear import relief, 10, 14
Groth, Lt. Col. Carl, 332
Fukuda U.S. visit (1977), 12
Group of 77 (see also Common Fund
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
proposals; North-South relations):
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Erb memoranda, 280, 295
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
Hansen memoranda, 256
Hormats/Hansen memoranda, 257
G–7 Venice Economic Summit (June
International debt, 299
Jamaica Summit (1978), 319
German Federal Republic economic
Panama multilateral meeting (1978)
growth concerns, 113
discussions, 306
IMF substitution account proposals,
Tarnoff memoranda, 319
UNCTAD V meeting (1979), 330
Japanese television exports, 19
Guadeloupe Summit (Jan. 1979), 179,
North-South relations, 42, 326
OECD Financial Support Fund, 6
Guinea, 292
Oil cargo preference legislation, 7, 38
Guiringaud, Louis de, 54
Schmidt U.S. visit (1977), 42
Steel industry import relief, 232, 234
Gwertzman, Bernard, 259, 262
U.S. economic aid policy, 259, 260,
U.S. North-South policy, 257, 321,
Haft, Marilyn, 293
Hannifin, Vice Adm. Patrick, 281
Global Negotiations, 344
Hanning, Hugh, 26
Hansen memoranda, 255
Hansell, Herbert J., 289
Policy Review Committee
discussions, 273, 300
UNCTAD V meeting (1979), 330
Harden, Richard, 293
Vance memoranda, 325
Harkin Amendment, 260, 262
Hornblow, Michael, 254
Houghton, Arthur, 157
Harrington, Michael J., 260
Housing and Urban Development, U.S.
Harris, Patricia R., 297
Department of, 14, 263
Howe, Geoffrey, 222
Hashimoto, Toshikazu, 212
Huberman, Benjamin, 331, 332
Hatoyama, Iichiro, 12
Hufbauer, Gary, 215
Heath, Edward, 345
Humphrey, Hubert H., 260, 290
References are to document numbers

Humphrey Bill (International
International debt (see also Witteveen
Development Cooperation Act)
Facility)—Continued
CIEC discussions, 266, 275
Hunt, John, 121, 122
Erb memoranda, 295
Hunter, Robert:
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Barre U.S. visit (1977), 54
1977) discussions, 28
International Development Agency
Dollar crisis, 156
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
International Development and Food
Assistance Act (1977), 292
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 181,
International Development and Food
Assistance Act (1978), 321
North-South relations, 311
International Development Cooperation
Hurtado, Hector, 303
Hutcheson, Richard G., III:
International Development Cooperation
Dollar crisis, 161
Act (Humphrey Bill) (1978), 299,
Exchange market policy, 105, 109
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
International Development Cooperation
Oil cargo preference legislation, 13
U.S. economic aid policy, 268, 290,
International Emergency Economic
Powers Act (1977), 177
U.S. economic policy coordination, 82
International Energy Agency (IEA), 1,
U.S. energy policy, 109, 112
U.S. trade policy, 166
International financial institutions (IFIs)
(see also International Monetary
IFAD, 267
Fund; World Bank):
Ignatius, David, 80
Common Fund proposals and, 280
Ikeda, Yoshizo, 130
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
1977) discussions, 27
Imamura, Yoshio, 212
IMF/IBRD Development Committee, 25
Human rights requirements, 260, 262
Inderfurth, Karl Frederick (Rick), 254,
Schmidt U.S. visit (1977) discussions,
India, 339, 340
Soviet membership, 267
Indonesia, 290, 292
Inflation (see also Dollar crisis; U.S.
International Fund for Agricultural
Development, 24, 256
Ingersoll, Robert S., 74
International investment agreement
Inouye, Daniel K., 259, 260
proposals, 49
Institute for Scientific and
International Monetary Fund (IMF) (see
Technological Cooperation (ISTC),
also International financial
institutions; Witteveen Facility):
Inter-American Development Bank (see
Borrowing proposals, 23
also International financial
British reform proposals, 120
institutions), 253, 260
C–20 reforms, 126
Interior, U.S. Department of, 90, 102,
Compensatory Financing Facility
International Center for the Settlement
of Investment Disputes (ICSID), 49
Conditionality policy, 56, 58
International debt (see also Witteveen
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Facility):
Blumenthal memoranda, 263
Japanese trade surplus, 182
References are to document numbers

International Monetary Fund (IMF) (see
Japan (see also Japanese trade surplus;
also International financial
U.S.-Japanese economic relations):
institutions; Witteveen
Agricultural quotas, 92
Facility)—Continued
Carter-Ohira correspondence, 190
OECD Financial Support Fund and, 6
Carter trip proposals, 67, 70
Soviet membership, 267
Special Financial Assistance Unit, 321
Economic situation, 65
Substitution account proposals, 122,
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
International Monetary Group, 116
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
International Nuclear Fuel Cycle
Evaluation Program, 91, 221
G–7 Ottawa Economic Summit (July
International Security Assistance Act
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
International Trade Commission (ITC):
Automotive industry, 246
Fastener industry import relief, 102,
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 45,
New Tokyo International Airport, 212
Political situation, 43
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
1977) discussions, 27
Japanese trade surplus:
Steel industry import relief, 29, 90
Bergsten memoranda, 9, 72
Television industry import relief, 12,
Bergsten-Nishiyama discussions, 154
Brzezinski memoranda, 76, 77
Callaghan U.S. visit (1978)
International Wheat Agreement, 267
discussions, 121, 122
Iranian hostage crisis, 339
Carter-Fukuda correspondence, 59,
Iranian Revolution, 222
Iribarren, Ignacio, 303
Economic Policy Group discussions,
Italy:
Economic situation, 44
Fukuda visit (1978) discussions, 130
European Monetary System, 186
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
Footwear exports, 11, 231
1978) discussions, 145
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
1978) follow-up discussions, 188
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Mansfield memoranda, 87, 92
Ohira U.S. visit (1979) discussions,
G–7 Ottawa Economic Summit (July
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
Platt memoranda, 206
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 209
Renner memoranda, 149
STR overview papers, 4
Jacklin, Nancy, 107
Strauss Japan visit (1978) discussions,
Jackson, Sarah, 332
Jackson-Vanik Amendment, 4
U.S. business community input, 211
U.S.-Japanese Subcabinet meeting
discussions, 55
Ushiba visit discussions, 81
References are to document numbers

Korea, Republic of—Continued
Television exports, 244
U.S. economic aid policy, 260, 290,
Jenkins, Roy:
Carter correspondence, 238
Koromzay, Val, 205
Carter meetings, 186
Kosciusko-Morizet, Jacques, 54
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
Kraft, Timothy, 82
Kreps, Juanita M.:
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Dollar crisis, 119
Footwear import relief, 16
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 43,
Ohira U.S. visit (1979), 212
Resignation of, 224
Steel industry import relief, 234, 238
Steel industry import relief, 64
U.S. anti-inflation program, 174
U.S. economic aid policy, 297
U.S.-Japanese economic relations, 99
Johnston, Ernest, 78, 165
U.S. North-South policy, 254, 261
Jones, James R., 208
Jones, Reginald, 47, 230
Jones Act (Merchant Marine Act of
Labor, U.S. Department of (see also
Marshall, F. Ray):
Jordan, Hamilton, 156, 295
Automotive industry, 245, 246
Jorgenson, Anker, 179
Fastener industry import relief, 102
Junz, Helen B., 113, 285
Justice, U.S. Department of, 230, 244,
Oil cargo preference legislation, 38
Steel industry import relief, 29, 90,
Television industry import relief, 244
Kaneko, Ippei, 222
U.S. economic aid policy, 263
Kato, Koichi, 212
Lake, W. Anthony:
Katz, Julius L.:
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
Common Fund proposals, 281, 286
Exchange markets, 117
North-South relations, 267, 338
German Federal Republic economic
Protectionism, 68
growth concerns, 113
U.S. economic aid policy, 253, 267,
Japanese trade surplus, 203
Oil cargo preference legislation, 7
U.S. economic policy overviews, 91
U.S. economic aid policy, 289
U.S. North-South policy, 257, 329
Global Negotiations, 344
U.S. trade policy, 193
Hansen memoranda, 256, 270
Katz, Stanley, 279
Policy Review Committee
Keatley, Anne, 279
discussions, 273, 276
Kelly, William B., 185
UNCTAD V meeting (1979), 329,
Kendall, Donald, 211
Keynes, John Maynard, 222
U.S.-Venezuelan discussions, 303
al-Khail, Aba, 23
Vance memoranda, 325
Kimmitt, Robert, 339
Lambsdorff, Otto Graf:
King, Seth S., 229, 337
Countervailing duties, 153, 179
Kissinger, Henry A., 257, 295
Economic growth targets, 101
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
Komoto, Toshio, 77
Korea, Republic of:
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
References are to document numbers

Marshall, F. Ray—Continued
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Lauria, Carmelo Lesseur, 303
Steel industry import relief, 63
Lefgren, John, 175, 198
U.S. economic aid policy, 297, 332
Leone, Giovanni, 1
U.S. North-South policy, 254, 261
Less developed countries. See Group of
77; North-South policy; U.S.
Mathews, Jessica Tuchman, 278, 289,
North-South policy.
Levine, Richard J., 171
Matsuda, Minoru, 55
Matsukawa, Michiya, 55, 157
Lipshutz, Robert, 184
London Summit. See G–7 London
Economic Summit.
McCaffrey, T. D., 121, 122
Long, Clarence, 260, 291
McDonald, Alonzo L.:
Long, Olivier, 165, 201
G–7 Venice Economic Summit (June
Lopez Michelsen, Alfonso, 306
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 61,
Lo´pez Portillo, Jose´, 11, 201
Lovelace, Allen, 332
Luers, William H., 326
Lyons, Richard L., 163
MacDonald, Donald, 27, 28
McGiffert, David, 276, 281
MacDonald, Flora, 222
MacDonald, James Ramsay, 27
McHugh, James F., 335
Mackour, Oscar, 57
McIntyre, James T., Jr.:
MacLaine, Shirley, 293
Common Fund proposals, 318
MacLauray, Bruce, 264
Dollar crisis, 119
Mahon, George H., 260
Exchange market policy, 106
Steel industry import relief, 63
Mali, 339
U.S. anti-inflation program, 141
U.S. economic aid policy, 297, 302,
Mansfield, Michael J.:
U.S. energy policy, 131
Dollar crisis, 154, 160
U.S. trade policy, 135, 164
Fukuda U.S. visit (1978), 130
War on hunger, 298
McNally, Thomas, 121, 122
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 43,
Meany, George, 47, 200
Ohira U.S. visit (1979), 212
Meany-Jones Labor-Management
Strauss Japan visit (1978), 92
Committee, 47
U.S.-Japanese currency swap, 157
Meigher, Eva, 335
U.S.-Japanese Subcabinet meetings,
Meissner, Chuck, 344
Melcher, John, 219
Maritime industry. See Oil cargo
Merchant Marine Act (1920) (Jones Act),
preference legislation.
Marris, Stephen, 228
Marshall, F. Ray:
Meyers, Gerald C., 245
Dollar crisis, 119
Footwear import relief, 16
Michalopoulos, Constantine, 281, 286
References are to document numbers

Miller, G. William:
Automotive industry, 246
Moran, David R., 165
Brandt Commission, 345
Moran, Theodore, 267
Cabinet appointment of, 224
Morgan, Dan, 289
Carter IMF/World Bank speeches,
Morgan, Lee, 211
Mori, Yoshiro, 130
Common Fund proposals, 347
Morse, Bradford, 333
Dollar crisis, 118, 156
Morse, Edward L., 247
Exchange market policy, 227
Motono, Morizuku, 77
IDA support, 335
Moynihan, Daniel P., 185
IMF substitution account proposals,
International financial institutions,
Multilateral Trade Negotiations (MTN),
International opinions, 167
Automotive industry, 245
Ohira U.S. visit (1979), 212
Barre U.S. visit (1977) discussions, 54
Steel industry import relief, 232, 234,
Bergsten memoranda, 9, 45
British attitudes, 169
U.S. North-South policy, 342, 348
Brzezinski-Schmidt correspondence,
Miller, George, 332
Miller, Judith, 39, 246
Carter Europe trip (Jan. 1978)
Minchew, Daniel, 304
discussions, 84
Miyazaki, Hiromichi, 212
Carter-Giscard discussions/
Miyazaki, Isamu, 55
Miyazawa, Kiichi, 77
Carter-Jenkins discussions, 186
Mondale, Walter:
Carter-Schmidt discussions/
Automotive industry import relief,
Cooper-Long discussions, 165
Barre U.S. visit (1977), 54
Economic Policy Group papers, 136
Callaghan U.S. visit (1978), 121
Erb memoranda, 295
Dollar crisis, 83, 119
French resistance to:
Brzezinski-Schmidt
Footwear import relief, 16
correspondence, 169
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Carter-Giscard discussions/
German Federal Republic economic
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
growth concerns, 5
1978) discussions, 147
IMF substitution account proposals,
Hartman memoranda, 159
NSC staff papers, 189
Monetary policy, 48
Owen-Deniau discussions/
Schmidt U.S. visit (1977), 44
Steel industry import relief, 234, 236
Strauss memoranda, 179
U.S. balance of payments, 48
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
U.S. economic aid policy, 292, 297,
1978) discussions, 147
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
U.S.-Japanese economic relations, 12
Hinton memoranda, 22
Japanese trade surplus and, 203
War on hunger, 221, 337
Katz memoranda, 117
Monetary policy (see also Exchange
Less developed countries
market policy; International
participation, 189, 311
References are to document numbers

Multilateral Trade Negotiations
National Security Council (NSC) (see
(MTN)—Continued
also Policy Review
Mondale Europe/Japan visit (1977)
Committee)—Continued
discussions, 1, 5
Dollar crisis, 156
Multilateral planning talks (June
Export promotion proposals, 230
International debt, 300
NSC staff papers, 189
Oil imports, 119
Steel industry import relief, 29, 90,
Renner memoranda, 149
U.S. economic aid policy, 268, 277,
Schmidt U.S. visit (1977) discussions,
STR overview papers, 4
War on hunger, 293
Strauss-Jenkins meetings, 43, 61
Netherlands, 44
New International Economic Order,
Strauss textile program and, 193, 195,
Niederste-Ostholt, Gisela, 44
Tokyo Round finalization, 209
U.S.-British discussions/
Nishimura, Mutsoyoshi, 130
correspondence, 137
Nishiyama, Chiaki, 154
U.S.-Canadian discussions/
Nixon, Richard M., 28
correspondence, 137
Non-Aligned Movement, 330
U.S. countervailing duties and, 166,
Nooter, Robert, 289, 332
U.S.-German Federal Republic
discussions/correspondence, 125,
Nordli, Odvar, 38
Norman, John T., 151
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
U.S. import relief and, 220
(NATO), 21
U.S.-Jamaican discussions/
North-South policy (see also Commodity
correspondence, 311
price stabilization; Common Fund
U.S.-Japanese discussions/
proposals; Council on International
Economic Policy; U.S. economic aid
policy; U.S. North-South policy):
U.S. North-South policy and, 330
U.S.-Venezuelan discussions, 303
North-South relations:
Vance memoranda, 89
Wolff Europe visit discussions, 45
Carter-Callaghan correspondence,
Collective economic action proposals,
Murphy, John M., 7
Muskie, Edmund S.:
Congressional staff discussions, 68
Appointment of, 241
Cooper-Long discussions, 165
U.S. economic aid policy, 355, 356
Cooper memoranda, 249
U.S. economic policy overviews, 241,
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
Nachmanoff, Arnold, 342
1978) follow-up discussions, 188
Nakagawa, Ichiro, 160
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Nakajima, Toshijiro, 130
National Energy Act (1978), 66
National Security Council (NSC) (see
G–7 Ottawa Economic Summit (July
also Policy Review Committee):
Automotive industry, 245
1981) discussions, 252
References are to document numbers

North-South relations—Continued
Obst, Harry, 44
Office of Management and Budget, U.S.
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
(OMB) (see also McIntyre, James T.):
Automotive industry, 246
Common Fund proposals, 284
G–7 Venice Economic Summit (June
Export promotion proposals, 135, 149
Fastener industry import relief, 102
International investment agreement
IMF quota increases, 162
proposals and, 49
International debt, 300, 342
Oil cargo preference legislation, 38
Oil imports, 119
LDC energy fund proposals, 171
Steel industry import relief, 29, 90,
Less developed countries MTN
participation, 189
Steel industry task force report, 80
U.S. economic aid policy:
NSC discussions, 1
Blumenthal memoranda, 263
Carter-Congressional leadership
meetings, 259
Panama multilateral meeting (1978),
International financial institution
support, 302
Schmidt U.S. visit (1977) discussions,
Legislative constraints, 305
Selective import safeguard proposals,
Soviet bloc role in, 267
Science and technology
Tokyo Declaration (1973), 45
U.S. North-South policy, 257, 270
UN Committee of the Whole, 299,
War on hunger, 298
Office of Science and Technology
UN role in, 275, 276
Policy, U.S., 328
Office of the Special Trade
Representative, U.S. (STR) (see also
U.S.-Jamaican discussions/
Strauss, Robert S.):
Automotive industry, 245, 246
Export promotion proposals, 230
U.S.-Japanese Subcabinet meeting
Fastener industry import relief, 102
discussions, 55
Japanese trade surplus, 208
Norway, 38, 44
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 4,
Nuclear energy (see also Nuclear
nonproliferation):
Role of, 133
French nuclear reactor sales to China,
Steel industry task force report, 80
Television industry import relief, 244
International Nuclear Fuel Cycle
U.S. trade policy overviews, 4
Evaluation Program, 91, 221
Ohira, Masayoshi:
Owen memoranda, 91
Carter correspondence, 190
U.S. export controls, 230
Death of, 245
U.S.-Japanese discussions/
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
correspondence, 5, 130
Nye, Joseph S., 256, 270
References are to document numbers

Ohira, Masayoshi—Continued
Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries (OPEC)—Continued
Investment in the United States, 41,
Oil. See Energy policy; Oil cargo
preference legislation; Oil prices;
Oil prices:
U.S. energy policy.
Blumenthal memoranda, 66
Oil cargo preference legislation, 7, 13,
Carter-Schmidt correspondence, 88
Cooper memoranda, 83
Oil prices:
Cooper memoranda, 225
Dollar vs. SDR pricing, 213, 217
Katz memoranda, 117
G–7 Venice Economic Summit (June
Owen memoranda, 91
Presidential Review Committee
North-South relations and, 266
discussions, 118
OECD Financial Support Fund, 6, 23,
Surplus:
Blumenthal memoranda, 263
OPEC policy:
Cooper memoranda, 249
Blumenthal memoranda, 66
Eizenstat/Ginsburg memoranda,
Carter-Schmidt correspondence, 88
Cooper memoranda, 83
G–7 London Economic Summit
(May 1977) discussions, 27
Schmidt U.S. visit (1977)
Katz memoranda, 117
discussions, 44
Owen memoranda, 91
Schultze memoranda, 58
Presidential Review Committee
U.S.-Japanese Subcabinet meeting
discussions, 118
discussions, 55
Pe´rez proposal, 294
Witteveen Facility participation, 50
Ottawa summit. See G–7 Ottawa
U.S. decontrol, 211, 222
Economic Summit (July 1981).
Oksenberg, Michel, 130
Omang, Joanne, 247, 351
Owen, Henry D.:
Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development
Barre U.S. visit (1977), 54
Common Fund proposals, 280, 281
East-West trade study, 4
Carter Europe trip (Jan. 1978), 84
Economic growth discussion
Carter IMF/World Bank speeches,
proposals, 113
Carter Japan trip proposals, 67, 70
G–7 Venice Economic Summit (June
Collective economic action proposals,
International investment agreement
Common Fund proposals, 65, 138,
proposals, 49
Meeting, June 1977, 35
Congressional leadership
discussions, 312
Erb memoranda, 280
Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Policy Review Committee
Countries (OPEC):
discussions, 286
Dollar crisis and, 122, 128
Dollar crisis, 171
G–5 finance ministers meeting
Carswell memoranda, 158
discussions, 24
Carter IMF/World Bank speech,
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Carter-Schmidt correspondence, 93
References are to document numbers

Owen, Henry D.—Continued
Owen, Henry D.—Continued
Multilateral Trade
Dollar crisis—Continued
Negotiations—Continued
Economic Policy Group
Carter-Schmidt discussions/
discussions, 119
correspondence, 204
NSC discussions, 156
Deniau discussions/
NSC staff memoranda, 128
Presidential Review Committee
French resistance to, 168, 179
discussions, 118
McDonald memoranda, 173
Renner memoranda, 139
NSC staff papers, 189
U.S.-Japanese discussions/
U.S.-Canadian discussions/
correspondence, 129
correspondence, 137
European Monetary System, 142, 143
U.S.-Japanese discussions/
Exchange market policy, 109, 114,
correspondence, 137, 144
French monetary policy proposal, 239
Fukuda U.S. visit (1977), 12
Carter-Callaghan correspondence,
Fukuda U.S. visit (1978), 130
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
Follow-up, 171, 188
Ohira U.S. visit (1979), 212
Oil prices, SDR pricing, 217
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
U.S. balance of payments, 86, 91
U.S. economic aid policy, 282, 291,
G–7 Ottawa Economic Summit (July
Assessment studies, 253
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
Erb memoranda, 278
Ford administration policies, 253
Human rights and, 290
G–7 Venice Economic Summit (June
International financial institution
support, 302
German Federal Republic economic
Iran/Afghanistan crises and, 340
Legislative constraints, 336
IMF quota increases, 65, 162
Policy Review Committee
IMF SDR allocation, 162
discussions, 279
IMF substitution account proposals,
Science and technology
cooperation, 331, 334
U.S. economic policy, 73
International opinions, 167, 210
Brzezinski memoranda, 77
Carter-Fukuda correspondence, 59,
U.S. economic policy coordination, 82
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
1978) follow-up discussions,
U.S.-Japanese currency swap, 157
Ohira U.S. visit (1979) discussions,
U.S.-Japanese economic relations, 12,
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 65,
U.S. North-South policy, 91, 184
Carter Venezuela speech (Mar. 29,
Carter-Giscard discussions/
Carter-Jenkins discussions, 186
Global Negotiations, 344
References are to document numbers

Owen, Henry D.—Continued
Presidential Proclamations—Continued
U.S. North-South policy—Continued
No. 4510, ‘‘Implementation of
Thornton memoranda, 296
Orderly Marketing
UNCTAD V meeting (1979), 329
Agreementsˇand the Temporary
Quantitative Limitation on the
Importation Into the United
States of Certain Footwear,’’ 33
Palme, Olof, 345
No. 4665, ‘‘Extension of Temporary
Panama, 306
Quantitative Limitation on the
Importation Into the United
States of Certain Articles of
Pastor, Robert A.:
Stainless Steel or Alloy Tool
Steel,’’ 218
Presidential Review Committee, 118
U.S. North-South policy, 272, 274,
Presidential Review Memoranda:
Patterson, Gardner, 165
PRM 8, ‘‘North-South Strategy’’:
Brzezinski memoranda, 261, 263
Paye, Jean-Claude, 54, 159
Erb memoranda, 274, 278
Pelikan, Robert, 342
Perez-Guerrero, H. E. Manuel, 28, 266,
Hormats/Hansen memoranda, 257
NSC papers, 277
Peru, 56
Pastor memoranda, 272
Peterson, Peter G., 345
Policy Review Committee
Peterson, Rudolph, 253
discussions, 276
Philippines, 1
Text, 254
Pickering, Thomas R., 332
PRM 33, ‘‘Science and Technology in
Pimental, George, 332
Developing Countries,’’ 297, 331,
P.L. 480. See under U.S. economic aid
policy.
Presidential Task Force on Global
Resources and Environment, 351
President’s Export Council, 230
Policy Review Committee (PRC):
Common Fund proposals, 281, 286
Dollar crisis, 119
Protectionism:
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Barre U.S. visit (1977) discussions, 54
Congressional staff discussions, 68
International debt, 300
G–5 finance ministers meeting
Schmidt U.S. visit (1977), 42
discussions, 24
U.S. economic aid policy, 273, 276,
Mondale Europe/Japan visit (1977)
U.S. North-South policy, 254, 273,
discussions, 5
Portugal, 24, 42
Ohira U.S. visit (1979) discussions,
Powell, Jody, 156, 224
Presidential Commission on World
Owen memoranda, 65, 197
Schmidt U.S. visit (1977) discussions,
Presidential Proclamations:
Schultze memoranda, 53
No. 4445, ‘‘Temporary Quantitative
U.S.-Japanese Subcabinet meeting
Limitation on the Importation
discussions, 55
into the United States of Certain
Vance memoranda, 89
Articles of Stainless Steel or
Alloy Tool Steel,’’ 29
Proxmire, William, 122, 233
References are to document numbers

Quotas. See Multilateral Trade
Schlesinger, James R.—Continued
Negotiations; U.S. import relief;
Ohira U.S. visit (1979), 212
U.S. trade policy.
Resignation of, 224
Rafshoon, Gerald M., 152, 321
U.S. economic aid policy, 297
Rattner, Steven, 163
U.S. energy policy, 25, 112
Rattray, Alexander, 319
U.S. North-South policy, PRM 8, 247,
Reagan, Ronald, 353
Renner, John C.:
Schlosstein, Ralph, 246
Schmidt, Helmut:
Exchange market policy, 116
Blumenthal visit (1978), 111
Exchange markets, 100
Carter discussions/correspondence,
German Federal Republic economic
growth concerns, 113
Carter meetings, 131
Japanese trade surplus, 149
Collective economic action proposals,
U.S. economic policy overviews, 149
U.S. energy policy, 100
Countervailing duties, 179
Republic of China (ROC). See Taiwan
Economic aid to Portugal, 24
Reuss, Henry S., 194, 260
Reuss Amendment, 262
European Monetary System, 143
Rhodes, John J., Jr., 203, 305
Exchange market policy, 111, 227
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
Richardson, Henry, 296
1978):
Rieffel, Alexis, 342
Roderick, David, 235
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Roel Garcia, Santiago, 266
Romberg, Alan, 247
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
Roosa bonds, 122
Roosa, Robert V., 174
German Federal Republic economic
Roth, William V., Jr., 185
Rowe, James L., Jr., 141, 158
Inflation, 27
Rubinstein, David, 118
Multilateral Trade Negotiations:
Ruhfus, Juergen, 44
Brzezinski correspondence, 169
Rush, Barney, 344
Carter discussions/
Ryrie, William S., 121, 122
Owen memoranda, 181
Sagami, Takehiro, 212
Strauss discussions, 179
Salzman, Herbert, 228
Samuel, Howard, 201, 332
North-South relations, 28, 42
Sato, Yoshiyasu, 212
Guadeloupe Summit (Jan. 1979),
Sato, Yukio, 212
Saudi Arabia (see also Organization of
Jamaica Summit (1978), 324
Petroleum Exporting Countries),
U.S. anti-inflation program, 174
U.S.-Bundesbank currency swap, 114
Schirmer, Kitty, 85, 131
U.S. Cabinet changes (1979), 224
Schlesinger, James R.:
U.S. energy policy, 25
Dollar crisis, 118, 156
Exchange market policy, 106
Schueler, Manfred, 44
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Schultze, Charles L.:
Common Fund proposals, 281, 286
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
European Monetary System, 143
References are to document numbers

Schultze, Charles L.—Continued
Solomon, Anthony M.—Continued
Exchange market policy—Continued
IMF substitution account
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
International Monetary Group
discussions, 116
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
SDR creation, 107
U.S.-Bundesbank currency swap,
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
U.S.-Japanese currency swap, 154,
German Federal Republic economic
Exchange markets, 46, 55
IMF conditionality policy, 58
Export promotion proposals, 164
IMF substitution account proposals,
G–5 finance ministers meetings, 24
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
Japanese television exports, 31
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 177
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
U.S. anti-inflation program, 237
German Federal Republic economic
growth concerns, 113
U.S. balance of trade, 53
IMF substitution account proposals,
U.S. economic aid policy, 297
Most Favored Nation status, 201
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 61,
U.S. North-South policy, 254, 261
Ohira U.S. visit (1979), 212
Resignation of, 233
War on hunger, 298
Schmidt U.S. visit (1977), 44
Scott-Stokes, Henry, 212
Shafer, J., 113
U.S. balance of payments, 86
Shalala, Donna, 332
U.S. economic aid policy, 258
Shapiro, Irving, 74
U.S. energy policy, Crude oil import
Sherman, William, 12
fees, 112
Shoes. See Footwear import relief.
Shoesmith, Thomas P., 12
Simonet Plan, 4
U.S. North-South policy, 300, 342
Smith, Gene, 30, 47
Witteveen Facility, 23
Solomon Group, 139
Smith, Terence, 224
Somalia, 292
Smith, Lt. Gen. William Y., 273, 276,
Sonoda, Sunao:
Fukuda U.S. visits, 12, 130
Smuckler, Ralph, 332
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
Solomon, Anthony M.:
Common Fund proposals, 281, 285,
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
Conference on International
Economic Cooperation, 266
Southeast Asia, 283
Dollar crisis, 118
Soviet bloc (see also Soviet Union), 267
Domestic economic policy
coordination proposals, 57
Soviet Union (see also Soviet bloc):
European Monetary System, 142
Exchange market policy, 46
Brzezinski memoranda, 105
Dollar crisis and, 128
References are to document numbers

Soviet Union (see also Soviet
Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPRO), 66,
bloc)—Continued
Strauss, Robert S.:
U.S.-European economic cooperation
Carter Europe trip (Jan. 1978), 84
and, 127
Spain, 11
Sparkman, John J., 260
Dollar crisis, 119
Special Trade Representative, Office of,
Economic growth targets, 99
U.S. (STR). See Office of the Special
Fastener industry import relief, 102,
Trade Representative, U.S.; Strauss,
Robert S..
Springborn, Fred, 46, 155
Stammati, Gaetano, 28
Fukuda U.S. visit (1978), 130
Stanton, John, 260
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
Starkey, James, 22
Steel industry (see also Steel industry
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
import relief):
Countervailing duties, 4
EC program, 89
Eizenstat/Ginsburg memoranda, 95
Eizenstat memoranda, 80
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 96,
Reference price system, 80
Agriculture, 22
Revitalization program, 238
Carter-Jenkins discussions, 186
Strauss memoranda, 90
Task force report, 79, 80
G–7 economic summit discussions,
Steel industry import relief:
Bergsten memoranda, 36
Jenkins meetings, 43, 61
McDonald memoranda, 133, 173,
Blumenthal-steel executive meetings,
Multilateral planning talks (June
Eizenstat/Ginsburg memoranda, 95
Eizenstat memoranda, 30, 80
Owen memoranda, 177
Fastener industry import relief and,
Trade Policy Committee briefing,
Miller memoranda, 232, 236
U.S.-British discussions/
Schultze memoranda, 62, 237
correspondence, 137
Solomon memoranda, 235
U.S.-Canadian discussions/
STR overview papers, 4
correspondence, 137
Strauss memoranda, 90, 218
Task force report on, 79
U.S.-Japanese discussions/
Tripartite Advisory Committee
recommendations, 238
Ohira U.S. visit (1979), 212
U.S.-European Community
Oil cargo preference legislation, 34,
discussions, 234, 238
Vance/Klutznick/Askew
Steel industry:
memoranda, 234
EC-Japanese agreement, 90, 95
Steiger, William A., 170
Stern, Al, 332
Price increases, 30, 47
Stevenson, Adlai E., III, 318
U.S.-Japanese economic relations, 215
Stoessel, Walter J., Jr., 44, 101
U.S. North-South policy, 254
Stowe, Kenneth, 121, 122
U.S. trade policy, 216
References are to document numbers

Strauss, Robert S.—Continued
Tokyo Round. See Multilateral Trade
Negotiations.
U.S. trade policy—Continued
Tokyo Summit. See G–7 Tokyo
Export promotion proposals, 53, 74,
Economic Summit (June 1979).
Tolchin, Martin, 39
McDonald memoranda, 185
Torrijos, Omar, 306
Toumayan, Alec, 54
Trade Act (1974) (see also Jackson-Vanik
Stuart, Reginald, 246
Sweden, 44
Switzerland, 44
Syria, 339, 340
Trade deficits. See Balance of trade; U.S.
Taft-Hartley Act (1947), 114
balance of trade.
Trade liberalization. See Protectionism.
Takashima, Masuo, 130, 212
Trade negotiations. See Multilateral
Tanaka, Seichiro, 212
Trade Negotiations.
Tanaka, Tatsuo, 99
Trade Policy Committee (TPC), 4, 44
Tariffs. See Multilateral Trade
Trade Policy Review Group (TPRG),
Negotiations; U.S. import relief;
U.S. trade policy.
Trade Policy Staff Committee (TPSC),
Television industry:
Transportation, U.S. Department of,
Teshima, Reishi, 212
Treasury, U.S. Department of (see also
Textile industry:
Bergsten, C. Fred; Blumenthal, W.
Michael; Solomon, Anthony M.):
Automotive industry, 245, 246
Chinese import quotas, 219
Countervailing duties, 150
Dollar crisis, 139
Export promotion proposals, 52, 134,
Thatcher, Margaret, 221, 222
Fastener industry import relief, 102
Thomas, John, 332
Thompson, Brig. Gen. James M., 273
International debt, 300
Thornton, Thomas:
International investment agreement
Common Fund proposals, 280, 281,
proposals, 49
Japanese trade surplus, 70, 208
North-South relations, 267
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 197
U.S. economic aid policy, 279, 354,
Oil cargo preference legislation, 38
Oil imports, 119
U.S. North-South policy, 282, 296,
Carter Venezuela speech (Mar. 29,
Television industry import relief, 244
U.S. economic aid policy, 259, 263,
Erb memoranda, 274
Hansen memoranda, 255, 256
U.S. North-South policy, 270
Policy Review Committee
Treverton, Gregory F., Schmidt U.S.
discussions, 273, 276
visit (1977), 44
Tickell, Crispin, 186
Trilateral Commission, 6
Tripartite Advisory Committee, Steel
industry import relief, 238
Trudeau, Pierre:
Tokyo Declaration (1973), 45
Carter correspondence, 137
References are to document numbers

Trudeau, Pierre—Continued
U.S. anti-dumping actions—Continued
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
Blumenthal-steel executive meetings,
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Miller memoranda, 232, 236
Schultze memoranda, 62
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 137
Solomon memoranda, 235
Political situation, 240
Strauss memoranda, 90
U.S. anti-inflation program, 174
Task force report on, 79
Truman, Harry S., 315
Vance/Klutznick/Askew
Tuchman, Jessica. See Mathews, Jessica
memoranda, 234
Tuchman.
U.S. anti-inflation program:
Tunisia, 319
Blumenthal memoranda, 119
Eizenstat/Ginsburg memoranda, 47
Forbord memoranda, 175
Tvardek, Steven, 335
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
1978) follow-up discussions, 188
Ullman, Albert C., 185, 191
IMF substitution account proposals
UN Conference on Science and
and, 233
Technology for Development
International opinions, 167, 210
UN Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD) (see also
Presidential Review Committee
Common Fund proposals):
discussions, 118
Cooper-Long discussions, 165
Renner memoranda, 116, 149
Cooper memoranda, 315
Schultze memoranda, 237
Erb memoranda, 295, 329
Strauss memoranda, 141
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
U.S.-German Federal Republic
1978) discussions, 148
discussions/correspondence, 125
U.S.-Japanese discussions/
Lake/Hormats memoranda, 321
correspondence, 130
U.S. balance of payments (see also
Panama multilateral meeting (1978)
Dollar crisis; Exchange market
discussions, 306
UN Development Programme (UNDP),
U.S. balance of trade (see also U.S. trade
U.S. economic aid policy (see also War
UNIDO, 344
on hunger):
United Auto Workers (UAW), 245, 246
Basic Human Needs approach:
United Nations (see also ECOSOC; UN
Cooper memoranda, 310
Conference on Trade and
Erb memoranda, 274
Development; UN Development
Feinberg memoranda, 269
Programme):
Committee of the Whole, 299, 311,
Lake memoranda, 267
NSC papers, 277
Policy Review Committee
North-South relations General
Thornton memoranda, 354
Assembly discussions, 275
U.S.-Japanese discussions, 55
Blumenthal memoranda, 263
Fastener industry, 102
Brookings Institution/DCC
Steel industry, 63, 80
U.S. anti-dumping actions, 238
Brzezinski/McIntyre memoranda,
Blumenthal memoranda, 64
References are to document numbers

U.S. economic aid policy (see also War
U.S. economic aid policy (see also War
on hunger)—Continued
on hunger)—Continued
Brzezinski memoranda, 263, 282
Security Supporting Assistance (SSA),
Carter-Congressional leadership
meetings, 259, 260
U.S.-Venezuelan discussions, 303
Carter Foreign Policy Association
Vance-Congressional leadership
meetings, 265
Economic Policy Group papers, 263
Vance Congressional testimony, 259
Erb memoranda, 278
Vance memoranda, 282
Erb/Owen memoranda, 282
Young memoranda, 283
Erb/Pastor memoranda, 323
U.S. economic policy (see also U.S.
Ford administration policies, 253
anti-inflation program; U.S. trade
Fried/Owen memoranda, 253
policy):
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Coordination proposals, 82
Economic renewal program, 249
Hormats memoranda, 259
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
1977) economic growth targets,
International financial institution
International opinions, 167, 210
Owen memoranda, 73
Iran/Afghanistan crises and, 339, 340
U.S. energy policy, 171
Legislative constraints, 305, 336
NSC papers, 277
Carter speeches (July 1979), 224
Collective economic action proposals
and, 124
Armacost memoranda, 290
Cooper memoranda, 41, 241
Carter-Congressional leadership
Crude oil equalization tax (COET),
meetings, 260
Christopher memoranda, 289, 292
Crude oil import fees, 112
Erb/Owen memoranda, 282
Economic Policy Group discussions,
Owen memoranda, 341, 343
Thornton memoranda, 355
Eizenstat/Schirmer memoranda, 85
Policy Review Committee
Public education strategy, 295
Regional groupings, 283
Natural gas pricing, 163
Science and technology cooperation:
Blumenthal memoranda, 263
Oil prices decontrol, 211
Cooper memoranda, 315
Erb memoranda, 295
Policy Review Committee
Lake/Hormats/Maynes
discussions, 119
memoranda, 328
Presidential Review Committee
Lake/Hormats memoranda, 321
discussions, 118
McIntyre/Press memoranda, 334
Renner memoranda, 149
Policy Review Committee
Strategic Petroleum Reserve, 66
discussions, 331, 332
U.S.-German Federal Republic
discussions, 114
State Department overview paper,
U.S.-Japanese Subcabinet meeting
discussions, 55
Vance memoranda, 333
U.S. export policy. See U.S. trade policy
References are to document numbers

U.S. foreign assistance. See U.S.
U.S. North-South policy (see also
economic aid policy
Commodity price stabilization;
U.S. import relief (see also Footwear
Common Fund proposals; Council
import relief; Steel industry import
on International Economic Policy;
relief):
War on hunger)—Continued
Automotive industry, 246
Cooper memoranda, 310, 315
Fastener industry, 102, 187
Economic Policy Group discussions,
McDonald memoranda, 133
Multilateral Trade Negotiations and,
Selective safeguard proposals, 201
Erb/Pastor memoranda, 323
Erb/Thornton memoranda, 282
U.S. International Trade Commission.
See International Trade
Hormats/Hansen memoranda, 257
Commission.
International debt:
U.S.-Japanese economic relations (see
Cooper memoranda, 266, 310
also Japanese trade surplus):
Economic Policy Group papers, 263
Automotive industry, 242, 245
Erb memoranda, 299
Blumenthal visit (1979), 203
Nachmanoff memoranda, 342
Carter-Fukuda correspondence, 59,
Policy Review Committee
discussions, 300
Fukuda U.S. visit (1977) discussions,
State Department overview paper,
Japanese fastener industry exports,
U.S.-Jamaican discussions/
correspondence, 311
Lake/Hormats/Maynes memoranda,
Ohira U.S. visit (1979) discussions,
Lake/Hormats memoranda, 321, 327
Lake memoranda, 330
Platt memoranda, 206
Mondale Europe/Japan visit (1977)
Steel industry anti-dumping actions,
discussions, 1, 5
NSC papers, 277
Steel price increases and, 30
Owen memoranda, 91, 184
Strauss negotiations (1979), 215
Pastor memoranda, 272
Point Four Program, 315
Trade Facilitation Committee, 99
Policy Review Committee
U.S.-Japanese currency swap, 154,
PRM 8 text, 254
U.S.-Japanese Subcabinet meetings,
State Department overview paper,
Wise Men’s Group, 208, 212
STR overview papers, 4
U.S. North-South policy (see also
U.S.-Venezuelan discussions, 275, 303
Commodity price stabilization;
Vance memoranda, 325, 327
Common Fund proposals; Council
Vance Seattle speech (Mar. 30, 1979),
on International Economic Policy;
War on hunger):
U.S. Steel Corporation (see also Steel
References are to document numbers

U.S. Trade Act. See Trade Act (1974).
Vance, Cyrus—Continued
U.S. trade policy (see also Countervail-
ing duties; Multilateral Trade
Common Fund proposals, 281, 286,
Negotiations; U.S. import relief):
Bergsten memoranda, 9
Dollar crisis, 118, 156
Blumenthal memoranda, 37
European protectionism, 89
‘‘Buy America’’ preferences, 30, 133,
Exchange markets, 117
French monetary policy proposal, 239
Eizenstat/Ginsburg memoranda, 52
Fukuda U.S. visit (1977), 12
Export promotion proposals:
Fukuda U.S. visit (1978), 130
Armacost memoranda, 74
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
Brzezinski memoranda, 164
Eizenstat/Ginsburg memoranda,
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Eizenstat/McIntyre memoranda,
G–7 Tokyo Economic Summit (June
G–7 Bonn Economic Summit (July
G–7 Venice Economic Summit (June
1978) discussions, 145
Klutznick/Askew memoranda, 248
German Federal Republic economic
growth concerns, 2
Policy Review Committee
IMF substitution account proposals,
discussions, 119
Renner memoranda, 149
Rivers memoranda, 192
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 43,
Schultze memoranda, 53
Import licensing, 185
North-South relations:
Investment incentives, 185
Brandt Commission, 345
McDonald memoranda, 133, 185
Conference on International
Most Favored Nation status, 201
Economic Cooperation, 266
Erb memoranda, 201
G–7 London Economic Summit
(May 1977) discussions, 28
STR overview papers, 4
NSC discussions, 1
Strauss memoranda, 216
Soviet bloc role in, 267
UN Committee of the Whole, 338,
U.S. North-South policy and, 310, 330
U.S.-Jamaican discussions/
Ushiba, Nobuhiko:
correspondence, 307
Economic growth targets, 99
Oil cargo preference legislation, 39
Fukuda U.S. visit (1978), 130
Protectionism, 68
Schmidt U.S. visit (1977), 44
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 97,
Steel industry import relief, 234
U.S. balance of payments, 85
Strauss negotiations (1979), 215
U.S. economic aid policy, 282
Strauss visit (1978), 92
Assessment studies, 264, 268
Basic Human Needs approach, 269,
Vaky, Viron P., 303
Carter-Congressional leadership
Value added taxes (VAT), 4
meetings, 260
Van Dyk, Frederick T. (Ted), 270, 273
Congressional leadership meetings,
Van Lennep, Emile, 228
Vance, Cyrus:
Congressional testimony, 259
Barre U.S. visit (1977), 54
Human rights and, 262, 289
Cabinet changes (1979), 224
Iran/Afghanistan crises and, 340
References are to document numbers

Vance, Cyrus—Continued
U.S. economic aid policy—Continued
War on hunger:
Legislative constraints, 305, 336
Clift memoranda, 337
Ehrlich memoranda, 351
Public education strategy, 295
G–7 Venice Economic Summit (June
Science and technology
1980) discussions, 240
Lake memoranda, 330
U.S. economic policy overviews, 91
MacLaine documentary, 293
U.S. energy policy, 112
U.S. North-South policy, 325, 327
Brzezinski memoranda, 261, 287,
Presidential Commission on World
Hunger design, 298
Cooper memoranda, 315
Warner, Marvin, 104
Hansen memoranda, 270
Warnke, Paul, 297
International debt, 299
Watanabe, Koji, 12
Lake/Hormats/Maynes
Watson, Jack H., Jr.:
memoranda, 328
Automotive industry, 246
Lake/Hormats memoranda, 321
Lake memoranda, 330
Steel industry import relief, 29, 63
Policy Review Committee
U.S. economic policy coordination,
discussions, 254, 273
U.S. North-South policy, 310
U.S. trade policy, 37
State Department overview paper,
UNCTAD V meeting (1979), 329,
West, Quenton, 332
U.S.-Venezuelan discussions, 303
Wexler, Anne, 219, 223
White, John, 332
World economic outlook, 225
Whitney, Craig R., 24
Vandenberg, Arthur, 264
Wickel, James J., 12
Vanden Heuvel, William, 344
Widjojo Nitisastro, 326
Venezuela:
Wilkowski, Jean, 332
Common Fund proposals, 303, 326
Winder, Joseph, 335
Conference on International
Williams, James, 343
Economic Cooperation, 265
Wirth, Timothy E., 240
Panama multilateral meeting (1978),
Witter, Col. Robert A., 332
U.S. North-South policy, 275, 303
Witteveen, H. Johannes (see also
Venice summit. See G–7 Venice
Economic Summit (June 1980).
Witteveen Facility:
Vest, George S., 44, 54
Blumenthal Europe visit discussions,
Villain, Claude, 165
Vine, Richard, 113, 185
Callaghan U.S. visit (1978)
Vinocur, John, 103, 171
discussions, 122
Volcker, Paul, 227, 233
G–5 finance ministers meeting
Von Staden, Berndt, 44
discussions, 24
Waggonner, Joseph David, Jr., 152
Waldheim, Kurt, 350
Schmidt U.S. visit (1977) discussions,
Walker, Jenonne, 247, 267
References are to document numbers

Witteveen Facility—Continued
World Hunger Working Group, 293,
U.S.-Jamaican discussions/
correspondence, 294
Wynne, Gordon, 61
Wolfensohn, James, 211
Wolff, Alan:
Yamazaki, Ryuichiro, 12, 130
Japanese trade surplus, 92
Yamazaki, Toshio, 12
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 22,
Yasukawa, Takeshi, 203, 212
Yeutter, Clayton, 4
Oil cargo preference legislation, 34
Yondo, Marcel, 326
Young, Andrew J.:
World Bank (International Bank for
G–7 London Economic Summit (May
Reconstruction and Development)
(see also International financial
Panama multilateral meeting (1978),
institutions):
Bond guarantee facility, 321, 330
U.S. economic aid policy, 283
Bonn proposals, 186, 188
U.S. North-South policy, 254, 261,
World Conference on Agrarian
Owen memoranda, 35, 65
Reform and Rural Development,
Soviet bloc membership, 267
Special Financial Assistance Unit, 321
Young, Charles William, 260
Young, Milton R., 260
World Conference on Agrarian Reform
and Rural Development
Zablocki, Clement J., 260, 333
(WCARRD), 330
Zaire, 292, 305
World Development Program, 25, 35
References are to document numbers
