Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I cause of their dependence on us; and even the Chinese are talking tough. Personally, I do not believe that any significant alteration in our approach is yet required on any of these issues. But if we should decide to make changes, it is crucially important that we do so in a deliberate manner. Thus, in the next several weeks, we should give extraordinary care to public as well as background remarks concerning SALT, the Middle East, and our relations with our allies. We should spread the word throughout the government that we wish to convey a patient, determined, yet relaxed attitude toward these major issues. Also, you should take the time to lay out at some depth your views to our allies (like Schmidt), so that they sense their larger strategic dimension instead of just listening to them. As for possible modifications in our approach, you will have an opportunity to consider them when you receive the results of the PRC’s work on the Middle East,10 Human Rights,11 and separate memoranda being prepared for you on US-Soviet relations (the assessment and the list of your initiatives).12 Whither the Federal Republic of Germany? The second of the two opinion pieces this week was written by Colonel William Odom of my staff. Bill served a total of 8 years in both East and West Germany. He was also an Assistant Army Attache in Moscow from 1972 to 1974. His opinion piece is interesting—and timely— reading in light of Chancellor Schmidt’s impending visit.13 “The division of Germany at the end of World War II put the major issue of Europe in this century on ice: the emergence of German power and the relative decline of Britain and France. Furthermore, the Federal Republic broke with the traditional ambivalence about Germany’s place in the East or the West by choosing the West. In the intervening three decades, many political leaders in the West have come to assume 10 The Policy Review Committee met on July 12 to discuss the Middle East. For a summary of this meeting, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute,
