Venezuela 1239 VE–18. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, January 5, 1959.1  Washington, January 5, 1959. SUBJECT Effect of Venezuelan Tax Law PARTICIPANTS Mr. Thomas C. Mann—E

Mr. Craig Stark—E Mr. Maurice Bernbaum—OSA

Members of the Petroleum Industry Mr. Carl Bartch—OSA Mr. Hollis Kannenberg—FSD At the request of the Department of State, 38 leaders of the petroleum industry met to discuss the probable effects of the Venezuelan tax decree announced December 19. Mr. Mann opened the meeting with a review of the events leading up to the Venezuelan move and outlined steps taken since then by the Department of State. He described at some length the attitude of the Venezuelan people and government toward the tax decree and cautioned against any overt retaliation on the part of industry. Mr. Mann pointed out that one of the major problems in Venezuela is in attempting to get the Government to speak frankly to its people. Mr. B. C. Schmidt (San Jacinto Petroleum) said that the Junta was under no pressure and that the move was evidently motivated by fiscal goals. It will not be possible to arrive at an exact figure, he said, because the effect will vary with the size of the company. Mr. Mann asked that the companies determine, within a range, what the effect of the cut will be. The newcomers should calculate what the effects in 1958 will be, how long it will take them to recover their initial investment and how the flow of oil in 1959 will be effected. These facts would be complementary to those provided by the established firms. Both groups should understand their case and present it to the Venezuelans in relation to their own company interest. He cautioned against making public and written protests. Private conversations with prominent Venezuelans, as well as with the Government, would be more advantageous and would provide the Department of State with support. Mr. T.S. Petersen (Standard of California) indicated that the tax decree must increase the Venezuelan tax revenue since his company’s tax bill was due within a few weeks. Any company working for 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 831.112/1–559. Confidential. Drafted by Stark.
