National Security Policy  249
of the meeting, and another is attached to this memorandum.) He then 
called on Dr. Lauriston Taylor to summarize the contents of the subject 
report.
Dr. Taylor’s summary was related to the seven Conclusions set 
forth in the Summary at the beginning of the written report. (A copy of 
the report is filed in the minutes of the meeting.)
At the conclusion of Dr. Taylor’s presentation, General Cutler sug­
gested, by way of Council action, that the above-­mentioned report be 
referred to Governor Hoegh for study and such recommendation to the 
Council as he might deem appropriate.
General Cutler next called upon the Director, Bureau of the Budget. 
Mr. Stans pointed out that, as the report itself said, there was certainly 
a lack of coordination in some of the areas of research in non-­military 
defense programs. The most effective use to which the report could be 
put would be to fill in these gaps in coordination.
The President counseled Governor Hoegh to pay particular atten­
tion to the 6th and 7th Conclusions, which seemed to him to deal largely 
with procedural problems.
The National Security Council:
a. Noted and discussed the report on the subject prepared, pursu­
ant to NSC Action No. 1882–­b–(1)–(2), by the Advisory Committee on 
Civil Defense of the National Academy of Sciences-National Research 
Council, with the advice and assistance of personnel from a number of 
other committees of the Academy-Research Council and of individual 
consultants, and transmitted by the reference memorandum of July 1, 
1958; as summarized at the meeting by Dr. Lauriston Taylor.
b. Referred the aforementioned report on the subject to the Direc­
tor, Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization, for study of the Con­
clusions contained therein (especially Conclusions Nos. 6 and 7 on 
page 2 of the Summary), and such recommendations to the Council as 
he may deem appropriate.
NOTE: The action in b above, as approved by the President, sub­
sequently transmitted to the Director, Office of Defense and Civilian 
Mobilization, for implementation.
2. THE NUMBER OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS WHICH MIGHT BE 
TOLERABLE TO WORLD POPULATIONS
(NSC Action No. 1882; NSC 5807/1; Memo for NSC from Acting 
Executive Secretary, same subject, dated July 7, 1958)
After a further short briefing by General Cutler, Dr. Libby was 
called upon to comment on the written report. He pointed out that the 
world-­wide effect of a nuclear war fought with “dirty” bombs having a 
megatonnage of 15,000, would result in serious effects on the health of 
the non-­combatant peoples of the world, but would not actually lead 
to the end of life on the earth. The main point was that these effects
