830
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
form is only successful when there is a concurrent provision of supple-
mentary services such as credit, roads, etc. Also the need for better ex-
tension service was noted.
b) Accessibility—They will focus on increasing the purchasing
power of the poor and population growth rates.
c) Consumption—The paper states that the first goal is to ensure
that everyone has enough calories to consume and then the Commis-
sion should worry about the nutritional make up of the diets of chil-
dren followed by the nutritional make up of the diets of adults. The
Commissioners agreed that quantity not quality was the first priority in
eradication of hunger. This discussion went off in the direction of
American companies marketing non-nutritious products in countries
where there are severe hunger problems.
d) Trade—This was a very vague discussion and the Commis-
sioners recognized that they needed a fully developed paper in this
area.
The paper ended with a proposed Action Plan which the Commis-
sion would recommend to the President. As explained by Linowitz a
consortia of multi and bilateral donors would be established for food
aid and agricultural development assistance. An LDC would then be
required to present the group with a development strategy, including
the kind of investment the country itself was willing to make, and ex-
ternal assistance would then be tailored to the requirements of the
country strategy.3 Linowitz was quite enthusiastic about this approach
and said that it would give the USG flexibility to “tailor” program ac-
tions to the particular needs of the developing country. He said that
they did this in the days of the Alliance for Progress and he felt that it
worked very well. After several questions from other Commissioners,
Linowitz said that the details still had to be “fleshed out” and that the
Commission didn’t have to accept this type of program immediately
but that it was very attractive to him.
The last item for the Commission’s consideration was the proposal
that they issue two statements. One would urge the Congress to repeal
3 In a February 16 letter to Shaughnessy, Freeman endorsed this concept: “Finally,
the action plan, that is to say, trying to go country by country and work out a kind of part-
nership arrangement, is, I think, excellent. I have had some discussion with our chairman
as to whether we have the resources to do that. But if we succeed in laying on a plan of
action by midyear 1979 and have a year to work at it, and if we could get the cooperation
of some of the operating parts of our government, not only AID, but the Department of
Agriculture and parts of other departments so far as expertise and inputs (maybe get
people on special assignments), we might work wonders.” (Carter Library, RG 220, Presi-
dential Commission on World Hunger, Linowitz’s Subject Files, Box 42, Members of the
Commission [2])
