Human Rights 269 source and the stimulus for action programs in support of human rights which went beyond exhortation and penalties. IV. Functions of a Human Rights Agency The overall purpose of the agency would be to support overall US foreign policy objectives through the promotion of human rights on a global basis.4 It could, presumably, assume some human rights functions already being undertaken by other agencies, but it could also undertake additional programs and activities which could make new positive contributions to the furtherance of human rights. Among other things, the agency could be authorized to: 1. Plan, devise, develop, and execute programs which would further global human rights in accordance with US foreign policy objectives. 2. Work with other US government agencies, foreign governments, private organizations, and international organizations for the expansion of human rights. 3. Provide assistance to private individuals and organizations, public and private international organizations, and other governments for programs which promote human rights. 4. Periodically study the condition of human rights globally and in specific societies and assess trends affecting human rights (possibly assuming here responsibilities assigned to the State Department under existing legislation). 5. Undertake research on human rights issues and the ways of more effectively expanding human rights. 6. Monitor US government policies and actions which affect human rights, assess their effectiveness, and make recommendations to the appropriate executive and legislative bodies. 7. Prepare and disseminate information on human rights in order to promote public understanding of human rights issues and support for human rights in the US and abroad. 4 Some might ask: Why should this agency only attempt to promote human rights abroad? Shouldn’t it also promote human rights in the US? The answer is that it should not. And the reason is twofold, but simple. First, fewer violations of human rights occur in the United States than in most other societies. Second, far more people and organizations—official and private, national and local—are concerned with the protection of human rights in the United States than in other societies. As a result, the ratio of organized concern to actual or potential violations of human rights is far higher in the US than anywhere else in the world. There is thus far greater need for the human rights agency to focus on the global condition of human rights than on their condition in the US. To become involved in the latter would also clearly distract it from the former. The agency should, consequently, become concerned with aspects of human rights in the US only insofar as these impinge directly on the condition of human rights abroad. [Footnote in the original.]
