Colombia 383 the Act that such assistance in the form of equipment and materials be furnished only in furtherance of western Hemisphere defense missions. Enclosed is a detailed statement of the background and justification of this program, the implementation of which is estimated to require the expenditure of up to $1,750,000 of funds available under the Act for military assistance, of which up to $1,500,000 may be used to furnish equipment and materials. A small amount of excess equipment and materials may be included. It is considered that the furnishing of the proposed assistance in the form of equipment and materials and the use of funds available thereafter under the Act are in furtherance of the purposes of the Act and are important to the security of the United States. IT IS, ACCORDINGLY, RECOMMENDED that you sign the enclosed memorandum which contains the determinations required by the Act in order to carry out such military assistance to Colombia.3 Livingston T. Merchant Enclosure Military Assistance for Colombia Requiring Determinations, Under the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended The assistance proposed for Colombia includes initial equipment and related services and specialized training for the Colombian Military establishment at an estimated total cost of $1,750,000. Equipment to be furnished would include vehicles, communications equipment, and air transport equipment. It is expected that the equipment and materials portion of the proposed assistance will cost up to $1,500,000. There will be a continuing modest annual requirement for maintenance and spares, but it is expected that the Colombian Government will be able to finance this continuing cost itself. A small amount of the initial equipment and materials may come from excess stocks. Training, at an estimated cost of $250,000, would be provided by United States training advisors or at selected United States installations in such subjects as counter-­guerrilla warfare, intelligence and 3 The referenced memorandum containing the necessary Presidential Determinations, designated No. 61-14, recommended by Dillon and conurred in by John N. Irwin, II, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, on Decenber 21, and Maurice H. Stans, Director of the Bureau of the Budget, on December 29, is not printed. The following typed note appears on the source text: “Approved by the White House; see Memo to the Secretary of State dated 1/5/61 from the President.” The note is initialed, but the initials are indecipherable.
