Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA counseled patience. At one point, Meyer-Landrut said, “we will get it, just be patient.” Ruhfus said the Foreign Office would be instructed to consult with the Embassy on Holzkirchen and other outstanding issues involving the Radios. The Chancellor had a strong personal interest in the Radios and reference was made to his discussions in 1974 with Secretary Kissinger and in 1977 with President Carter. Ruhfus realized that a prompt response was required and he hoped a solution could be found “more in line with our situation here and our sovereignty.” He did not indicate what the Chancellery decision might be though he generally maintained a positive approach toward the Radios, noting that their value as a source of info in Eastern Europe had again been brought home to him during his visit to Poland with the Chancellor. Begin comment: Meyer-Landrut later told us the suggestion of Foreign Office-Embassy consultations had been his idea and Ruhfus had readily agreed. As noted above, Meyer-Landrut supports approval of the Holzkirchen application. End comment. State Minister Von Dohnanyi was in general more reserved on Holzkirchen. While it might be desirable from a technical standpoint, politically it represented an increase in radio presence which ran counter to the Chancellor’s desires. The matter must therefore be handled delicately. Though there were basically no differences in our foreign policy, including our approach to detente, there were shadings of emphasis which affected broadcast policy toward the East. The Radios were now operating in a new era of German sovereignty and this, too, had to be taken into account. This made the FRG very cautious and it would be necessary to review the matter carefully. Begin comment: Von Dohnanyi’s unhelpful approach is not indicative of Foreign Office policy. As a Parliamentary State Minister, Von Dohnanyi has no line responsibility within the Ministry and is not in the decision-making chain on this issue. Nonetheless, he is an important figure in the SPD and his opinion may be more reflective of Party sentiment. If his views are widespread within the Party—and we have no evidence that they are—it will have an impact on the Holzkirchen decision. End comment. 3. RFE/RL amalgamation and Vorbehalt (reservation clause): Bauch believed the Postal Ministry would issue a new license for the merged corporation within a few weeks. There were no problems here. He hoped working-level action on the reservation clause (Vorbehalt) could be concluded this week or next. (The final draft would basically resemble the 1955 RFE and RL letters to German Foreign Office). There would then be a meeting with the Postal Ministry. If the Chancellery did not express an interest in clearing the wording—and Bauch did not expect that they would—the text would be approved and communicated to the Embassy.
