North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 857 The US Proposal The US proposal is summarized on pp. 1–3 of the discussion paper. In my view, the pooling concept on which it is based has serious technical and political shortcomings: My critique of the financial viability of the pooling proposal includes the following points: —a pooling arrangement without a back-up facility based on direct government contributions or guarantees would not offer a significant incentive to producer/consumer commodity agreements to join the pool; —a common fund without its own financial resources would not be able to convince private bankers of its credit-worthiness and consequently would have a weak borrowing capacity on private capital markets. Note: The World Bank lending proposed by the EPG was an attempt to respond to this issue. —the pooling mechanism envisages a complex way of using the callable capital of commodity agreements and some existing agreements might not be able to participate in the pool as presently defined. On political grounds the pooling proposal: —risks splitting the group of developed countries in November since some of the smaller European countries are not satisfied with the proposal as it stands. —may well provoke a confrontation with developing countries because it falls far short of the Group of 77 proposals. The Proposal of the Developing Countries The common fund proposals of the Group of 77 now include: (1) creation of a central source of funds for international commodity price stabilization agreements between producers and consumers; (2) support by a common fund for “other measures” which would include improvements in productivity, marketing and diversification; (3) financing for stocks and other measures for commodities not covered by international commodity agreements. Only the first of the above proposals offers us a reasonable prospect for compromise. This is so because the US cannot at this time responsibly support a new institution for financing “other measures” when we must still deliver on commitments of $800 million to existing international development lending institutions. Moreover, support by a common fund for commodities not covered by agreements would only be possible if the US and other developed countries had agreed with producers to international guidelines which were comparable to those in formal international agreements. The Group of 77 is not united solidly behind their proposals, a factor which lends considerable uncertainty to interpretations of their possible reaction to the OECD proposal. My best guess is that the LDC
