Dominican Republic  497
indicated that he desires to retire if a way can be found to accomplish 
it. I believe a simple but rather ingenious way could be found to accom-
plish this result by the creation of a philanthropic foundation to which 
Trujillo and his family would transfer the assets of himself and his fam-
ily within the Dominican Republic, which holdings would be adminis-
tered for the benefit of the Dominican people.
It is highly probable that any new regime in the Dominican 
Republic would confiscate the Trujillo family’s local assets and would 
attempt to seize any other assets outside the Dominican Republic as 
they were able to obtain. Therefore, in the plan for retirement and the 
transition to a constitutional form of government, most of the fac-
tors which would provoke bloodshed and chaos could be removed if 
Trujillo voluntarily turned over to a foundation to be used for the good 
of the Dominican people the bulk of his fortune and if at the same time 
peaceful conditions within the Dominican Republic were safeguarded 
by the good offices of the United States and the Organization of the 
American States.
2. The foundation hereinabove referred to should be administered 
by internationally known United States and Latin American citizens for 
the benefit of the Dominican people. Tentatively, the following names 
have been suggested for trustees:
Ex-Presidents Hoover and Truman of the United States;2
Ex-President Eduardo Santos of Colombia;
Ex-President Galo Plaza of Ecuador;
President Kubitschek of Brazil (whose term expires this year);
Pedro Aramburu, former Provisional President of Argentina;
Ex-President Ruiz Cortines of Mexico; possibly Raphael Trujillo 
himself.
3. The Trujillo family and their friends might be given asylum in the 
United States during the establishment of this plan and until it became 
evident that their return to the Dominican Republic would not be an 
act provocative of bloodshed. When the plan was once established and 
a peaceful transition to constitutional government was assured, mem-
bers of the Trujillo family might then return to the Dominican Republic. 
However, it might well be that they would prefer to seek permanent 
homes elsewhere.
4. Naturally, all of the foregoing steps would have to be taken in 
the utmost secrecy. Further, to be successful, the good offices of the 
United States would have to be utilized. In all probability the forum at 
which this plan would be announced would be the Organization of the 
2 The phrase, “President Eisenhower after 1961,”was lined out by the President at 
this point in the source text.
