410 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement weapons. (State had concurred.) Various items of discussion came out during the presentation. Essentially, these were: a. Custody of atomic weapons, specifically that the military com­ manders be authorized to act as the agent of the AEC in maintaining custody of atomic weapons. b. The precarious nature of our base agreements in such countries as [text not declassified] from a political standpoint. c. Means of safeguarding dispersed atomic weapons in the event of limited or general war. d. Relationship of the AEC with the Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy in operational matters. In further discussion, the President stressed certain points of partic­ ular interest. He queried how well protected our weapons are overseas, and Mr. Quarles said they have the same protective arrangements as here. The President added that he had the feeling there was increasing lack of control on these weapons, and emphasized that there must be no carelessness in their custody. General Twining pointed out the need to balance conflicting considerations: while dispersal undoubtedly les­ sons control, if the weapons are not locally available to commanders in an emergency they may not arrive in time. The President commented that, as to anti-­aircraft and anti-­submarine weapons, he did not have too much reservation; when it comes to increasing the number of large weapons that are dispersed, he wanted very careful review of protec­ tive arrangements. The President then asked how many weapons could be carried [text not declassified] on the first sortie; no one was able to give him a definite answer. He said his thinking was that the United States may not be able to carry out more than one sortie from this area, because fields could well be immediately destroyed. He asked as to the Defense thinking on this matter, indicating that while enough weapons to arm the planes that are stationed there could logically be kept on hand one must ask why we could not send the other B–47s planned for straight from the United States with weapons aboard. The Defense members said they would study this matter further. The President approved the dispersal plan as presented by Admiral Parker. However, he desired that he be briefed at a later date on the planning by which this dispersion scheme has been calculated in order to afford optimum economy and usefulness of our national stockpile. (Scheduled for January 5, 1959.) ********** At this point Admiral Parker and Colonel Schinz departed and Mr. Lay joined the group. **********
