1224
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
also recognized. “Unhindered access” to technology is unacceptable
because it is US policy not to export certain sensitive technologies (e.g.,
reprocessing). Any implication that IAEA safeguards alone is a suffi-
cient control measure should be avoided because US must legally re-
quire other assurances (e.g., physical security, vetos on retransfer/re-
processing) and because the US has raised serious questions about the
safeguardability of reprocessing plants. Our negotiating strategy
should focus on developing supplier state consensus and working
principally with Yugoslavia and other NPT parties (e.g., Iran, Mexico,
Nigeria) to encourage Non-Aligned compromise—emphasizing that
only through close supplier-recipient cooperation (e.g., INFCE) can
such issues be resolved.
E. Disarmament/Development Link. The US cannot accept an au-
tomatic link that would commit savings which may accrue from disar-
mament to increases in development assistance. However, the US is
prepared to acknowledge that development assistance is a high pri-
ority objective which deserves serious consideration in the reprogram-
ming of savings which may accrue from disarmament. The US Del
should express general support for a multilateral effort to define cri-
teria which would permit the preferential use of development aid to
favor states that make significant arms control and disarmament ef-
forts. Such use would, of course, have to be weighed against the other
US criteria for the allocation of development aid.
F. Military Expenditure Reporting and Limitations. The US sup-
ports Swedish proposal for a field test by small but representative
group of states of Military Expenditure Reporting (MER) matrix. We
believe that development and general use of such a standardized re-
porting instrument is a prerequisite of Military Expenditure Limita-
tions (MEL) agreements. Along with several other Western States, we
have announced that we will submit US military expenditures data for
field test in the interest of greater openness of information about mili-
tary spending. However, we have largely deferred to Swedish (and to a
degree Mexican, leadership in carrying case for Non-Aligned support
and participation in test. In view of failure to date of any announced
LDC participation, Del should approach Swedish Del early in the ses-
sion to suggest coordinated efforts to persuade group of fence-sitting
states (possibly India, Venezuela, Colombia, Peru, Ghana, Nigeria, and
Liberia) if possible simultaneously, to announce their participation.
G. Reduced Blast/Enhanced Radiation Weapons. The Soviets are
likely to continue their propaganda campaign against RB/ER weapons.
In responding, US Del should rely on points contained in State 110723.5
5 Not found.
