Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission fact that the situation is very fluid and no comments are desirable at this time. (S) 2. Expulsion of Iranian Diplomats. The Attorney General reviewed for the SCC the problems associated with expelling Iranian diplomats. The decision to grant them five days to depart, to impose close and visible surveillance, and to avoid disruptive incidents were inconsistent. A considerable number of non-diplomats are present in some of the facilities (perhaps more than 60 in the Washington Embassy, for example) and arms have been stockpiled. By allowing five days, we increase the chances that these individuals will organize incidents which could have an impact on civil order here and possibly on the hostages in Tehran. The need for close surveillance over a five-day period increases the diplomats [refusal?] to leave or a refusal of the airlines to accept them. (S) The Attorney General recommended that we assume responsibility for removing the diplomats from the facilities and transporting them to the departure point. There would be an initial demonstration of U.S. presence, including individual notification of the requirement to depart, then less visible surveillance in the interim, followed by official escort to the departure point. He recommended reducing the period of delay to the minimum and no more than 24–48 hours. If there is substantial resistance, we would attempt to defuse it by negotiating methods rather than the use of force. (S) Judge Webster seconded this recommendation. He noted that the FBI had located all but two of the residences of the diplomats involved. There is no evidence to date of any plan by the diplomats to run or attempt to escape. There are thousands of Iranian students in all of the cities where facilities are located, and demonstrations are a significant possibility. Recent reports indicate one case of an individual entering the Embassy with an AK–47 submachinegun. Another report indicates armed guards on the roof. There are Hanafi Muslims on the grounds of the Embassy with hand guns. There is one diplomat in Chicago who has been linked to the militants, and we would keep particularly close surveillance on him. However, we want to avoid a “Keystone Kops” situation where police cars converge on the Embassy and Consulates from all directions as the diplomats come to work in the morning. Three teams of two men each would be assigned to each individual, and this would be increased as the moment of departure arrives. Agents in each of the locations have been notified to make preparations, but detailed instructions have not yet been sent to avoid leaks. (S) Mr. Aaron strongly supported the idea of reducing the departure time for the bulk of the diplomats to 24 hours from notification. This would cause personal hardship in some cases, but their personal effects could be handled by those who remained behind. The Department of
