Arms Control and Disarmament 1221 control studies that would be basic to agreements on any additional steps of disarmament. 29. The Soviet have repeatedly indicated their support for some kind of international control organization under the UN Security Council. Other August 29th Proposals 30. The remaining proposals in the August 29th paper are separable and can be practically implemented in successive steps if agreed upon. II. POLICY OBJECTIVES 31. Actively to seek a safeguarded disarmament agreement, begin­ ning with a partial agreement and subsequently extending the initial step or steps into a more comprehensive agreement. In negotiation of the foregoing, the United States should seek either individually or in combination measures which would: a. Break the present deadlock, gain experience in inspection and regulation, and at the same time be careful not to impair the security of the United States in the event that further progress in developing wider disarmament agreements was not forthcoming. b. Reduce the danger of great surprise attack and thereby give con­ tinuing vitality to the nuclear deterrent. c. Inhibit the spread of nuclear weapons into the hands of “fourth countries”. d. Reduce the probability of weapons systems, particularly missile systems, from developing in a way as to increase the danger of major nuclear conflict being initiated either by accident or by actions of other than the responsible national officials, particularly with regard to the growing problem of dispersion of authority to take action which would initiate world war. e. Enhance the political position of the United States with regard to its allies and the uncommitted nations. f. Facilitate within the Soviet Union and the Communist bloc coun­ tries the rise of “non-­Stalinist” elements and ultimately the evolution of the Soviet Bloc countries into more liberal and democratic societies, including the true independence of the satellite countries. III. POLICY GUIDANCE 32. The United States, after consultation with the NATO states and other free countries as appropriate, should propose the following sepa­ rable measures as a basis for an initial agreement: a. (1) Immediately following ratification of the agreement, the installation of approximately eight to twelve test monitoring inspec­ tion stations with appropriate agreed scientific instruments, in the USSR, a like number in the United States, and suitable numbers of such stations in the Pacific Ocean areas, and at other necessary
