1978 375 followed by a list of specific systems. I believe we need to proceed with a substantial selection of these in order to respond both to military needs and to political perceptions. 1. Though each of the major (and some of the minor) programmatic cancellations and deferrals effected by this Administration was made for sound programmatic reasons, cumulatively they have combined with the relative paucity of new starts to convey the impression, both to our allies and to some of our own public, of unreciprocated unilateral restraint—­our detractors would say, unilateral disarmament. We do not know how the Soviets view these matters, but we should also be concerned about their perception. 2. We need to begin some systems that can be identified as initiatives of this Administration. Differing degrees of program commitment—­ full-­scale development, production, deployment—­are appropriate for consideration, depending on the particular case. But nothing less than full-­scale deployment will count in the actual military balance, and at least some of these systems will have to be deployed if we are to change perceptions. 3. Military utility, relative effectiveness, and cost should be the principal criteria for going ahead with such new systems. But anticipated political effects, particularly effects on our allies or on the Soviets, can weigh heavily in such decisions. These effects include such considerations as the creation of parity in a geographical area or at a particular level of escalation; the promotion of arms control agreements; or the conveying of a sense of U.S. technological superiority. 4. In general, strategic systems will have the greatest effect on perceptions, though there are exceptions—ERW, for example. Here are some examples of systems whose implementation would affect perceptions as well as military capabilities. Because they are not equivalent in nature, I do not present them as alternatives. However, I believe we will have to move forward with a substantial number of them to have a significant effect. I emphasize that funds for the next steps have been programmed for very few of these systems. Thus any encouragement engendered by the thought that these systems exemplify the lead we could have over the Soviets in technology should be severely tempered. What this memorandum contains are ideas, potential development programs, and possible prospective deployments. These by no means offset the Soviet forces in being, or the Soviet systems in serial production. Moreover, the systems described below are not a substitute for an increase in the size of the defense program. They are the part of what would constitute an increased program, specific reasons for increased expenditures. In no way could they substitute for the rest of our forces
