1450  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
383.	 Memorandum From Minshull to Killian1
Washington, September 23, 1958
SUBJECT
Policy Decision re Terms of Reference for Surprise Attack Delegation
On Thursday, 25 September 1958, you are tentatively scheduled to 
attend a meeting with Secretary Dulles and Secretary McElroy to discuss 
the Terms of Reference for the U.S. delegation to the forthcoming sur­
prise attack discussions in Geneva. The major question to be resolved at 
this meeting is whether the U.S. delegation will be instructed to discuss 
only the techniques and value of inspection per se, or whether they will 
also be allowed to consider limitations on force readiness as well as 
disposition and level of force as methods to safeguard against surprise 
attack.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff have taken a formal position on this mat­
ter, contending that the discussions must be limited to inspection per 
se. They argue that limitations or controls on readiness, disposition and 
level of force are problems of disarmament, a topic not under consid­
eration at these meetings. In this regard it is interesting to note that 
although Mr. Quarles forwarded the JCS position on this matter to the 
Secretary of State on August 30th, he did not specifically endorse the 
JCS views as the position of the Defense Department.
The State Department, on the other hand, has taken the view—as 
did the Interagency Working Group—that it is also necessary to con­
sider the effect of arms limitation or control in discussing safeguards 
against surprise attack if the meeting is to yield useful results.
The means for bringing this basic policy difference to the attention 
of yourself and the two Secretaries is a draft of the proposed Terms of 
Reference for the November Conference (Attachment A). This docu­
ment was prepared by the State Department (after informal and pri­
vate consultation with this office) and was the subject of a meeting of 
staff personnel from the State Department, the Defense Department, 
the Atomic Energy Commission, CIA and this office on September 
19th. At this meeting the participants came to general agreement on 
the contents of the draft with one exception: the Defense Department 
representatives (Lt. Gen. Byers and Col. Rhea of ISA) insisted that Items 
1 Source: Outlines JCS view that readiness, disposition, and level of forces not be 
included in Surprise Attack talks. Secret. 4 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office 
Files, Additional Records of the Office of the Special Assistant for Science and Technol­
ogy, Disarmament, Surprise Attack.
