1074
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
drudgery, and limited life expectancy. Vast numbers of children are
born into a future of undernourishment, physical and mental impair-
ment, and virtually no prospect of advancement and a better life. Multi-
tudes of adults and youths are without meaningful employment.
“Population pressures are by no means the only cause of these con-
ditions. Poverty and suffering existed long before there were such pres-
sures. But the central importance of overpopulation in the syndrome of
mounting demands on diminishing life support systems, and sta-
tionary or declining living standards over most of the developing
world, is clear.” (Department of State Bulletin, November 1978, page 4)
Part 2 also described multilateral efforts toward curbing popula-
tion growth, notably the 1974 adoption of the World Population Plan of
Action (WPPA), and national efforts toward instituting family plan-
ning programs.
The December issue of Department of State Bulletin featured the
third and final part of “Silent Explosion.” After offering several “pri-
ority action areas” designed to improve the effectiveness of population
programs, the authors highlighted U.S. international population pol-
icies, notably the 1977 amendment of the 1961 Foreign Assistance Act
(FAA), the establishment of the House Select Committee on Population
in September 1977, and the work of the National Security Council Ad
Hoc Group on Population Policy. Asserting that the world could no
longer “gloss over population problems,” Green, Feary, and Giffler
concluded:
“Whether world population stabilizes at 8, 11, or more billions, one
thing seems clear: There will be mounting pressure on resources and
environment everywhere. Awareness of this fact has been slow in
coming, but there is now widening recognition that lifestyles are going
to have to change. Fortunately, many religions and cultures already re-
flect appreciation of the intangible and spiritual over the material. But
anguishing adjustments remain in store.
“The world population explosion impacts on almost all global
issues—food, energy, environment, North-South disparities, and, most
fundamentally of all, improving conditions of life for countless millions
of people. Whether the world community can act adequately and in
time to stabilize population levels will critically affect the future of
mankind.” (Department of State Bulletin, December 1978, page 47)
In a November 16 action memorandum to Secretary of State Cyrus
Vance, sent through Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance,
Science, and Technology Lucy Wilson Benson, Assistant Secretary of
State for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs
Thomas Pickering suggested that the Department transmit copies of
“Silent Explosion” to all Chiefs of Mission. Commented Pickering, “I
believe it should be required reading for all U.S. Ambassadors and
