1256 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement are likely to get scooped. He thinks the Russians will come out unilat­ erally re suspension of testing and L thinks we should consider saying we will stop after the next test. Why is it being done so far ahead when it is not until August? Also make it definite who the observers are. L thinks it should be the radiation comm. The Sec said Herter is han­ dling it through OCB. L will talk with him. The Sec told re working hard over the weekend with Defense and AEC on suspension but finally they agreed not to do it. The Sec went into a discourse about how in the long run we look militaristic though some isolated cases and their decisions are right. If we just had to win a war that would be easy but it’s the diplomatic and economic arenas where we might lose out. Then L, after agreeing, asked if the Sec has thought of asking the Pres to ask to Soviets to agree on an inspection system. L added he is afraid it is going to be bad from a PR standpoint. 304. Memorandum From Lay to the NSC1 Washington, March 28, 1958 SUBJECT Technical Feasibility of Cessation of Nuclear Testing REFERENCE NSC Action No. 1840–­c The Report on the subject,2 called for by NSC Action No. 1840–c– (1), has been prepared by the NSC Ad Hoc Panel established by the reference NSC Action (consisting of representatives of the President’s Science Advisory Committee, the Department of Defense, the Atomic Energy Commission, and the Central Intelligence Agency), and will be presented orally at the National Security Council meeting on Thursday, April 3, 1958. 1 Source: Appendices A–E to Report of the NSC Ad Hoc Working Group (Bethe Report) (print Document 147). Technical feasibility of cessation of nuclear testing; Appen­ dices B, D, and E not declassified (25 pp.). Top Secret; Restricted Data. Appendix A is Secret. 64 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Additional Records of the Office of the Special Assistant for Science and Technology, Disarmament—Bethe Report. 2 Report enclosed with this copy. Special security precautions should be observed in the handling of the enclosures, and access to them should be limited on a strict need-­to-­know basis. [Footnote is in the original.]
