80
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
• Openness to outside inquiry—is the country in question willing
to permit investigation by such public international organizations as
the UN or such respected non-governmental organizations as the Inter-
national Commission of Jurists?
• Extent of other US interests/leverage—the degree and character
of US influence in the country? Likely third-country reaction to US ac-
tion or inaction on human rights? Reaction of democratic elements in
the country concerned? Possible retaliation by the host government
against US policies on human rights (such as recent renunciation of
military assistance by several Latin American nations or possible
cut-off of oil elsewhere)?
Action Requested
—That you authorize a general statement of US policy on human
rights which is: premised on the UN Universal Declaration, balanced
with attention for both political/civil15 and economic/social rights,
most concerned in the short-term with improving performance by
those governments committing crimes against the person, and based
on consideration of the criteria set forth above.16
—That you authorize dispatch of guidance, to the field and for ref-
erence within the foreign affairs agencies in Washington, which reflects
this general policy. (Tab 2)17
2. Action with Individual Countries
We continue to resist the idea of a country “hit list.” It would not
reflect the universal dimension of our policy—i.e., general concern for
all rights everywhere and working with all nations. And, it might be
counterproductive—i.e., needlessly antagonize some nations, while
giving others a free ride. Flexibility is in order—both for defining the
continuum of countries of most concern to us and in discerning what ap-
proaches [public or private, bilateral or multilateral, symbolic or sub-
stantive, positive or reactive, etc.] could be most useful.18
However, while stressing the fundamental global character of our
program, we will inevitably focus on some nations more than others—
identifying or responding to particularly egregious cases of murder,
15 Christopher inserted the word “personal/” before “political/civil.”
16 Christopher bracketed this point and wrote in the margin: “Tab 2 is a good start.”
Christopher initialed his approval of the request on March 27.
17 Tab 2, an undated “General Statement for U.S. Policy on Human Rights” paper, is
attached but not printed. Christopher wrote above this paragraph: “This is a good start.
Q & A could be incorporated into text of next testimony—WC at HIRC [House Interna-
tional Relations Committee] (?).” Christopher drew an arrow from the disapproval line to
the approval line and wrote: “To be reviewed after general statement prepared. Note tel-
egram I sent last week,” a presumable reference to Document 28.
18 Brackets in the original.
