588 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II sult them more frequently during “the process of making a decision.” They in particular requested to be informed about pending decisions in the Christopher Committee or other fora (where private business and foreign government pressures come into play) so that their views can be considered. 188. Paper Prepared by Thomas Thornton of the National Security Council Staff1 Washington, undated HUMAN RIGHTS I have been holding this horse for you only since Jessica’s departure;2 hence, I have not been deeply involved in a number of aspects of it—substantive or procedural. It is very important that you get together soon with Jessica and have her fill you in. I do have a number of observations to make however; perhaps you will find some of them mildly interesting. Human rights is probably the main success story of this administration’s foreign policy, at least in a long-term historical view. We have developed a policy in which we can take pride. We have made human rights an issue of international standing. We have had a definite beneficial impact on the lives of thousands of people throughout the world. And we have created a basis for mutual respect with leaders such as Morarji Desai, Julius Nyerere and others who were alienated from the 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues— Bloomfield Subject File, Box 16, Human Rights: 7/78–7/80. Confidential. In a July 3 memorandum, Brzezinski asked Thornton to prepare a “comprehensive memorandum” from Brzezinski to Bloomfield outlining Bloomfield’s new duties and responsibilities. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 59, Administration’s Policy: NSC: 1979) Thornton sent a copy of this paper to Brzezinski under a July 11 covering memorandum, indicating that he had prepared it for Bloomfield per Brzezinski’s request. According to the NSC Global Issues Cluster’s July 18 evening report, Thornton had given Bloomfield “an extraordinarily helpful briefing on the human rights and UN portfolios” that day. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 37, Evening Reports: 4–8/79) 2 Tuchman Mathews left the NSC Staff in June. Bloomfield then assumed responsibility for human rights issues within the Global Issues Cluster. In the NSC Global Issues Cluster’s August 7 evening report, Bloomfield described his press contacts for that day: “Again, Jessica Tuchman Mathews, of the Washington Post, but in her kindly capacity of passer-on of the baton.” (Ibid.)
