708
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
In the early 1970s the Japanese began shipping cargo boxes and cab
chassis separately for assembly in the U.S. to take advantage of the low
4 percent duty on cab chassis. Customs found this practice acceptable
for about 10 years until a recent court decision caused it to reconsider.
In making its decision to reclassify lightweight cab chassis as substan-
tially complete trucks, Customs noted that U.S. assembly involved less
than 3 percent of the parts and 7 percent of the value of the completed
trucks.
Following normal practice, the reclassification will become effec-
tive 90 days after the May 23 announcement, i.e., on August 21. Before
or after August 21 you have authority to reduce the 25 percent duty on
trucks: (a) unilaterally to 8.5 percent either temporarily or permanently;
(b) by a combination of unilateral action and agreement with Japan, to
any rate of duty between 25 percent and 6.8 percent or possibly a
tariff-rate quota with a higher rate of duty on imports over a certain
quantity; and (c) by an agreement with Japan which is approved by
Congress to any rate of duty between 25 percent and free.
During the MTN the U.S. offered to reduce its truck tariff from 25
to 3.4 percent. The EC offered only minimal payment and we withdrew
the offer. Separately the U.S. indicated to Japan in the MTN that, in
view of the controversy concerning the classification of cab chassis, the
U.S. would be willing to consider a reduced tariff for mini-pickups.
Japan did not show much interest, and the U.S. also withdrew this
offer. Last December we again offered to negotiate a reduction in the
truck duty, but Japan was not interested.
Reclassification comes at a difficult moment for the Japanese polit-
ically. The Ohira Government fell May 16 and Mr. Ohira died on June
12. Elections were held June 22, but until the establishment of a new
government in mid-July at best, it is unlikely the GOJ could negotiate a
major tariff reduction. Although any new government in Japan will
maintain close ties with the U.S., it will face increasing pressure from
business circles—which were instrumental in the LDP’s smashing vic-
tory—to retaliate against a six-fold increase in the duty on a major Japa-
nese export.
So far, the GOJ reaction to the reclassification announcement has
been low-key. Japanese Embassy officials met with representatives of
several USG agencies to express the GOJ’s great regret that Customs
decided to reclassify, to indicate, from their point of view, that we owe
them because the U.S. raised a duty 21 percentage points, to state that
reclassification will be a problem in the context of GATT, and to reserve
the GOJ’s GATT rights. (The GATT issues are complicated and without
precedent; however USTR lawyers believe that a sound GATT defense
can be made by the U.S.) The GOJ has reminded us of its recently an-
