344 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement CO–17. Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Ambassador in Colombia (Cabot)1  Washington, December 22, 1958. Dear Jack: I have received and read with interest your letter of December 122 and I agree with you that the overthrow of the new National Union government would have had serious consequences not only for Colombia but for our relations with their country as well. We are, as you know, hopeful that this effort to restore democracy in Colombia will have every chance for success. We were, therefore, concerned when Rojas was permitted to return and were relieved when Lleras acted firmly and decisively. The action you took, which apparently-­ contributed to this good end, was of course a delicate one. I am sure you weighed all the possibilities and will do so in any future situations of this kind. You are in close touch with the religious situation, and I am confident you will decide what might best be indicated. I certainly agree that the initiative should come from the Protestants, as you have suggested. From here it looks as though the religious situation greatly improved during 1958. We rarely get any complaints now regarding this problem. You will be interested to know that recently we were told confidentially that the National Council of Churches plans to accept the offer of the Roman Catholic press and is going to appoint Dr. Stewart Herman of the Lutheran World Council as its member of a fact-­finding mission to Colombia to report on the situation as it now exists. We tried to discourage this by pointing out the religious situation is relatively quiescent for the first time in ten years, and it seemed risky to disturb it by any inquiry now. Nevertheless, we were told that the Protestants feel obligated to go ahead with these plans, since in the past they have criticized the Catholics for failing to carry out their promise to do just what is now contemplated. If these plans go through, Mr. Seamons of 1 Source: Department of State, Rubottom Files, Lot 60 D 553, “Colombia 1958.” Secret; Official-Informal. Co-­drafted by Ernest V. Siracusa, Director of the Office of West Coast Affairs, and Gerberich on December 19. The source text is a carbon copy bearing Rubottom’s typed name. 2 Document CO–16.
