532
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Should Zahedi fail in his effort to replace Mossadeq when Agency
assets had been involved in this effort, the result would be that these
assets would be compromised and possibly destroyed. In addition,
such a failure would fan National Front and public antipathy to such an
extent that the Point IV and Military Missions might be expelled from
Iran. The reaction might include a swing to closer relations with the
USSR on the part of the Mossadeq Government.
Should developments cause active Agency support [to] be with-
held from Zahedi, a detailed plan of operations should be prepared for
such a time as Mossadeq falls from power as the result of other pres-
sures. Mossadeq’s prestige and power is definitely on the decline and
should this trend continue a successor, favored by the U.S., would find
the task of taking over much easier than at the present time. In fact, it
might be achieved without the backing of the Shah.
I. Basic Assumptions
These assumptions are listed in order of relative chronology. Sec-
tions which follow contain material in support of certain of the
assumptions.
1. Mossadeq must go.
2. Appropriate U.S. covert assets will be directed toward his over-
throw and U.S. policy action and financial aid will support his
successor.
3. General Zahedi is the only currently active candidate to succeed
Mossadeq who has a real chance of success.
4. For success Zahedi requires the energetic backing of the Shah
which insures adequate support by the armed forces.
5. At this time Soviet reaction to a forced change in government
would be limited in nature.
6. Failure of an attempted forced change would lead to violent Ira-
nian reaction against the U.S.
7. Zahedi can last only if he manages the immediate removal of all
dissident leaders.
8. Zahedi is allegedly anxious to settle the oil issue. A new pro-
posal agreement must at least appear to be more generous than any pre-
vious one: it must not insist upon compensation for years in which con-
cession would have covered.
9. Timing of oil agreement is of great importance as it should not
be announced immediately after Zahedi takes office.
10. Zahedi’s cabinet must include the strongest possible indi-
viduals, including a U.S. approved choice of his successor.
11. Kashani’s influence with the Zahedi government must be re-
stricted or neutralized.
