Haiti  737
HA–3.	
Editorial Note
Between April 18 and May 2, 1958, a special Haitian Financial 
Mission, headed by Minister of Finance Fritz Thebaud, met in Washington 
with representatives of the Department of State, the Department of the 
Treasury, the International Cooperation Administration, the Export-
Import Bank, and the Development Loan Fund to discuss Haiti’s 
outstanding economic and financial problems. As a result of these dis-
cussions, the following agreements were reached:
1) Haiti agreed to regularize its interest and amortization pay-
ments on a $27 million credit from the Export-Import Bank, which had 
been in default, and to reorganize the administration of the Organisme 
du development de la Vallee de l’Artibonite, or Artibonite Valley Authority, 
to the satisfaction of the Export-Import Bank. The Bank in return con-
sented to finance a survey of the Artibonite project in order to ascertain 
the cost of satisfactorily completing it and also agreed to a resumption 
of construction on the project.
2) The International Cooperation Administration agreed to make 
available to Haiti $2 million in fiscal year 1958 special assistance funds 
for economic development projects such as roads, bridges, irrigation, 
and water supply.
3) The International Cooperation Administration agreed to increase 
its technical assistance program during fiscal year 1958 to $1.5 million, 
with increased program assistance slated for agriculture, health, educa-
tion and public works.
4) The Development Loan Fund agreed to consider expeditiously 
financial assistance for sound project proposals from either the Haitian 
government or private sources for which financing was not otherwise 
available.
A summary of the agreement is in Department of State press 
release 240, printed in the Department of State Bulletin, May 26, 1958, 
pp. 880–881. A more detailed summary of the agreement is in a mem-
orandum from Post to Rubottom of September 17, 1958, in file 838.00/ 
9–1758. Additional Department of State documentation concerning the 
discussions is in the file 838.10.
