International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1037 where required, to stimulate greater attention to the food-population linkage and programs related thereto. It would have the further advantage of bringing to the attention of receiving countries the seriousness we attach to the longer-range food-population issue and the urgent need to take timely action. E. AID Population Programs. Despite all the progress achieved over the past decade with AID assistance in introducing and expanding developing country family planning programs, population growth rates remain excessively high, with most couples in the developing world desiring a completed family size of four or more children. AID’s population assistance has focused strongly on extending family planning services. While building on that base, the Agency is now tackling the population problem along a broader front, recognizing the importance of the many factors that bear upon fertility determination. As described in earlier sections of this Report, it is this broadening of approach that motivated many of the principal developments in AID’s population programs and organization in 1977. The 1979 request for $216.4 million will enable the Agency to accelerate implementation of this broader approach so that, in addition to continued attention to the supply of family planning services, it will undertake: (1) Development of comprehensive country population strategies and of better means to evaluate the effectiveness of population programs. (2) Expanding integrated health services, including family planning, at low cost with maximum outreach. (3) Improved motivation programs, especially on a personalized basis. (4) Research which increases understanding on the determinants of fertility, particularly in key countries receiving our assistance. (5) Improved demographic data collection, including recognition of the need for better vital registration systems. (6) Greater attention to sound administration and logistics management. In addition to the above points of program emphasis, AID will accelerate its efforts to enhance population programs by interrelating them to other components of development assistance which now affect population growth or which can broaden the delivery of family planning services.
