Human Rights 325 The reason for all the delay in getting this package to you is that I have been struggling to find some answers to what I see as the major problems of our human rights policy. We have pursued the policy on many fronts. We have: —taken innumerable diplomatic initiatives expressing concern over general conditions or specific offenses and encouraging specific improvements (prisoner releases, elections, etc.); —pushed countries to accept visits by investigatory or observer teams from various international agencies; —worked to strengthen the human rights machinery of both the UN and the OAS; —made a fairly large number of general public statements on human rights, though only a very small number of country-specific statements; —signed three international human rights treaties (though we have done nothing on ratification of any); and —steadily pursued an honest review of implementation of the Helsinki Final Act at Belgrade. But without any doubt, the major instrument of our human rights policy has been our foreign assistance programs—both bilateral and multilateral, and it is here that the major problems have arisen. Even without the present statutory requirements, foreign assistance—especially through the IFIs where our vote is often irrelevant—is a crude instrument for pursuing a human rights policy. The legislation adds many complicating factors, of which the worst are: defining what makes a “gross and consistent” violator of human rights; and, deciding when aid “serves the basic human needs” of the recipients. Because of the Administration’s reluctance to judge any country (except perhaps Chile) a “gross and consistent violator”, there has been a consistent tension between our policy and Congressional expectations. This has fed Congress’ suspicions that, but for its pressure, the Administration would renege on its commitment to human rights. (I know this is hard to believe given the President’s deep personal commitment to this policy, but it is what the human rights advocates in Congress believe.) Rather than make a sharp and clear determination that a small number of countries are “gross violators”, the Administration has turned instead to treating a large number of grey area countries as more or less under the requirements of the law prescribed for gross violators. This leads to an uneven policy, uncertain signals being sent out, and enormous dissension within the government. It also creates a huge workload, since a policy level group must review every loan and grant
