El Salvador 593 gave the ruling Partido Revolucionario de Unificación Democrática a total vote of 368,545 to 51,557 for the opposition, and control of all Legislative Assembly seats and all but six municipalities. In telegram 337, May 2, 1960, Ambassador Kalijarvi reported that an opposition demonstration against alleged electoral fraud by the Government drew only a “small, unenthusiastic crowd.” He concluded that the “public in general seems disposed accept results and administration believed safely through electoral period.” (716.00/5–260) A memorandum of April 27, 1960, from the Director of Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs, C. Allan Stewart, to Roy R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, stated that the opposition’s showing in the elections “comes as a considerable surprise to us and it indicates we can now expect the tempo of political activity in El Salvador to be noticeably accelerated.”(ARA/OAP Files, Lot 64 D 16, “Political Local - General: El Salvador, 1960”) ES–16. Memorandum of Conversation by the Chargé in El Salvador (Downs)1  San Salvador, June 7, 1960. PARTICIPANTS Lt. Col. José María Lemus, President of El Salvador C. Allan Stewart, Director, Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs, Department of State Donald P. Downs, Chargé d’Affaires a.i., American Embassy, San Salvador Mr. Stewart and I called on President Lemus at 10 a.m. on June 7. The conversation got underway with President Lemus painting in broad strokes a picture of the internal situation here in El Salvador. He revealed that he was very much disturbed over recent trends and particularly with the infiltration of the University, the labor unions, the press, and other public institutions that the Communists in hand with the Cubans had been able to accomplish. He said that it was now clear that El Salvador was the main target but that it held, at the same time, the key to this area’s future. He said that as long as El Salvador remained free the danger to other countries in the area was lessened. However, if El Salvador fell, then it would be a very easy thing for the 1 Source: Department of State, ARA/OAP Files, Lot 64 D 16, “Political International- General: El Salvador, 1960.” Secret. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.
