366
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
OMB
Defense
W. Graham Claytor
James McIntyre*
Robert Murray
White House
JCS
Lloyd Cutler**
General David Jones
Hedley Donovan
General John Pustay
Zbigniew Brzezinski
David Aaron
CIA
Henry Owen*
Admiral Stansfield Turner
Vice President’s Office
Justice
Denis Clift*
John Shenefield*
NSC
Energy
Colonel William Odom
John Sawhill*
Gary Sick
Treasury
Thomas Thornton
Robert Carswell*
*Domestic Issues Only
**Domestic Issues and Shah
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
Domestic Issues:
1. Emissary. Richard Cooper will depart for Europe by this weekend
and be prepared to begin discussions with the Europeans on Monday.2
Some of the preparations for these discussions are dependent on the
outcome of the sanctions vote on Iran in the Security Council. Specifi-
cally, we must decide whether to ask the allies to impose the full body
of sanctions3 defined in the resolution. A number of them lack the legal
basis for taking such action in the absence of UN authorization. (S)
2. Sanctions on Iran. Dr. Brzezinski expressed his concern that our
economic/diplomatic approach against Iran is running out of steam.
Even if sanctions are approved by the UNSC, how will they be applied,
how will they affect the Iranians, and what effect if any will they have
in getting the hostages released? If we do not get the sanctions, the
allies will be reluctant to impose sanctions unilaterally and the Iranians
will conclude that the international leverage against them has been
reduced. How much time would it take for economic sanctions to have
an effect? There is little time left on the political side, where our efforts
are being perceived to have failed. (S)
2 January 15. His mission was to consult with European allies on a coordinated
response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Should the Soviets veto the Iranian
sanctions vote, Cooper was to consult on ways to impose sanctions despite the veto. A
statement of his mission’s purpose and a January 1 discussion paper for economic
sanctions on Iran is in Department of State, Records of the Secretary of State, 1977–1980,
Lot 84D241, Presidential Breakfasts Jan/Feb/Mar 1980.
3 Carter underlined the phrase “whether to ask the allies to impose the full body
of sanctions” and wrote “yes” in the left margin.
