Formal and Informal Negotiating Channels
129.
Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 1, 1980
SUBJECT
Iran—Next Steps
The SCC on January 2 will need to examine the covert action
program being worked up by CIA and the diplomatic/economic strat-
egy we intend to pursue over the coming weeks. The first objective of
the SCC meeting—and the NSC meeting to follow—should be the
establishment of a policy framework with clear objectives which are
agreed at the highest level. The second objective should be to insure that
the package of proposed overt and covert actions are mutually reinforcing
and consistent with the policy objectives.
U.S. Objectives
We have two principal objectives: (1) the release and safe return
of the hostages; and (2) “to encourage the establishment of a responsible
and democratic regime in Iran.”
Although we have tended to regard these as separate, in fact they
are two sides of the same coin. Khomeini is not going to accept the
political costs of giving up the hostages until he is persuaded that
continued holding of the hostages is more costly to him than giving
them up. That means that Khomeini must see his internal power base
eroding, with the risk of losing control over the revolution. No other
argument or scheme is going to tempt him to change his mind.
Our strategy, therefore, must concentrate on making the present
situation as costly politically as possible for Khomeini and his followers.
We can do that by maintaining maximum pressure on Iran through a
diplomatic-economic offensive, combined with a vigorous covert action
program which undermines Khomeini’s effective control.
We should beware of various proposals which would have us make
a new set of offers or concessions to Khomeini as a face-saving device.
These will not work and could make things worse, rather than better.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box
73, Presidential Advisory File, Middle East Box 6 11/79–2/80. Secret; Sensitive. A stamped
notation in the upper right margin of the memorandum reads: “ZB has seen.”
340
