3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
706
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
has built up and the necessity of handling the matter in such a way as
not to complicate the situation further but to seek a path for lowering
the level of tension in connection with the question concerning the
American diplomatic personnel in Tehran. In our opinion, that which
the United States now proposes to undertake would change the situa-
tion for the worse.
Transferring the question to the level of any kind of sanctions, of
physical action in relationship to Iran can only bring forth a exacerba-
tion of the situation and complicate a solution of the question of the
American diplomatic personnel in Iran. For the question of sanctions
can arise, in accordance with the UN Charter, in situations in which a
threat to peace exists. We are convinced that if the United States will
not step over the bounds of reason, will show the necessary restraint as
befits a great power, then there will not be such a threat. For that reason
we do not think that there is a basis for broadening the interpretation of
the existing dispute into the framework of a serious international con-
flict. It can be said immediately that, in contrast to the broad under-
standing which the position of the United States enjoys on the specific
question of the “hostages” and the violation of diplomatic immunities,
going over to sanctions will surely produce a different attitude on the
part of many states, including during the consideration of this question
in the Security Council.
It is also necessary to take into consideration the complicated situa-
tion which exists in Iran itself. It can by no means be excluded that
posing the question of sanctions can produce there the opposite re-
sult to that which the American side is obviously counting on. This
would far from facilitate the earliest possible release of the American
diplomats.
These are the thoughts which I wanted to share with you
frankly and confidentially in connection with your message. I repeat
that we react with understanding to the concern shown by the United
States.
We are deeply convinced that it is not an escalation of pressure on
Iran through some kind of sanctions—which would inevitably be con-
nected with serious costs, including for the United States itself—but re-
straint and a measured approach which are the surest way promising
to produce a solution acceptable to both sides.
Such an approach would find understanding and support from the
side of the Soviet Union, which also intends in the future consistently to
advocate the observance by all states of the generally accepted norms of
international law and, accordingly, to act in this direction.
I hope that you will react with understanding to the considerations
I have expressed which are dictated by the wish that the American-
Iranian dispute will find the earliest possible just solution.
