Chemical and Biological Weapons cilities because such a provision could entail requests for OSI also of facilities constructed for permitted purposes; (4) Continued to reject any provision involving declaration of facilities early in the implementation of a convention; (5) Rejected the distinction between “implementation” and “compliance” as based on the U.S. concept of verification, which they did not accept; (6) Strongly reaffirmed their approach to verification, making it clear again that no pre-agreed (i.e., mandatory) OSI’s were acceptable and that the concept of “voluntary” OSI’s should apply to all obligations regarding destruction, production, and non-retention; (7) While expressing willingness to continue the search for methods of using NTM for monitoring a CW prohibition, questioned the U.S.–suggested measures for facilitating verification by NTM, in particular since they would involve declaration of locations of facilities. 6. In view of the fact that none of the issues on which language could be developed was sufficiently resolved, and also because of the Soviet refusal to discuss provisions regarding the disposition of facilities, the drafting group did not actively consider any specific formulations. A major portion of the group’s time and effort was devoted to the development of the joint report to the CD. 7. In sum, round twelve was not very productive, although at this juncture probably no different results could have been expected. At the same time, Soviet behavior in the bilaterals, in the process of the development of the joint report, and in connection with the CD’s working group on CW suggests that the Soviets continue to attach importance to the bilaterals. It was clear that they feel much more comfortable dealing with the U.S. alone than having to protect their position against a multitude of differing views, as they had to do in the CW working group with regard to issues to be dealt with in negotiations on a convention. 8. It is difficult to tell at this point what the eventual objective of the Soviets may be concerning a CW agreement, or whether they have even decided themselves. Early in round twelve Amb Israelyan told Amb Flowerree not to expect much progress and said that the Soviets would be re-evaluating their positions on arms control issues in the light of the outcome of the U.S. elections. At least the first part of this statement was borne out by the results of the round. The Soviets have talked about the possibility of a new round in January 1981. In the interim, consideration might be given to approaching them through diplomatic channels to probe their inventions and to reemphasize to them the crucial importance of reaching agreement on satisfactory verification provisions if any real progress is to be made toward a joint initiative. Helman
