1048
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
sudden surges in food imports, and providing a separate calculation
for export earnings shortfalls related to commodities. These sugges-
tions have generally been rejected out of hand in Treasury, and have
generated little enthusiasm in some parts of State. We need a fresh look,
and then ought to get behind whatever changes we decide upon.
• Other Financing Mechanisms: As usual, any movement in the fi-
nancial area is most difficult. Over our negative votes, resolutions were
passed in Manila asking the IMF to examine the need for a medium-
term balance of payments support facility and requiring the Secretary
General of UNCTAD to conduct a study of a possible complementary
facility to the Compensatory Finance Facility. We believe the Brandt
Commission will propose some mechanism to encourage surplus coun-
tries to lend on long-term conditions to developing countries.10 Our
bond guarantee proposal could be part of the answer to these demands.
—Launching the IDCA and ISTC: Unless blocked in Congress, the
IDCA and ISTC come into formal existence on October 1. We ought to
give major publicity to these events. The IDCA should be portrayed as
a US commitment not just to foreign assistance, but development per
se. Likewise, we should try to gain maximum exposure for the ISTC,
both domestically and internationally through ICA.
—Involving Other Foreign Governments in Our Efforts: Up to now we
have concentrated on pressing within our own government for a
North-South package. We should now step up our efforts to explain
our approach in developed and developing countries. The Summit will
be a start. However, as we prepare for the UNGA and UNCTAD TDB,11
we may want to do more in several key OECD countries and LDCs, to
explain our approach and solicit ideas on energy, food, and financial
issues. We will work with EB and IO on a separate memo on this topic.
10 In 1977, McNamara proposed that Brandt preside over an independent commis-
sion on North-South issues. Telegram 15053 from Bonn, September 14, 1977, transmitted
a letter from Brandt to Carter on the proposed commission, and telegram 19870 from
Bonn, November 30, 1977, reported on a November 29 press conference in which Brandt
announced the formation of the Independent Commission on International Development
Issues. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770333–0074 and
D770444–0392, respectively) The Commission’s report was issued in 1980; see Document
345.
11 The UNCTAD Trade and Development Board served as a preparatory committee
for UNCTAD V.
