1070 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX lution and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan5 there has been a growing realization of the need to cooperate more closely among the moderate Arab nations and also Israel. There is now an opportunity to make real progress. The U.S. needs a closer relationship with Egypt even than in the past few months. Ambassador Linowitz is the best negotiator in our nation. He is a strong, capable, intelligent man. He will be able to take positions which are unpopular in our country if he is convinced they are in the interest of peace. Once normalization has occurred, it would be useful for Egypt to present its case against settlements and for Palestinians to participate more strongly. We will do the same. In the President’s view, the majority of the people in Israel support that, including many of the people in leadership positions. We are grateful for Egyptian friendship, especially the help which has been offered in the Iranian situation. The air support given to our planes strengthens our determination to persevere. We also appreciate your encouraging other Moslem nations to condemn the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Even if the leaders of those nations do not profess friendship, they listen carefully to Egypt as the dominant economic, political and military power. We appreciate Vice President Mubarak’s coming here to try to persuade the North and South Koreans to settle their conflict. We are always ready for a three-country meeting if the North is willing to accept the political leaders of the South. It is necessary for each of us to keep the other fully informed on this. Vice President Mubarak said that he had met with Secretary Vance yesterday and with Secretary Brown today. He had informed Secretary Vance fully about the recent negotiations6 with Prime Minister Begin— perhaps in greater detail than Ambassador Atherton had reported. He said that he had a hand-written report7 on the talks written by President Sadat following the meeting and wondered if the President would like to read it. The President took the document and read it while the conversation among the others continued. Secretary Vance said we had gone back to the Sudanese after the message from the Egyptians.8 Vice President Mubarak interjected that the Sudanese had now pulled out their Ambassador to the UN on the grounds that he had vio-
