Costa Rica  449
Secretary Rubottom of March 8 and 22;7 and when the denunciation of 
the Treaty came I explained my ideas to Echandi. He enthusiastically 
adopted them, and authorized me to offer that kind of action to the 
Department in my forthcoming visit to Washington.
In my visit it developed that the Department was not prepared 
then to go along with a U.S.-Costa Rican declaration, but that explo-
rations of possible Colombian action with Costa Rica would be made 
through Bogotá. Nothing apparently came of these.
Whatever may have been the further complicating factors in 
Echandi’s failure to join a break of relations (and there have been a 
number of these) the fact remains that Echandi insisted that there was 
not, at the time he was asked to break, a clear-­cut issue between Cuba 
and Costa Rica as nations, as distinguished from the situation in March 
where the “peg” for action was the then current defiance of the Inter-
American System.
As also previously pointed out, Echandi wished to be accompa-
nied in his action by the U.S., or by other democratically impeccable 
Latin countries. One of the inherent difficulties in his political problem 
in the proposed Central American break of relations always was that 
Costa Rica would be open to accusation internally and internationally 
of joining with Ydígoras and Somoza who had already taken action; 
and since there was no current clear issue between Costa Rica and Cuba 
to justify Costa Rica’s action in Costa Rica’s own direct interest, Echandi 
would have to justify it as solidarity with other countries, two of which 
were pretty unpalatable in Costa Rican and hemisphere opinion when 
it came to an attack against Cuba based upon democratic principles.
I suggest that this explanation with any comments you care to 
make be circulated to my colleagues in the other OAP countries. My 
feeling is that would be most unfortunate if Echandi would be chided 
by any of the governments of these countries into publicly taking the 
position, which has privately expressed to me, that the “U.S. missed the 
boat” when it did not accept his offer last April.
With best regards,
Whiting Willauer
7 Not printed. (OAP Files, Lot 63 D 127, “Costa Rica, 1960”)
