478
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
mitted, and whether your assurance regarding resumption of testing
should constitute a plan to resume testing after five years, or just the op-
tion to do so. You may want to make these decisions following your
luncheon with the Chiefs. However, if you decide to overrule them, I
recommend that you defer decision until after an NSC meeting, to en-
sure for the record that they have had an opportunity to formally
present their views.
Schedule NSC Meeting.
Make decision after luncheon.5
Fixed Duration vs. 3 to 5 KT Threshold
A 3 to 5 KT threshold would be more consistent with verification
capabilities and stockpile reliability needs, but eliminating risks in
these areas would seriously erode potential benefits of a CTB to non-
proliferation and our relations with the Soviets, and would be viewed
as a significant departure from your public commitment to halting
testing. The threshold treaty would have smoother sailing during ratifi-
cation hearings, and the Chiefs’ views would carry a lot of weight, but
with Harold’s and Jim Schlesinger’s support, a fixed duration treaty
would probably be ratified after a difficult struggle. I believe that the
fixed duration approach is adequately protective of our security in-
terests and more consistent with your political objectives, and recom-
mend that you authorize us to propose it in the negotiations.6
3 vs. 5 Year Duration
Harold and Kerr (speaking for DOE) have specifically agreed that
they could live with a five-year duration, but both would prefer three
years, arguing that this would make it easier to keep the laboratories to-
gether. They recognize, however, that the shorter duration might be
criticized by non-nuclear weapons states as an insufficient commit-
ment, and could jeopardize prospects for installing an effective net-
work of internal seismic stations. In addition, the preponderant tech-
nical judgment is that we can maintain reliability without testing for at
least five years. We may have to consider a 3-year duration eventually
since the Soviets may see this as a means of exerting more pressure on
China; however, I recommend that you authorize the five-year dura-
tion as our initial position.7
5 Carter checked the “Make decision after luncheon” option.
6 Carter checked the “Approve” option.
7 Carter underlined the words “five-year duration” and checked the “Approve”
option.
