378 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement large is recognized as non-­political. This position would not preclude the assignment of individual U.S. advisors [text not declassified] nor the provision of training, material and equipment to the National Police as steps to strengthen the police capability to support the over-­all program. The Country Team concurs in the observations contained in both papers that improve intelligence would be of great help in the solution of the problem. This applies equally to the National Police, DAS, and the military services. I believe that as a part of our program we should offer the services of any advisers the GOC may desire to strengthen the intelligence activity and coordination of these agencies. In fact, the GOC already has requested, through NAAC channels, that our Army mission be augmented by two intelligence officers. The objectives stated in both papers are very similar. The objectives as stated [text not declassified] (a) “immediate suppression and liquidation of bandits,” and (c) “long-­range maintenance of internal security” are similar and are directly responsive to President Lleras’ request. Those objectives address themselves to the problem raised by the GOC appeal for assistance. [text not declassified] I question whether we, with U.S. personnel, should become involved in a special project of rehabilitation as part of an anti-­violence program. Rather, I think our efforts should be channeled through existing and contemplated ICA, DLF, and EXIM Bank, social development fund, and international financial agency programs in the fields of colonization, land reform, housing, penetration roads, and other types of financial and technical assistance to Colombia in its attempts to deal with its economic and social program. We are now actually engaged in such an aid program, witness our ICA technical assistance, the $70 million in credits recently approved by the EXIM Bank and the DLF and the continuing flow of credits from the IBRD and DLF. And we have every reason to think, in the light of the position taken by the U.S. Delegation at the Committee of 21 Meeting here, that this type if aid will continue and increase in the future. [text not declassified] [text not declassified] However, from all information available to the Embassy, including the opinions of our Military Mission and Armed Service personnel, light aircraft are of doubtful usefulness in anti-­ bandit operations and certainly are not considered to be adequate by the Colombian military. In fact, the only support I have encountered for the use of light aircraft came from certain members of the Survey Team. Admittedly, the cost factor is of import. However, would it not be a waste of money to provide aircraft that would not do the job? The question of exactly what military material and equipment are needed is also a technical one. It is significant, I think, that the equipment listed in the Survey Team report and the material originally requested by the GOC (Despatch 1, July 1, 1959) are very similar.
