Romania
715
over the past two years for energy and various consumer goods and
an energy conservation program has been implemented that sharply
limits public consumption.
Ceausescu has sought to improve economic performance by
launching a program to reform economic management. The program
seeks to spur productivity by tying workers’ salaries and bonuses more
closely to enterprise profits and to increase production efficiency by
phasing out success indicators that reward managers for lavish material
expenditures. Ceausescu is also trying to mobilize public support for
his economic programs by creating an aura of mass involvement in the
political process. These strategies are flawed, however, by Ceausescu’s
reluctance to yield essential control over economic and political
decision-making.
Public reaction to these measures so far has been restrained, but
the regime is undoubtedly concerned that consumer discontent could
erupt and touch off disturbances in other troubled sectors of Romanian
society. Workers have shown some restiveness, essentially over bread
and butter issues. A widespread slowdown by disgruntled coal miners
occurred in the summer of 1977, and sporadic incidents of industrial
unrest have come to light since then. Tensions between the Romanians
and their large Hungarian minority have boiled over occasionally,
though the Magyars seem quiet at the moment. Small dissidence move-
ments have also emerged among Romanian intellectuals and certain
religious groups in recent years, but have not posed a significant prob-
lem for the regime. The chances of general disturbances seem remote,
but the regime has betrayed its nervousness by the quickness with
which it has moved during the past year to squelch the smallest mani-
festations of dissent.
Ceausescu’s dominance of the Romanian political scene, which
was reaffirmed last November at the 12th Congress of the Romanian
Communist Party, has been demonstrated during the past year by the
extensive personnel changes he has overseen on both the national and
local levels, under the rubric of “cadre rotations.” In the latest round—
in late March—the most prominent winner was his wife, Elena, who
was elevated to the post of First Deputy Prime Minister. A member of
the party’s prestigious Permanent Bureau, Mrs. Ceausescu is thought
by some to be the most powerful political figure in Romania after
her husband.
Through periodic cadre rotations—which keep party and govern-
ment functionaries off balance and under control—and manipulation
of the bureaucratic structure, Ceausescu has amassed enormous power.
He now rules the country through a small group of loyal lieutenants
and appears able to bypass the regime’s traditional power centers.
Ceausescu’s autocratic ruling style and the personality cult that
enshrines him and his wife appear to have provoked some resentment
