Eastern Europe Region Even more important, the decision to review implementation of the Helsinki agreement in Belgrade in 1977 prompted some dissidents to conclude that a Communist desire to show a good record in Belgrade might make regimes susceptible to pressures for internal reforms. Other dissidents were well aware that Moscow intended Helsinki to signify only Western recognition of Soviet hegemony in Eastern Europe. As a result, they apparently emphasized the human rights commitments of the accord as a way of inducing the West to reconsider its support for the agreement or at least to force the Soviets and their allies to observe human rights as a price of Western recognition of Soviet hegemony over the area. (U) The calculation that pressure might lead to some changes for the better was fortified by what many dissidents saw as important Soviet concessions regarding national independence made to the “Eurocommunists” at the Berlin conference of European Communist parties in June 1976. For example, the East German dissident philosopher Robert Havemann, who considers himself a Eurocommunist of the Spanish variety, seized upon the conference as a vindication of his longtime advocacy of a Communist system that included domestic pluralism and a “true” sovereignty in foreign affairs. Some Polish dissidents also concluded that the time was ripe for the East Europeans to strive for greater autonomy from Moscow. Indeed, public, that is to say, dissident pressure was seen as an effective way to lead the regime toward seeking “true sovereignty.” (U) The vigorous US human rights policy enunciated in early 1977 gave some impetus to dissident activity and emboldened persons to speak out who otherwise might have remained silent. Many dissidents probably welcomed the US position because they believed it would help expose the vulnerabilities of the East European regimes with regard to human rights. Those who were already actively pressing a cause and considered international attention important for both its success and their own protection no doubt calculated that the US human rights policy would serve these ends.2 (U) East European dissidents were also encouraged by publicity and support from West European media, politicians and government leaders, public organizations, influential intellectuals, and maverick Com- 2 This was not the unanimous view, however. Other dissidents apparently were wary of the American policy and, recalling what they consider past US inconsistency toward Eastern Europe, were skeptical that Washington would press its objective with consistency or determination. Those who consider themselves Communist reformers rejected the helping hand of a “capitalist” state for ideological reasons; others felt vulnerable to charges of being “agents of imperialism.” [Footnote is in the original.]
