Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976 31 ference. I need only cite the “Nixon Shocks” and the abrupt actions taken by former Treasury Secretary Connally.3 We need to recognize also that in recent years our Western European allies have been deeply concerned, and justly so, by our unilateral dealings with the Soviet Union. To the maximum extent possible, our dealings with the communist powers should reflect the combined view of the democracies and thereby avoid suspicions by our allies that we may be disregarding their interests. We seek not a condominium of the powerful but a community of the free. There are at least three areas in which the democratic nations can benefit from closer and more creative relations. First, there are our economic and political affairs. In the realm of economics, our basic purpose must be to keep open the international system in which the exchange of goods, capital, and ideas among nations can continue to expand. “Must Avoid Unilateral Acts” Increased coordination among the industrialized democracies can help avoid the repetition of such episodes as the inflation of 1972–73 and the more recent recessions. Both were made more severe by an excess of expansionist zeal and then of deflationary reaction in North America, Japan and Europe. Though each country must make its own economic decisions, we need to know more about one another’s interests and intentions. We must avoid unilateral acts, and we must try not to work at crosspurposes in the pursuit of the same ends. We need not agree on all matters, but we should agree to discuss all matters. We should continue our efforts to reduce trade barriers among the industrial countries, as one way to combat inflation. The current Tokyo round of multilateral trade negotiations4 should be pursued to a successful conclusion. But we must do more. The International Monetary System should be renovated so that it can serve us well for the next quarter of a century. Last January, at a meeting of the leading financial officials, agreement was reached on a new system, based on greater flexibility of 3 See footnote 4, Document 4. 4 Reference is to the Tokyo Round of multilateral trade negotiations, held in Geneva in 1973. Documentation on the negotiations, which culminated in April 1979, is in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXI, Foreign Economic Policy, 1973–1976 and Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. III, Foreign Economic Policy.
