First Responses 59 groups taking a specific action in Khomeini’s name following his general policy statements. [3½ lines not declassified] Although individual members of the occupying forces are reportedly equipped with light arms, the initial entry into the Embassy came as a protest demonstration rather than an armed attack. Some 400 to 500 people were reportedly involved in the initial entry. Their number apparently has since been reduced to about 150 to 200. [portion marking not declassified] The occupying group is well organized. There is a security force of 20 to 30 men outside the Embassy gates, some are carrying walkietalkies, to control the crowd of anti-US demonstrators on the street. Five or six of these guards are outside the main gate and three or four are at each of the other gates or on patrol around the Embassy in several jeep-type vehicles and reportedly are armed with G–3 rifles. Watch posts reportedly have been established in buildings within at least a one-kilometer radius of the Embassy. According to one report, a group has been organized outside the Embassy to come to the assistance of the occupying forces if required. [portion marking not declassified] Inside the Embassy gates, which are chained and padlocked, a further security force of 20 to 30 men is reportedly located in the parking lot. These guards also are armed with light weapons, including G–3 rifles, machineguns, machinepistols, grenade launchers, and handgrenades. The compound and adjacent buildings are illuminated at night. Despite the presence of armed guards and the daily demonstrations outside the Embassy gates, the atmosphere inside the Embassy compound is reportedly calm, and groups of up to 60 of the occupying force gather periodically for prayer services. The relations between the hostages and their captors is apparently good. The hostages, who have been dispersed to at least three separate buildings in the Embassy compound, have been provided with food and reading material from the Embassy library. There have been no reports of violence directed at the hostages. [portion marking not declassified] Composition of the Occupying Forces Although there are conflicting accounts on the forces occupying the Embassy, the principal group involved reportedly is the “Islamic Monotheists,” a group of Islamic militants devoted to Ayatollah Khomeini that was formed a number of years ago. The group has been infiltrated recently by leftists who reportedly compose nearly 50 percent of the present membership and who strongly influence the group’s policies. On 9 November, when documents apparently recovered from Embassy files were released, a statement was issued by spokesmen for the group that was couched in leftist jargon and contained sophisticated analysis which indicates that at least some members of the occupying group are university educated. [portion marking not declassified]
