National Security Policy 825 materials. Should the Government, for example, barter for more met­ allurgical manganese or sell a part of the inventory already on hand? Recommendation #5. Government Use of Excess Materials Require Government organizations which use strategic materials directly to use excess inventories when this would be consistent with the over-­all dis­ posal policy and in the best interest of the Government. Channeling of excess strategic materials to Government agencies, such as the Bureau of the Mint, Atomic Energy Commission and arse­ nals, which are direct users of such materials should be authorized when feasible and consistent with general disposal policy. Required use of the materials in prime contracts and especially in subcontracts, how­ ever, is considered to be inadvisable because the quantities on individ­ ual contracts would be small and probably would add to the cost of the contracts by departing from normal supply channels, introduce uncer­ tainty that the precise qualities of materials needed could be obtained readily, and unjustifiably complicate the bookkeeping involved. Also such required use would have substantially the same effect as an out­ right disposal. Recommendation #6. Cancellation of Commitments Continue to seek mutually satisfactory cancellation of contracts to deliver excess materials and include possible cancellation by payment of above-­market premiums specified in the contracts. This would include payments to contrac­ tors on account of anticipated net profits. Negotiations to that end should be conducted in the light of over-­all interests of the Government and in the light of possible contract adjustments through cash payment, payment in kind, or barter of excess property. Current policy authorizing cancellation of deliveries in excess of objectives has functioned satisfactorily, but very little more can be accomplished by further negotiation unless some additional incentives are included. Implementation: If approved, the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization will initiate actions, in cooperation with the agencies con­ cerned, to carry out the above recommendations. Concurrences: Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization, BoB, GSA, and all members of the Civil and Defense Mobilization Board concur in the Recommendations as amended. Attachments: OCDM staff paper on “The Program for Strategic Materials”.
