328  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
were having in START. If the sides could agree on duration, the sides 
could agree on the measure right away.
Short-Time-of-Flight (STOF)
25. During his opening remarks on verification and stability 
measures, Burt noted that ministers had discussed the question of 
depressed-­trajectory SLBMs last May. A ban on short-­time-­of-­flight 
tests would enhance strategic stability, Burt said, because such tests 
could cause concern in a time of crisis. Also, he added, neither side 
currently has STOF SLBMs. One approach could be a ban on depressed-­
trajectory missiles, but that was not the only way. The problem was not 
only depressed trajectories—­it was STOF. Therefore, Burt said, the U.S. 
was seeking a broader commitment to ban all STOF, whether or not 
they were depressed trajectories. The U.S. side was prepared to discuss 
this, Burt said.
26. Nazarkin agreed that STOF was not just a problem of depressed 
trajectories. There should be a broader approach, he said, perhaps even 
broader than the U.S. side had proposed, and should include not only 
STOF but attack warning time, because time of flight was not the only 
thing that was important; warning time also was important. The sides 
could discuss this in more detail in the subgroup, Nazarkin said, but 
they should concentrate on the umbrella agreement and the notification 
agreement.
Early PPM
27. During opening remarks on Perimeter and Portal Monitoring 
(PPM), Burt said the U.S. was prepared to provide further details 
regarding its proposal to establish early PPM of certain ICBM pro-
duction facilities along the lines of the U.S. START proposal. This was 
consistent with the longstanding U.S. view that agreement on effective 
verification measures was essential if the U.S. were to drop its proposed 
ban on mobile ICBMs. Confidence in our ability to verify future START 
Treaty limits on mobile missiles could be improved if we began as soon 
as possible to implement, on an experimental basis, a PPM System at 
production facilities for MIRVed mobile or planned MIRVed mobile 
ICBMs—­the SS–24 and the peacekeeper. The U.S. was proposing that 
the sides begin to implement this agreement by exchanging lists of their 
respective facilities for:
— Casting the solid rocket motor and/or cartridges for the solid 
rocket motor for the largest stage of the SS–24 and Peacekeeper, and
— Final assembly of operational missiles or their spares for the 
SS–24 or for the Peacekeeper.
28. The sides would also exchange a general description of the 
production and assembly process at each listed facility and specific
