to the French Government, which shall forthwith transmit copies of such notification to the other Parties, informing them of the date on which it was received. “A denunciation shall take effect two years after the date on which the notification thereof was received by the French Government, and shall operate only in respect of the notifying State.” The Department considers that the period of ten years for the effectiveness of the Convention is far too long. The question of the control of the traffic in arms is yet in its experimental stage, and this Government would not desire to be bound for any such protracted period without an opportunity to examine the effectiveness and practicability of the contemplated procedure. It is therefore suggested that “ten years” be replaced by “three years” and that denunciation should take effect “one year” after notification. It might be well to add that after the expiration of three years the Convention, unless denounced, would continue to remain in force until one year after denunciation. ARTICLE 34 “The High Contracting Parties agree that, at the conclusion of a period of five years, the present Convention shall, in the light of the experience then gained, be subject to revision upon the request of a third of the said High Contracting Parties.” “Five years” should be replaced by “three years” to bring this Article in line with the preceding one. In conclusion, the Department desires again to emphasize the position indicated in the early pages of this instruction; namely, that it would welcome any agreement which, while protecting the legitimate interests of this Government, might be calculated to lessen the evils of the illicit trade in arms and war material and thereby aid in the preservation of peace. In working toward this end, this Government does not desire that its representatives at the Conference should be bound by instructions on points of drafting or phraseology. It is believed, however, that the foregoing instructions will serve to indicate the points of particular interest to this Government. You should consider the proposed rephrasing of the various Articles of the Convention as suggestive rather than as mandatory. In the event that the discussions at the Conference should raise questions involving substantial modifications on matters of principle, you should communicate with the Department for further instructions.
