World Hunger and Food Policy
647
is the single most important issue you will have to address from an eco-
nomic standpoint in the North-South relations.8
Space does not permit adequate discussion of international debt
service by developing countries. Suffice it to say that the better-off de-
veloped countries do not need it and fear that it would jeopardize their
credit standing. The debt issue, thus, comes down to the poor coun-
tries. Of the total amount owed, two-thirds is owed by India, Pakistan
and Egypt.
With respect to monetary reform, the issue concerns the devel-
oping nation claim that they do not receive a fair deal from the IMF be-
cause of their lack of voting weight. This in turn relates to the question
of special drawing rights, which are allocated on the basis of IMF
quotas, which are in turn a rough indicator of the financial importance
of the member country in the world economy, and thus of each member
country’s need for international reserves. In this connection, consider-
ation should be given to the possibility of permitting raw materials
such as copper, tin, etc., to be used as reserve currencies.
Further with respect to the question of the oceans, we have the
problem of the stalled Law of the Sea Conference. It is currently stale-
mated primarily on the issue of deep sea mining. Here I believe that we
must take a new initiative if we want to restore vitality to the negotia-
tions. A possibility worth pursuing is a fleshed-out version of Secretary
Kissinger’s most recent suggestion, i.e., a two-track approach involving
mining by both private interests and the public “Enterprise.” Under
this approach, the US and other individual countries would provide
the necessary technology and know-how to the Enterprise.
With respect to food, the basic answer is increased food produc-
tion in the developing countries themselves. Accordingly, there should
be increased emphasis in both bilateral and multilateral efforts on in-
creasing the developing countries’ production of food. It will, however,
take many years to increase food production in the poor countries.
Therefore, in the meantime, it will be important to establish and main-
tain sufficient grain reserves in the developed countries to meet recur-
ring needs in the developing countries.
Finally, we must continue to work on the population problem,
which is inextricably linked with the problem of food and social and
economic progress.
In light of the foregoing, the first and most critical task is to de-
velop a coordinated strategy for dealing with the various issues pre-
sented. They cannot be dealt with on a piecemeal basis. Therefore, as
8 In an earlier section of the paper, Vance noted that a new administration would
need to determine the position the United States would take with regard to GATT and
listed several options. He indicated that he favored the middle ground: “i.e., aim for an
early 1977 agreement on relatively non-controversial items.”
