Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1089
statement that Argentina would soon ratify, as U.S. would Protocol I.
Gros thinks Argentina is waiting for U.S. Protocol I ratification, but
would then ratify (without waiver) in next 2–3 months. He believes Ar-
gentine internal politics now such that it will wish to improve U.S. atti-
tudes toward it and will want to uphold its commitment to Vance, once
U.S. has done its part.
3. Brazil. Gros noted that he had tried in vain for several years to
point out that Brazil, as signer and ratifier, must respect Treaty. In last
year, Brazilians have stated three times that they would, under Vienna
Convention,2 not do anything contrary to Treaty. This was stated (1) in
a letter from Silveira, (B) by a Brazilian Rep at the 1977 OPANAL
meeting in Caracas, (C) in the Geisel-Lopez Portillo Joint Communique´.
Gros has “off the record” info that Brazil would become a full party if
the USSR would sign and ratify Protocol II.
4. Chile. Gros says he has a recent telegram from the Chilean For-
eign Minister that indicates that Chile would waive the entry into force
requirements if the USSR would ratify Protocol II.
5. Cuba. Gros cited Guantanamo as the most fundamental problem
preventing Cuba from signing and ratifying. He thinks that negotia-
tions with Cuba will become much easier once the U.S. ratifies Protocol
I, although this will not solve the problem completely. Cuban adher-
ence, he says, is also connected with the USSR attitude toward Protocol
II. Once this and U.S. Protocol I ratification are accomplished, he be-
lieves fruitful negotiations with Cuba can be accomplished.
6. Guyana. Gros says Guyana wants to sign, but has been pre-
vented from doing so by Venezuelan opposition under Article 25.3 He
says intense negotiations have been underway with Venezuela, and
he thinks a “formula” has been found which will be acceptable to
both countries. He therefore expects Guyana to become a party “in the
coming months.”
7. United States. Gros thinks that the wait in seeking Senate con-
sent to Protocol I was justified as the ratification of the Panama Canal
treaties paves the way for Protocol I.4 He views the Canal zone as now
2 Reference to the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.
3 Article 25 of the Treaty of Tlatelolco states that “Unless the Parties concerned
agree on another mode of peaceful settlement, any question or dispute concerning the in-
terpretation or application of this Treaty which is not settled shall be referred to the Inter-
national Court of Justice with the prior consent of the Parties to the controversy.” (http://
www.opanal.org/opanal/tlatelolco/tlatelolco-i.htm)
4 Reference to the fact that Article IV of the Panama Canal Treaty states that “since
Panama is a signatory to the Treaty of Tlatelolco, the United States shall not install any
type of nuclear armament on the territory of Panama.” The Carter administration there-
fore needed to gain Senate ratification of the Panama Canal treaties before submitting the
Treaty of Tlatelolco to the Senate. The Senate ratified the first Panama Canal Treaty on
March 16 and the second on April 18.
