988
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Attachment
Paper Prepared in the United States Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency2
Washington, undated
Factors to Consider in Determining U.S. Position on CD Working Group
on a Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB)
—If a consensus cannot be achieved at the NPT Review Confer-
ence because of U.S. unwillingness to accept a CD working group on
CTB, many nations, especially from the third world but also including
some western countries, would blame the U.S. for “wrecking” the
review conference by its inflexibility, and undermining one of the Ad-
ministration’s own major arms control objectives—a strengthened non-
proliferation regime. This criticism would be echoed in future multi-
lateral fora, including the UN General Assembly this fall.
—We would risk a serious blow to the NPT regime, and lose the
positive effects that a final conference document would have, including
encouragement of further adherence to the treaty and increased tech-
nical cooperation, advancement of full-scope safeguards and increased
support for IAEA safeguards, and discouragement of action by non-
nuclear weapon states (NNWS) to assist other NNWS to acquire nu-
clear weapons or explosive devices.
—We would face a generally more hostile attitude in multilateral
arms control efforts across the board, on which we need the coopera-
tion and support of others to achieve our objectives. Resentment could
spill over into other security-related issues.
—Actual establishment of a working group would be subject to
consensus agreement in the CD in February, where its precise terms of
reference would have to be negotiated, a process that would take many
weeks or even months and in which we could exercise considerable
influence. We could expect substantial differences of view on the
working group’s mandate. Given the time required for negotiation of
the mandate, the working group would be unlikely to be able to start
substantive discussions before the end of the CD’s first 1981 session
(May) or sometime during its second (June–August) session.
—In addition to influencing the working group’s mandate, we
would also have some opportunity in the working group itself to re-
strict the scope of its activity. We could seek to have the group at least
2 Confidential.
