Chapter 2, January–June 1989 141 Tab D1 Paper Prepared by the Policy Coordinating Committee6 Washington, June 2, 1989 DST 001 (U) Purpose. To review U.S. policy options regarding the means of assuring U.S. testing rights during a specified period of non-­withdrawal from the ABM Treaty, in the context of a Defense & Space Treaty. (S) Current Status. The United States and the Soviet Union disagree about the activities that would be permitted during a period of non-­ withdrawal from the ABM Treaty. The U.S. seeks to preserve its full ABM Treaty (broad interpretation) rights to research, development, and testing, while the Soviets have consistently rejected this position and have sought restrictions on ABM research, development, and testing beyond those agreed in 1972. (U) In December 1987, the United States and the Soviet Union in the Washington Summit Joint Statement committed to seek an agreement, inter alia, “to observe the ABM Treaty, as signed in 1972, while conducting research, development, and testing as required, which are permitted by the ABM Treaty, and not to withdraw from the ABM Treaty, for a specified period of time.” The sides disagree over the interpretation of that language. The U.S. asserts the broad interpretation and seeks an indication of Soviet acceptance of that interpretation. The Soviets have rejected the broad interpretation, but have not made clear what interpretation they believe is reflected by the WSJS. Soviet views have ranged at times between an interpretation more restrictive than the narrow interpretation, and the narrow interpretation. Hence, U.S. initiatives in Defense & Space have sought to obtain an indication that the Soviets accept our interpretation of the WSJS before a Defense & Space Treaty is signed. (S) U.S. Position: Space-­based Testing Initiative. To clarify testing permitted during the non-­withdrawal period and to address stated Soviet concerns that U.S. testing in space could become de facto deployment, the U.S. stated on 28 October 1988 in an authoritative unilateral assurance that: “In order to demonstrate that the testing of space based components capable of substituting for ABM interceptor missiles, which is permitted by the ABM Treaty, does not represent the deployment of 6 Secret. Brackets are in the original.
