3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
356
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
ban on new types, but in so doing we felt it essential that each side have
the right to determine, if we went along that route, whether or not the
new type of missile was to be MIRVed.
Insofar as the Backfire was concerned, the Secretary would prefer
to leave that issue for the discussion on Saturday.
African Affairs
Speaking off the record and instructing his interpreter to stop
taking notes, the Secretary expressed to Gromyko the concerns felt in
the United States, among the general public and in Congress, over So-
viet and Cuban activities in Africa. He pointed out that while we recog-
nized that Soviet and Cuban assistance to Ethiopia had initially been
caused by the Somali invasion of Ogaden, once this situation no longer
existed, it was difficult for us to regard the continued presence of large
numbers of Cuban troops in Ethiopia as anything other than cause for
serious concern. Recognizing that Cuba was a sovereign state, it was
felt nevertheless that the Soviet Union was in a position to exert appro-
priate influence upon the Cubans. Failure to do so had led to the per-
ception that the involvement of the Cubans in Ethiopia was a joint un-
dertaking by the Soviet Union and Cuba.
After the Secretary’s off-the-record remarks, Gromyko suggested
they join their two SSOD Delegations for a short period of time, and
subsequently return to the issue the Secretary had raised. Gromyko,
too, had something to say on African affairs.
The Secretary and Gromyko joined their two Delegations to the
SSOD and introduced their members to each other. They then returned
to their private discussion.
Gromyko told the Secretary that, as seen from Moscow, recent
American behavior in African affairs was bringing the Soviet leader-
ship to the conclusion that the United States was getting more and
more involved in African affairs, either directly or through other states.
Speaking frankly, this was viewed by the Soviet authorities as direct in-
terference in the internal affairs of countries in that part of the world.
What he had in mind in this connection was US participation in the air-
lift of troops, certain landing operations, and certain things being done
in Zaire. At the same time, attempts were made to cast a shadow on the
Soviet Union in this connection. He would point out that the Soviet
Union did not have a single soldier or rifle in that area, and had no in-
tention of sending any there.
As for Ogaden, Gromyko would point out that the matter there
was not entirely settled. He did not know what President Siad Barre of
Somalia had told the United States. He had told the Soviet Union, how-
ever, that he had made a mistake with regard to Ogaden. The Soviets
had told him that in that case he should sit down at a negotiating table
