3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
908
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
2. You will be receiving separately FBIS text of October 30 Moscow
World Service English commentary by Dimitriyev3 on alleged U.S. in-
terference in Poland. Dimitriyev point of departure is gross distortion
of October 29 comments by Department press spokesman, text of
which is at para 4 [5]. The commentary’s references to US activities
against Allende4 in Chile and its allegations of US disregard for Hel-
sinki Act’s non-interference provisions strike us as sufficiently om-
inous to warrant raising the issue promptly with Moscow.
3. You should therefore seek early appointment with Korniyenko
to convey copy of spokesman’s remarks and make the points below.
You should point out that we are raising this particular issue against
the background of a number of public statements by Soviet and other
Warsaw Pact leaders which contain false allegations about US and
Western interference in the Polish situation. These intentional distor-
tions cause us serious concern.
4. Points to be made:
—The Soviet side is well aware of our position that current devel-
opments in Poland are an internal matter best resolved by the Poles
themselves without outside interference of any kind. We have scrupu-
lously observed this policy ourselves and have displayed the greatest
restraint in our actions and our statement.
—For this reason I have been instructed to protest in strong terms
an October 30 broadcast by the Moscow World Service citing remarks
by a State Department spokesman as evidence of US interference in Po-
land’s internal affairs.
—We are deeply disturbed by this broadcast, which was a gross
distortion of the spokesman’s actual remarks, a copy of which I would
like to leave for the record.
—Such biased and tendentious treatment of the facts can only raise
questions about the intentions of the Soviet Union itself.
—I wish to reiterate in the strongest terms Secretary Muskie’s
statements5 in recent meetings with Foreign Minister Gromyko and
Ambassador Dobrynin that Soviet intervention in Poland would have
incalculable consequences for East-West relations.
5. Text of relevant comments from October 29 press briefing
follows: Begin Text. I don’t have anything in particular to say about Po-
land. We regret that the process of compromise and negotiation that
has been taking place between the Polish Government and the Polish
people has not yet reached an acceptable settlement where the union
3 Not further identified.
4 Salvador Allende, President of Chile from November 1970 until September 1973.
5 See Documents 304 and 306.
