374 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX which, he said, was based on the language in those treaties, saying that it was “a compromise but acceptable.” Fischer hoped that the Secretary would also find this text acceptable and said it was a propitious date for reaching a solution on this issue, since it was the anniversary of the UK–GDR consular convention. The “compromise,” he said, would involve the GDR’s acknowledging that the U.S. maintains its position on nationality. (Comment: A later reading of the “compromise” text indicated that Fischer meant here U.S. nationality not German nationality.) “We would not,” he said, “want to hurt your ally and we would not want to be embarrassed ourselves.” The Secretary said that he would study the proposal “promptly” and would provide the GDR with an answer “before he left next week.” Turning to Africa, the Secretary said he had noticed in the press that GDR Minister of Defense Hoffmann had recently visited Africa. He asked Fischer for his views of developments in Zaire. Fischer said that Hoffmann’s visit and the events in Zaire were two different things having nothing to do with each other. He noted that the events in Zaire had started while he (Fischer) was in Belgium. He had received many questions there about whether there were GDR troops in Zaire. It was obvious, he said, that he would not have wanted to have his official visit to Brussels harmed by having troops in Zaire at the same time. Fischer said that he “assumed” that the Secretary receives his information not only from the press and added that events in Zaire are “an internal affair in which the GDR is not involved.” Nobody from outside, he said, should be involved in Zaire. “That goes for us and for others.” Claiming that he could not tell the Secretary what is happening, he repeated that, if there is trouble in Zaire, it is internal. External activities can only hurt. He reminded the Secretary that GDR has no official relations with Zaire but that that fact is not related to recent events. The Secretary then referred specifically to reports that the GDR was involved with the training of Katangan Gendarmes who had invaded Shaba. Fischer responded with: “These reports will not gain truth by their being repeated.” “We have trained nobody and will not,” he added. “In general,” he said, “we have been concentrating on economic assistance and the training of cadres in the economic and education areas.” This he said “applies to all of Africa and to other third world countries.” “You may, he concluded, “take that as authentic.” With regard to CSCE and human rights, the Secretary said that he was pleased with recent progress concerning divided families. We hoped, he said, that this progress will carry over to other cases, specifically those of the Wilhelmi family and Gundrun Koch. The Secretary also said that he would welcome consultation that would lead to progress and less acrimony. He proposed, therefore, that Assistant
