devote their very [considerable?] ingenuity to creating situations [causing
conflict among?] the various foreigners who are protagonists of capitalism
and tempted to yield a principle ordinarily in preference to risking an
incident. In case one power yields, the same will have to be done by the
others, and in time an end will come to those rights making commerce with
China possible. The Cantonese do not see that when once back to
conditions prevalent a century past, and complicated and worsened by
China’s present internal strife, there will come again a time when Western
pressure will force new conflicts and once more begin the old cycle:
hostilities over a long period, subjugation, and special conditions for
intercourse imposed. The United States may not become in our day—and
may not at all, though it is more likely now than in the century past—the
active agent to counteract the attitude of exclusiveness and arrogance
towards the West which today the Chinese are reviving (dating from the
taking of the [factories?] at Canton). But I for one feel we have a
responsibility for effort directed toward saving the Chinese from their own
folly. Their folly is of a historically characteristic form, whose results
[threaten?] more or less directly to involve us in the disaster of indefinitely
retarding in China the development of a rational, ordered political and
economic entity and of relationships between the Western powers and
China that are normal.
7. I hope therefore that regardless of any disposition on the part of
shipowners to acquiesce, by way of serving their immediate interests, in
regulations which are destructive of our treaty position, the Department will
decide to take a further policy of giving to American shipping naval
protection from illegal visit and search in China’s territorial waters adjacent
to Canton.
8. A reply to this telegram is being awaited before I consult with the
commander in chief on this general problem.
MACMURRAY
80 Not found in Department files.
80 Not found in Department files.
