686
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
253.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
Kabul, April 15, 1980, 0838Z
1348. Subject: Coordinating Relations With Afghan Regime. Ref:
State 76559.2
1. (C—Entire text)
2. We share Department’s concern as expressed in reftel about how
long we can continue to avoid diplomatic contact with the Babrak
Karmal regime and still expect to function as a diplomatic mission in
Kabul. We have already seen the kinds of pressure the DRA can apply
to “encourage” us to move towards more normal diplomatic relations:
when we were unsuccessfully seeking consular access to two impris-
oned Americans we were told that “something might be done” if we
took it up at the political level; and we and other Embassies which
refrain from diplomatic dealings with the regime are being subjected
to a more restrictive visa policy than “friendly” countries, and this
could impact on our operations here.3 There are obviously many other
similar ways the DRA could try to pressure us into upgrading our
relations with it.
3. We have been discussing this problem with selected diplomatic
colleagues and on April 13, after a false start or two, I got the UK,
French, Italian, German and Japanese Chargés together for lunch to
discuss it as a group. While everyone agreed that we are on thin ice
here, all seemed to have different (and not very well thought out)
notions of what we might be able to do to improve the situation. All
are under general instructions to refrain from diplomatic contacts with
the DRA. However, except for the UK Chargé, they are unwilling to
exercise the slightest initiative in interpreting that instruction without
referring back to their capitals. (The four EC Chargés have been meeting
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
Box 9, Afghanistan: 4/10–18/80. Confidential; Sensitive; Exdis. Sent for information to
Ankara, Bonn, Islamabad, London, Moscow, New Delhi, Paris, Rome, and Tokyo. Printed
from a copy that was received in the White House Situation Room.
2 Telegram 76559 to Kabul, March 22, raised concern over how long the United
States could maintain a diplomatic presence in Kabul while avoiding contact with the
Karmal government. The Department stated that U.S. policy on this matter should
be coordinated with its allies. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D800146–0501)
3 In telegram 1103 from Kabul, March 24, the Embassy described the arrest and
detention of Charles Brockunier, a U.S. citizen and rug buyer who was detained by
Afghan police for alleged suspicious activity. The Embassy advised Brockunier to leave
Afghanistan immediately because, as a private citizen, it could offer him no protection.
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800149–0733)
