706  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
I had the pleasure of speaking in very general terms with Mr. Arenas 
on this subject some time ago.3 I explained then that the allocation of for-
eign sugar quotas was made by Act of Congress4 which does not expire 
until the end of this year. I also explained that in 1960 the Congress would 
doubtless consider in what form the Sugar Act should be extended and 
that it would not be profitable to speculate in advance on what the deci-
sion of the Congress would be I did observe that on the last two occa-
sions Congress had extended the Sugar Act, small increases were given 
to the full duty countries and if, as a result of the various economic fac-
tors involved, it should develop that small increases in quotas for the full 
duty countries could be made again, I was confident that Guatemala’s 
desire for an increased participation in the United States market would 
be given every consideration. Perhaps this latter statement was taken by 
Mr. Arenas out of context with the other statements.
No figures were mentioned in these conversations. I am confident 
Your Excellency will agree that not only is it uncertain that any quota 
changes will be made in the Sugar Act but that, if made, it is unlikely they 
will even approach in magnitude the figure which Mr. Arenas has sug-
gested.5 Certainly in the past, changes in United States commercial policy 
dictated by changing economic factors have been gradual and mod-
erate and they have taken into account the desire of the United States 
Government to promote the economic progress of all of the free world.
The United States shares your concern about the dependence of the 
economies of Guatemala and a large number of other countries on cof-
fee. It is for this reason that we have supported the efforts of the coffee 
exporting countries to prevent severe and harmful price fluctuation in 
the price of coffee and, at the same time, helped to promote a more diver-
sified agricultural and industrial production through such techniques as 
technical assistance, the expansion of lending facilities and trade and the 
creation of common markets consistent with GATT principles. I venture 
to hope that Your Excellency shares my optimism that these cooperative 
measures will, with the measures taken by other countries, contribute to 
sustained economic progress throughout the hemisphere.
I have very pleasant memories of my recent residence in Guatemala6 
and of the Guatemalan people whom I had the pleasure of meeting. We 
shall continue to seek better ways to make our own cooperation more 
3 For further information, see Document GT–21.
4 P. L. 545, approved May 29, 1956, amended and extended the Sugar Act of 1948, as 
amended, to December 31, 1960; for text, see 70 Stat. 217.
5 On August 2, 1960, the Department of Agriculture announced sugar quota figures 
for 1960 including an allocation of 6,000 tons reassigned from Cuba to Guatemala under 
authority of P. L. 86–593, approved July 6, 1960. For text of the law, see 74 Stat. 330.
6 Mann had served as Counselor of the Embassy in Guatemala 1954–1955.
