World Hunger and Food Policy concerned with food and agriculture. I will send you suggestions for topics to be included in such a speech. —The meeting of the Food and Agriculture Organization in Rome in November provides another opportunity for this Administration to make a positive turn in American policy. Mainly because of attitudes carried over from the past, the United States is seen as being more interested in haggling over FAO’s budget than in FAO’s real purposes. In my speech to the meeting in Rome I plan to emphasize this Administration’s commitment to the FAO as a principal instrument for progress in world food and agriculture as well as our commitment to helping improve the effectiveness of the FAO. —In order to sustain our leadership in international organizations concerned with food and agriculture, Secretary Vance and I need to work out better means for exercising that leadership. Because of habits from the past, the Departments of State and Agriculture (and some other departments) tend to compete for leadership rather than concentrate on substance. Our working arrangements should reflect the facts that the Department of State has primary responsibility for coordinating foreign policy and that the Department of Agriculture has primary responsibility for substantive and technical decision-making on food and agriculture. I will work out necessary arrangements with Secretary Vance. —The Department of Agriculture also needs to work closely with international development banks on agricultural projects. In 1976 agricultural projects financed by these banks amounted to about $3 billion. The World Bank has invited our participation, and we will take up that invitation. Foreign Food Assistance In September you will receive recommendations from the Development Coordinating Committee and the Brookings Institution about the overall shape and scale of the United States’ official development assistance. Probably you will have to choose among divergent options on substance and organization. In my view, this Administration’s foreign assistance program should be built on effective actions to deal with malnutrition and with inadequate rates of growth of food production in poor countries. I believe there is widespread support among the American people and in the Congress for this approach. But the structure we have inherited— with its confused objectives and complicated administration—is not delivering the goods. I will submit for your consideration: —Proposed legislation to improve foreign food assistance now carried out under Public Law 480. The legislation would provide spe-
