750
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
negotiations are worth the risk that the Soviets would not agree to such
an agenda. Christopher added that the real question was whether we
were prepared to hear what they had to say and then to reject those
areas we don’t want to talk about. Gelb noted that this was just what
the delegation was proposing should be done, but that the Soviets
would not agree to only address areas that are in the US interest.
Brzezinski then had to leave and wanted to summarize his posi-
tion. He felt that we should first discuss the agenda, letting the Soviets
make their case on Korea, if necessary, in that context. We should then
make our pitch on Soviet transfers to Vietnam and then we should pro-
ceed to discuss Latin America and Africa as roughly symmetrical re-
gional topics. If the Soviets won’t agree to proceed on this basis, then
we will know that the reason they are interested in CAT is to use CAT
to affect our relationships with our allies.
Gelb remarked that from the very beginning, the prospect of the
US and the USSR working together for restraint has been inherent in
this enterprise. There is a risk to our relationships with our friends and
allies, but the question is whether we can accept that risk. Our allies like
Korea are big boys. Why can’t we go to them and tell them that the So-
viets are likely to raise their region and that we will listen in response.
He disagreed with Brown’s earlier remark that the Gleysteen cable was
negative. Our plan was to consult with the Koreans before the round
and if they strongly objected, we would tell the Soviets that Korea was
not an appropriate topic. Brown asked whether we also planned to con-
sult beforehand with Iran. Gelb replied that he had personally briefed
the Shah on CAT about ten months ago.4 The Shah was quite relaxed
about it. Brown replied that that was a different era and the Shah would
not feel the same now, whereas the Koreans may be more relaxed now
than previously. He felt that we had a wider spectrum of alternatives in
dealing with Korea than with the Shah, but that active discussion was
not an option in either case.
Christopher asked what the negotiators felt about having a discus-
sion at the beginning of the talks on what should be discussed. Gelb re-
plied that such a discussion would be fruitless, and would only lead to
a stalemate. In essence to do this would amount to a decision to end the
talks. Blechman agreed, saying that we had thought that Mexico City5
would be a test of the Russians and now we are finding that it is a test of
ourselves. Keeny said that getting other suppliers to cooperate in arms
restraint is the President’s policy. If we don’t want to pursue it, we
should put the issue to him and let him decide. McGiffert noted that
4 Gelb met with the Shah on February 5. No record of their meeting was found.
5 The next round of Comprehensive Arms Talks were scheduled for December 5–15
in Mexico City.
