1956  667
41. Wang said it was their view that both sides must make equal 
efforts come to agreement. Chinese side has made such efforts but US 
has not. Therefore, difference between two of us not one of specific for­
mulation or of choice of words, but one of substance. If US insisted on 
including phrase concerning individual and collective self defense in 
draft agreed announcement, he did not see how we could reach any 
agreement. This outcome was not Chinese desire or hope.
42. I responded that, first, Wang insisting on belaboring supposed 
question of statements by Secretary of State. I would like specifically 
ask what statement or statements?
43. Wang said this was statement now known everywhere and he 
referring to statement appeared Life magazine.
44. I said I wondered whether or not Wang along with many 
others might not be confusing official and authorized statements of 
Secretary of State with opinions and views issued on own responsibil­
ity by writer of magazine articles. I might add that I had read article in 
entirety and could find no statement therein by Secretary of State that 
could remotely support statements Wang made here this morning.
45. Wang said talks between two of us should be aimed at settling 
peacefully dispute between our two countries instead of at creating ten­
sions. Peaceful settlement of dispute between two countries would not 
only bring about relaxation tensions in world but would contribute to 
cause of peace in world. Hard for them understand why US on one 
hand invited them discuss making joint announcement on renuncia­
tion force, while on other hand US SecState revealed that on three occa­
sions US had been on verge of unleashing atomic war against China. 
Suppose these disclosures had been made by someone else—Senator 
Knowland or Mr. McCarthy—Chinese could omit ref to them in these 
talks. However, they noted these statements being made by personal­
ity in charge and guidance of US foreign policy, and those statements 
certainly caused alarm part of Chinese. They could not help raising 
question as to whether US foreign policy, under guidance Mr. Dulles, 
advocated negotiations between two sides or advocated use of atomic 
bombs against China. He only wanted make it plain and clear Chinese 
people were not to be frightened by this sort of talk.
46. Wang said, in particular they thought that at time while 
­Sino-­American talks were in progress, these utterances would serve no 
useful purpose. And he wanted to point out also that he who plays with 
fire is one who gets burnt in the end.
47. I said I had seen no statement by Secretary in Life article or 
elsewhere, or ever under any circumstances anywhere, speaking of 
unleashing an atomic war on China or on any other country. I had how­
ever seen statements referring to determination of US to resist, by war 
if necessary, aggression unleashed by others.
