2
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
The review should address the following issues:2
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Eastern Europe.]
4. Eastern Europe: This section should analyze the situation in the
area in terms of general trends—political, economic and social stability.
The status and outlook in each country for relative internal liberaliza-
tion and external independence should be examined. In particular,
there should be a discussion of how the US should approach the area
and the countries involved; whether and how we should differentiate
among the countries in trading or political relations, e.g., treat them
more or less uniformly, or primarily as a function of the policy toward
the USSR, or on the basis of other criteria, e.g., should US policy be
more forthcoming toward Eastern European countries that are rela-
tively more liberal internally (e.g., Poland and Hungary), or relatively
more independent from Moscow (e.g., Romania). This review should
include an examination of the role of RFE/RL. This analysis should
also address the GDR in the context of US-German and Berlin policies,
as well as Eastern Europe.
5. Security Issues: East-West: An analysis should be made of East-
West relations in Europe, probable trends, tradeoffs, and issues or
contingencies that might arise. It should examine the constraints on
further progress, the main elements of an East-West agenda and priori-
ties of US policy. This analysis should include an examination of Soviet
policy and objectives in European security. In particular, the following
sub-issues should be covered:
(a) MBFR: As a follow up to the priority work being undertaken
in PRM/NSC–6,3 an analysis should be included in this study of the
role of mutual force reduction (including MBFR) in East-West relations,
its priority, objectives, prospects, as well as possible US initiatives.
(b) CSCE: This section should describe the status, and examine
the utility of CSCE, particularly for increasing East-West contacts and
effecting changes in the human rights area. It should analyze the role
of CSCE in the overall East-West relationship and its priority in US
policy during and beyond the Belgrade Conference.
(c) Berlin and Germany: This section should describe the present
situation in terms of the Quadripartite Agreement, the inter-German
relationship, possible Soviet-GDR moves, and the efficacy of current
Allied consultative arrangements; an examination should be made of
whether the Three Western Powers and/or the FRG should undertake
2 The memorandum also covered European relations, NATO, and economic issues.
Scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.
3 PRM/NSC–6 ordered a review of U.S. policy toward MBFR. Scheduled for publica-
tion in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. V, European Security, 1977–1983.
