National Security Policy  243
69.	
Memorandum From Smith (S/P) to John Foster Dulles1
S/P–58–193–1A
Washington, July 10, 1958
SUBJECT
National Security Council Meeting, July 14, 1958
The items for discussion at this meeting are four reports called for 
by NSC action, approved by the President on April 2, 1958, on Meas­
ures to Carry Out the Concept of Shelter. There will be oral briefings on 
the reports (attached as Tabs A to D). High points in them are:
1. ADEQUACY OF GOVERNMENT RESEARCH PROGRAMS IN 
NON-MILITARY DEFENSE. Principal conclusions are that adequate 
shielding is the only effective means of preventing radiation casual­
ties; that there is no lack of essential scientific knowledge which war­
rants postponement of basic shelter construction; that if no action is to 
be taken on shelter construction, the decision must be based on other 
than technical reasons; that there is need to investigate many details in 
order to provide an effective and coordinated shelter system; that since 
a substantial program of shelter construction could not be completed 
for a period of years, supplementary research and studies should be 
carried out while the basic shelter structures are being constructed; and 
that although a shelter system is the essential core of an effective non-­
military defense system, it cannot of itself be regarded as sufficient to 
assure our survival as a nation.
2. THE NUMBER OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS WHICH MIGHT BE 
TOLERABLE TO WORLD POPULATIONS. The report concludes that 
there would be adverse effects on populations of non-­combatant coun­
tries of the Northern Hemisphere as a result of nuclear detonations in 
general war but they would not be as serious as some have assumed. 
This is based on the assumption that nuclear weapons used on both 
sides would have a total yield of 15 million kilotons. (15,000 megatons).
3. SURVIVAL OF POPULATION FOLLOWING A MASSIVE 
NUCLEAR EXCHANGE. This report assumes an attack on the United 
States in 1965; fallout shelter will be provided for the population; and 
the war will be over after one exchange of nuclear weapons. Principal 
conclusions are:
a. Ninety-­four million Americans (49 percent of the estimated 1965 
population of 192 million) will survive the attack and its aftermath of 
fallout.
1 Source: Briefing for July 14 NSC meeting. Top Secret. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, 
Whitman File, NSC Records.
