Yugoslavia
773
243.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, September 29, 1977
SUBJECT
Your Meeting with Yugoslav Presidency Member Edvard Kardelj, September 30,
10:30 a.m.
The memorandum from Warren Christopher2 (in the accompany-
ing briefing book) effectively presents the issues for this meeting.
The most critical question for Kardelj (addressed as Mr. KarDELL)
is continuing uncertainty about our commitment to Yugoslavia’s inde-
pendence and integrity. While efforts throughout the year have erased
most of the deep concern over your comments in the final television
debate3 —though it came up again on Tito’s China visit—reasserting
our concern and commitment is very important. Our new offer of an
arms supply relationship will help considerably.4 You will be breaking
the news to him (points summarized in the State memo). We are also
resuming the processing of FMS cases and requests for export licenses.
Yugoslav concern is heightened by the role the Russians are play-
ing. When Brezhnev came to Belgrade last year, he tried to bully Tito
into moving closer to the Soviet orbit. Tito stoutly resisted, and circu-
lated the memoranda of conversation to key party leaders to make the
point. On Tito’s trip to Moscow, however, Brezhnev tried the opposite
approach: surrounding him with warmth and affection. Yugoslavs who
are intensely suspicious of the Soviet Union believe this is designed
to be used as a weapon following Tito’s death: that the Tito “line” was
friendship for Moscow, and his successors should be bound by it. In
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit
File, Box 15, Yugoslavia: Presidency Member Edvard Kardelj, 9/28/77–10/5/77: Cables
and Memos. Secret. Sent for action. Carter initialed the memorandum indicating he had
seen it. Later in the day, Brzezinski sent another memorandum to Carter forwarding
Department of State talking points on détente and the Oversees Private Investment
Cooperation program with Yugoslavia. Carter initialed Brzezinski’s covering memo-
randum indicating he had seen it and wrote at the top “We may follow up on N/S
Korea.” (Ibid.)
2 Memorandum from Acting Secretary of State Christopher to the President, Septem-
ber 27. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit File, Box
15, Yugoslavia: Presidency Member Edvard Kardelj, 9/28/77–10/5/77: Briefing Book)
3 See footnote 2, Document 235.
4 The phrase “arms supply relationship will help considerably” is underlined by
an unknown hand, possibly Brzezinski. The Department of State talking points submitted
by Christopher recommended that Carter inform Kardelj of the U.S. Government’s
decision to expand the arms sales program moderately. See footnote 2 above.
