1374  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
b. Supplying the necessary special nuclear material to fuel the 
reactors;
c. Entering into arrangements with regard to reactor fuel cycles 
reasonably consistent with those offered in the U.S. domestic program;
d. Extending the present U.S. direct program of fuel cycle develop­
ment and testing;
e. Establishing a 10-­year cooperative program of research and 
development;
f. Assisting in the establishment of a training program, arranging 
for the exchange of technical information, and establishing a liaison 
office at EURATOM headquarters;
g. Continuation by the U.S. of a strong program of research and 
development on advance reactor types, basic reactor technology, etc., 
and providing such information to EURATOM for use in meeting long-­
term objectives.
36. Within this framework, a Joint U.S.-­EURATOM Working Party 
has held discussions in Europe and in Washington, and has developed 
a detailed program now under consideration within the Executive 
Branch prior to submission to the Congress. This program may be out­
lined in the following manner:
a. The proposed program will have as its objectives, (1) the bring­
ing into operation by 1963, within the Community, of large-­scale power 
plants using nuclear reactors of proven types, on which research and 
development has been carried to an advanced stage in the United 
States, having a total installed capacity of approximately one million 
kilowatts of electricity and under conditions which would approach 
the competitive range of conventional energy costs in Europe; and 
(2) the initiation of a joint research and development program centered 
on these reactors;
b. The total capital cost, exclusive of the fuel inventory of the 
nuclear power plants, is estimated not to exceed $350,000,000. These 
funds would be provided for by the participating EURATOM utilities 
and other European sources of capital, such financing to be arranged 
with the appropriate assistance of EURATOM. Up to $135,000,000 
would be provided by the United States Government to EURATOM in 
the form of a long-­term line of credit to cover a portion of the capital 
costs. These funds would be re-­lent by EURATOM for the construction 
of nuclear power plants covered under the program;
c. In addition, in order to reduce the risks in operating costs to 
a point where the widespread participation of the European utility 
industry is assured, the United States, for a ten-­year period of opera­
tion, would guarantee ceiling costs for the fabrication of the fuel ele­
ments required under the program as well as a fixed life for the fuel 
elements;
d. The proposed joint research and development program, which 
is for a 10-­year period, would be centered on the improvement of the 
performance of the reactors involved in the program and at a lowering 
of fuel cycle costs. During the first five (5) years, the financial contribu­
tion of the Community and the United States would amount to about 
$50,000,000 each, with the sum required for the second five (5) year 
period to be determined at a later date;
