National Security Policy 1107 Iran, and Laos, their use would not provide a clear military advantage. However, use of [text not declassified]. 7. Anticipation of the need to initiate a limited military operation along with the earliest possible decisions on its character and objectives, including possible restrictions on weapons systems to be employed, will substantially enhance U.S. and allied capabilities to respond rap­ idly to the threat. 8. Limited military operations to achieve national objectives are based on a careful balance of political and military considerations which may require restraints on the use of military force. Such restraints may seriously handicap the conduct of military operations and must be kept under continuous review for the purpose of considering their possible revision, where necessary, to achieve established national objectives. The closest possible coordination of political and military decisions and actions will enhance our capability to conduct limited military opera­ tions effectively. 9. From a military point of view, it would not be advantageous for U.S. and allied forces to initiate the use of lethal CW/BW agents, prin­ cipally because current programs provide only a limited capability and because our allies lack protective equipment and training. 10. U.S. employment of non-­lethal CW/BW agents would, under certain circumstances, enhance the capabilities of U.S. and allied forces. 11. The United States and its allies presently do not have an ade­ quate capability for counter-­guerrilla type limited military operations. 12. If fully committed and used in optimum fashion, the U.S. mil­ itary airlift, including reserve and national guard, is adequate when augmented from civilian sources for effective support of the individual operations studied in Iran, Laos or Korea, but is not adequate to sup­ port two such operations simultaneously. 13. An augmentation of existing sea-­lift capabilities would be required in all cases except Berlin. This would vary from a rather small augmentation of existing cargo lift in the Pacific for the Offshore Islands to an extensive augmentation of cargo and passenger lift for Korea—including a transfer from the Atlantic to the Pacific of passen­ ger transports. 14. World-­wide strategic communications are adequate to sup­ port all operations studied except in Southeast Asia, where they would require considerable U.S. augmentation. 15. Pre-­stockage of supplies in the European and Far East areas substantially enhances our capabilities to respond promptly and effectively. Although present pre-­stocks in the Eastern Mediterranean and in Southeast Asia are minimal and add little to our capabilities to respond, programmed pre-­stocks will partially correct this deficiency by 1962.
