these new provisions and proposed to make Special Articles of them. These
new Articles have been printed in the IVth Part of this Document.”
As the circular telegram dated July 12, 1924, issued by the International Telegraph
Bureau at Berne, pointed out that the proposals to be submitted by the respective
administrations for consideration at the International Telegraph Conference at Paris
were to be “based exclusively on the telegraph regulations now in force” and as the
circular letter dated July 15, 1924, issued by the Bureau jointly with the French
Administration, requested the administrations to forward “the additions or
modifications that your office would like to introduce in the International Service
Regulations (Revised at Lisbon) and the tariffs now in force”, it is surprising to find
that the administrations concerned have submitted a large number of propositions
dealing with the regulation of communication by means of radio and that the Berne
Bureau printed these proposals relating to radio in the Document.
I feel that it is of great importance to emphasize the fact that, in determining what
subjects shall be discussed at the conferences, care should be exercised to have the
discussions limited to subjects that properly fall within the scope of the conference. At
present there are two wholly independent conventions, each dealing with a separate
general subject, first, the Telegraph Convention, dealing with communication by means
of wire, and, second, the Radiotelegraph Convention, dealing with communication by
means of radio. Since the Paris Conference is to be held first, I am strongly of the
opinion that it should not concern itself with subjects which properly would come
before the Radiotelegraph Conference to be held at Washington. And in as much as
your Government has agreed to the holding of the International Radiotelegraph
Conference at Washington, I have no doubt that your Government is of the same
opinion that radio matters should be taken up at the Washington Conference and that
the printing of these proposals relating to radio does not involve their consideration at
the Paris Conference.
From such examination as it has been possible to make of the Document issued by the
International Telegraph Bureau at Berne, it seems clear that if the Conference at Paris
takes up the consideration of all of the subject matter contained in the above mentioned
Document it will take into consideration a great many matters which, in fact, relate
only to the use of radio and, in so doing, will invade the field that should properly be
reserved for study and discussion at the Washington Conference. This observation
applies particularly to Part IV of the Document.
A study of the five questions which you submitted makes this fact clearer and, with the
exception of the fourth question, I beg to suggest that your Government should, in the
light of the foregoing comments, consider carefully the propriety of taking them up at
the Telegraph Conference at Paris.
