254 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 seeing the Japanese Foreign Minister immediately after this meeting. The Secretary said that the Japanese had behaved abominably. They had bought between 20 and 30 million barrels of oil—almost all that we had freed up—at an average price of about $40. The Japanese claim that Japanese firms had violated MITI instructions, but we know also that firms have used coded accounts and that Japanese banks have agreed to this. The government had also advised about ten days ago that the Japanese banks should not call any loan. The Secretary said that this was not only business as usual, but actually taking advantage of the situation. Francois-Poncet said that this confirms their information and that it was very disturbing. It makes others look ineffective. Cooper said that the question is really a psychological one, since we know that the real economic effects of our actions will only come much later. Francois-Poncet said that they too had information that Iran was worried about these measures. We could count on full collaboration from the French. The question was when and how, and particularly getting the necessary international basis from the Security Council. The Secretary said that even pending such sanctions, he thought that it ought to be possible to take action because we have a clear case that international law is being flouted. Paye thought that, in France at least, only in the case of war could action be taken without that international sanction. Francois-Poncet concluded that we need, as he had said to the Ambassador the other day, to have more exchanges of information in order that all of us can act intelligently. He recognized the necessity to act to put pressure on Tehran and also to meet US domestic pressures, but we also need to exchange our assessments. For example, he had received a telegram yesterday (this is the one we were shown by Giscard that evening) giving the assessment by their Ambassador, who is a good man, of the measures as seen from Tehran. The conclusion was that pressures could be counter-productive in the current situation. He recognized that that was only one view and, of course, it was a view from the point of view of someone right on the spot in Tehran and he was not sure it was a balanced appreciation. Therefore, we had to have continuing exchanges. The Secretary said he agreed and wished to express appreciation for all the French had done, both in giving us information and in trying to be helpful in Tehran. (There followed a discussion by the Secretary of military options with only Francois-Poncet and the Ambassador present.) The meeting concluded with Francois-Poncet alone as he raised several questions with respect to the NATO communiqué.7 He said 7 For text of the NATO communiqué issued on December 14, see Department of State Bulletin, February 1980, pp. 20–22.
