December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
625
183.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, February 25, 1979, 2:03–2:45 p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
The President
Secretary Vance
Prime Minister Khalil—Egypt
Foreign Minister Dayan—Israel
Zbigniew Brzezinski
The President: We are running out of time. Therefore, it is important
when you go back for there not to be any public rejection of any facets
of the proposals advanced here. There should be no categorical state-
ments that one will never yield, etc.
The interim between this and the next meeting will cause
problems. The longer a decision is delayed, the more difficult it will be
to reach it.
My own hope is that we can get together for a summit this coming
weekend and I hope Prime Minister Begin can attend. I can spend some
time on this in the latter part of this week. (To Khalil) You have full au-
thority to negotiate a full settlement, don’t you?
Khalil: Yes, unless we can conclude an agreement now, it will be
difficult to do so in a month and impossible in two or three. Our region
is threatened. Nimeiri and Fahd have urged an Arab summit before an
Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty is concluded. President Sadat has con-
firmed that our desire for peace is consistent, but we cannot isolate our-
selves from the Arab world. The remaining difficulties are trifling. The
proposed formulas are fair to Israeli security and our position in the
Arab world.
The President: The most stabilizing action would be an Egyptian-
Israeli peace treaty. Once it is done, the other Arab countries cannot re-
ject Egypt. An Arab summit after the treaty could be fruitful. Without
peace, things will deteriorate.
Dayan: I agree on the urgency.
The President: Does the Cabinet sense it?
Dayan: All agree, but some might feel that now is not a good time
for a withdrawal or for autonomy. I feel that we should do away with
the military government. But there are differences of view among us on
autonomy.
1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 36, Serial
Xs—(1/79–2/79). Secret. Drafted on February 26. The meeting took place in the Oval
Office.
