646
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
and others who might surprise you. We have not turned to the United
States. Oil to Israel is not wasted. But if we have no oil, then our tanks
and planes cannot move and we would be in deadly danger. This is a
matter of life and death.
We now have oil in the area of Sinai from which we will withdraw.
Israel now gets 1.6 million tons from those wells. In six months this will
be up to 2.5 million tons. I want a commitment from Sadat in writing
that we will be able to purchase 3.5 million tons of oil out of our 8 to 9
million tons annually. I also am asking you to give an American guar-
antee to the Egyptian commitment. If Egypt will not give such a com-
mitment, we shall proceed to evacuate Sinai in the context of the peace
treaty, but we will not give up the oil wells. And I will say so to Sadat.
This is a matter of life and death. The Camp David Agreement was
signed when the Shah was still ruler. We are asking for no favors. We
will pay the market price. We are giving back the oil wells which we de-
veloped to Egypt, but we need a commitment from them.
On the question of ambassadors, Sadat agreed to normalization of
relations. If he reopens the Annex dealing with the exchange of ambas-
sadors, we will also reopen the question of the timing of withdrawal,
and we may change the time for the interim withdrawal from nine to
eighteen months or the time for the final withdrawal from three to six
years. If there is a reopening, it should be done on both sides.
President Carter: I want Secretary Vance to respond to your com-
ments on the letter, but I have some remarks to make.
Secretary Vance: Let me say one word. The President has indicated
that we are trying to help the parties reach agreement. We have been
asked to make suggestions. That has been our role. On the specifics, the
letter does offer the possibility of making a distinction between the
West Bank and Gaza. The suggestion was made that it might be easier
to establish self-government in Gaza first. This was discussed among
the three ministers at Camp David. Dayan said that the Cabinet had not
made a decision on this, but that it was an interesting idea. He said that
he would take it back to the Cabinet, and this was the basis for our de-
veloping such a proposal.
Prime Minister Begin: But Dayan told you that he would agree to
this provided that Sadat would not have anything to do with the nego-
tiations on autonomy in Judea and Samaria.
Ambassador Evron: We were, of course, not present, but Dayan told
us that if an agreement is made on Gaza separately, then he would rec-
ommend that Egypt should have no role in the negotiations on Judea
and Samaria.
Prime Minister Begin: I have his cable.
Secretary Vance: I don’t recall it that way. Concerning Jordan’s role,
the suggestion was made by the Egyptians at the first Camp David
