1977  205
regulatory policy. As an initial action, the head of departments and 
agencies, as designated by the Subcommittee, shall assess the need for 
protection of unclassified information transmitted under their suspices 
and report their conclusions to the Subcommittee within 60 days. The 
Subcommittee shall then set appropriate standards for protection.
Tasking: The Department of Commerce will develop and submit 
for subcommittee review a technique to assess department/agency 
information. It will include but not be limited to:
—Kinds of information which may need protection.
—How the data is transmitted.
—Origination and distribution points.
—System nodes.
—If protection is necessary, what kind of protection and estimated 
cost.
—Is the cost of protection higher than the loss of data if it were 
compromised.
The GSA will keep the subcommittee informed on its on-­going 
bulk encryption study for satellites.
The CIA should be prepared, if called upon, to provide a reassess-
ment of known Soviet intentions.
The NSA shall review its past activities in these areas and provide 
the subcommittee a summary thereof.
Concerning the magnitude of the threat, or changes thereto, the 
Department of Justice (FBI) shall be the lead agent in keeping the sub-
committee informed.
—5. NSDM’s 266, 296, 338 and 346 and the 1968 NSC Communica-
tions Security Directive are hereby rescinded.4
REMARKS:
By rescinding the 1968 NSC Communications Security Directive, 
the United States Communications Security Board or USCSB is abol-
ished. The policies promulgated by that board shall remain in effect 
until such time as the subcommittee Executive Secretary, in consulta-
tion with Defense, reviews that policy and makes recommendations 
concerning their disposition.
The Chairman tabled a final issue; not one contained in PD–24 but 
directly related to the overall subject of telecommunications protection 
policy and is therefore an area that may well need policy attention. The 
following is a summary of the presentation given by Howard Rosen-
bloom and deals with “public cryptography, signals intelligence and 
academic freedom.”
4 See footnote 3, Document 40.
