3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
172
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
not a decisive” voice in formulating the US package and in advising the
administration to “take a hard line.”
As the date for the next Vance-Gromyko meeting in Geneva ap-
proached, the coverage took on a more optimistic cast. A Pravda May 7
editorial, apparently aimed at countering impressions abroad that re-
jection of the US March proposals implied a Soviet unwillingness to
consider substantial arms reductions, argued the USSR had always
been the prime mover in international disarmament endeavors. And as
the Soviet-US SALT delegations resumed talks, media and spokesmen
once again began to stress Soviet willingness to seek agreement,
pledging that the USSR would respond to a “realistic attitude” on the
part of the US.
When Gromyko and Vance met in Geneva May 18–20 the atmos-
phere was definitely less charged. The signing ceremony for the agree-
ment on the use of outer space for peaceful purposes was cordial, and
the “Joint Report” issued May 206 spoke of a “businesslike” forum. Fol-
lowing the meeting, TASS reported Secretary Vance’s statement that
“full agreement” had been reached on the general framework for a
SALT II accord even though substantial differences remained to be ne-
gotiated. The Soviet press also underscored the Joint Report’s conclu-
sion that the talks had achieved “progress” on a general framework for
further talks.
But Gromyko, while acknowledging “some progress” on “certain
problems,” made the point in leaving Geneva that “this does not mean
a solution of the main questions is close in sight. . . . The conclusion of
the work of drafting the agreement is still a long way off.”
In keeping with Gromyko’s thrust, Moscow then continued to play
up alleged US obstinacy on SALT affairs, and minimized prospects for
quick progress. Soviet media accused the President of “skating
around” SALT in his May 24 speech at Notre Dame,7 contrasting his
tone with Brezhnev’s somber evaluation to French TV May 29: “The po-
sitions have drawn closer to a certain degree . . . yet it must be said
frankly that there has been no serious progress so far because of the un-
constructive line pursued by the US.” This line, Brezhnev said, did not
promote the conclusion of an agreement.
Brezhnev also privately told the French in late June of his concern
over the way the SALT negotiations were going, and after his trip to
France stated flatly that “no progress” had been achieved. He capped
6 The Geneva meetings specifically addressed SALT issues. A copy of the May 20
“Joint Report” was not found.
7 The text of Carter’s May 22 Notre Dame commencement speech is in Public Papers:
Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 954–962.
