Plenary Session and at the Third meeting of Committee II, Dr. Wang stated that China was prepared to enter into a reciprocal tariff agreement with Japan or with any other Power which desired to enter into such a reciprocal agreement. It was pointed out that no such agreement then existed between Japan and China, but that in case one should be negotiated it would come into force either before or after the enforcement of the National Tariff Law, item 5 of which relates to the subject. Mr. Oudendijk inquired whether a reciprocity treaty such as described would contain a “most favored nation clause.” Dr. Wang replied that it could be so made if there were things for exchange on the basis of reciprocity. The question again arose as to whether the declaration submitted by the Chinese Delegation should be a preamble or an article in the treaty. Dr. Wang took the position that it would constitute an article, or two articles, of the treaty that was being negotiated at the Conference. Mr. Oudendijk favored the language in the American proposal,97 as it was more emphatic. Mr. Strawn said that the first part of the American proposal, namely, “The Contracting Powers other than China recognize the right of China as a sovereign State to Tariff Autonomy”, was put in because China had by previous treaties given away the sovereign right of tariff autonomy and it was now proposed to have China recover it and as a condition to regaining it and enjoying full tariff autonomy it would be necessary to remove the tariff restrictions contained in existing treaties. Further discussion on this point, participated in by several Delegates, and consideration of an amendment offered by Mr. Hioki, resulted in the adoption of the following preamble to the Chinese resolution, or proposed treaty articles, which had the unanimous approval of the Delegates: “The Delegates of the Powers assembled at this Conference resolve to adopt the following proposed article relating to tariff autonomy, with a view to incorporating it, together with other matters to be hereafter agreed upon, in a treaty which is to be signed at this Conference.”
