620
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
228.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
Washington, March 6, 1980, 9–9:40 a.m.
SUBJECT
Iran/Afghanistan
PARTICIPANTS
State
White House
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Henry Owen (Chairman)
Warren Christopher
Jody Powell
David Newsom
Lloyd Cutler
Peter Constable
Hedley Donovan
Nelson Ledsky
NSC
Gary Sick
OSD
William Odom
W. Graham Claytor
Jerrold Schecter
JCS
General David Jones
Lt. Gen. John Pustay
Justice
John Shenefield
Treasury
Robert Carswell
Energy
John Sawhill
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
4. Chemical Warfare. Admiral Turner said there is growing evidence
that the Soviets have used chemical warfare in Afghanistan, but as yet
it is not possible to confirm adequately that this has gone beyond the use
of riot control agents.2 The Soviets have decontamination equipment
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council Institutional Files, 1977–1981,
Box 109, SCC–284, 3/6/80, Iran & Afghanistan. Top Secret. The meeting took place in
the White House Situation Room. In the upper right corner, Carter wrote: “Zbig, C.”
2 This allegation was first reported in a situation report prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency, March 1, based on “credible evidence” received in the U.S. Consulate
in Peshawar: “Three separate reports from Afghan refugees who claim to have witnessed
the attacks gave similar descriptions of gas canisters, symptoms of Afghan victims,
and methods used to avoid contamination. The attacks are said to have occurred in
Badakhshan, Vardak, and Takhar Provinces both before and after the Soviet invasion.
The victims apparently experienced loss of control, became unconscious, or died. We
have received a number of other reports of chemical warfare in Afghanistan, mainly
from refugees, but these have been inconclusive and of questionable reliability.” ([report
number not declassified] March 1; Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of
Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator
for DCI (1977–81), Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—March 1980, NIDs)
