228
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
those circumstances. We will review sympathetically what might be
done to provide additional military and economic assistance to Jordan.
—It goes without saying that we would also give Jordan full polit-
ical diplomatic support through our contacts with other area gov-
ernments and through our public statements. In this connection I
should note that among the side letters to be published in connection
with the Camp David agreements is a letter from us reaffirming our
historic position on Jerusalem. We tried to resolve Jerusalem in the doc-
ument. It was impossible. Therefore we agreed with Egypt and ulti-
mately with Israel to state our positions in documents to be made
public. Our position on Jerusalem remains that outlined by Ambas-
sadors Goldberg,11 Yost12 and Scranton13 in U.N. debates with which
you are familiar. The most fulsome expression was that of Yost.
11 In an address before the United Nations General Assembly on July 14, 1967, Am-
bassador Arthur J. Goldberg declared: “with regard to the specific measures taken by the
Government of Israel on June 28 [1967], I wish to make it clear that the United States does
not accept or recognize these measures as altering the status of Jerusalem. My Govern-
ment does not recognize that the administrative measures taken by the Government of
Israel on June 28 can be regarded as the last word on the matter, and we regret that they
were taken. We insist that the measures taken cannot be considered other than interim
and provisional, and not prejudging the final and permanent status of Jerusalem.” He
continued: “We believe that the most fruitful approach to a discussion of the future of Je-
rusalem lies in dealing with the entire problem as one aspect of the broader arrangements
that must be made to restore a just and durable peace in the area.” (Department of State
Bulletin, July–December 1967, pp. 148–151)
12 Speaking before the United Nations Security Council on July 1, 1969, Ambas-
sador Charles Yost declared: “the United States considers that the part of Jerusalem that
came under the control of Israel in the June [1967] war, like other areas occupied by Israel,
is occupied territory and hence subject to the provisions of international law governing
the rights and obligations of an occupying power.” He continued: “Among the provi-
sions of international law which bind Israel, as they would bind any occupier, are the
provisions that the occupier has no right to make changes in laws or in administration
other than those which are temporarily necessitated by his security interest and that an
occupier may not confiscate or destroy private property. The pattern of behavior author-
ized under the Geneva convention and international law is clear: The occupier must
maintain the occupied area as intact and unaltered as possible, without interfering with
the customary life of the area, and any changes must be necessitated by immediate needs
of the occupation. I regret to say that the actions of Israel in the occupied portion of Jeru-
salem present a different picture, one which gives rise to understandable concerns that
the eventual disposition of East Jerusalem may be prejudiced, and that the rights and ac-
tivities of the population are already being affected and altered.” He continued: “My
Government regrets and deplores this pattern of activity, and it has so informed the Gov-
ernment of Israel on numerous occasions since June 1967. We have consistently refused
to recognize these measures as having anything but a provisional character and do not
accept them as affecting the ultimate status of Jerusalem.” (Department of State Bulletin,
July 9, 1969, pp. 76–77)
13 On March 25, 1976, Ambassador William Scranton stated to the United Nations
Security Council that “as far as the United States is concerned, such unilateral measures,
including expropriation of land or other administrative action taken by the Government
of Israel, cannot be considered other than interim and provisional and cannot affect the
present international status nor prejudge the final and permanent status of Jerusalem.
The U.S. position could not be clearer.” (Department of State Bulletin, April 19, 1976, pp.
529–530)
