Special Session on Disarmament 1175 476. Memorandum of Conversation1 London, May 9, 1977 PARTICIPANTS UK—Foreign Secretary Owen Deputy Under Secretary Hibbert Mr. Ferguson, Principal Private Secretary to the Foreign Secretary France—Foreign Minister DeGuiringaud Political Director DeLaboulaye Mr. Andreani, Director for European Affairs, Foreign Ministry FRG—Foreign Minister Genscher State Secretary Van Well Mr. Terfloth, Foreign Ministry Press Spokesman Mr. Weber, Foreign Ministry Interpreter US—Secretary of State Vance Assistant to the President Brzezinski Assistant Secretary Hartman Mr. Hunter, NSC Staff Mr. Dobbins (Notetaker) [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Special Session on Disarmament.] The UN Special Session on Disarmament Gencher felt that they should take very seriously and begin to prepare as soon as possible for the UN Special Session of Disarmament. There were elements of this meeting which the West could turn to its advantage. For instance, the West might wish to call attention to the fact that its ability to contribute to Third World economic development was limited by the arms burden imposed on it by the East. Owen suggested that the preparations for CSCE, which went forward concurrently in NATO, EEC, and the Council of Europe, offered a model for preparation for the UN session. Gencher noted that there were a larger number of countries involved in the special session than in the CSCE. One must seek to avoid a polarized UNCTAD type situation. This was why this was an urgent question. Once opinion on these issues became formulated, it would be very difficult to exert any influence. Close cooperation with the U.S. was essential, which was why he raised the matter with the four power forum. 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 10, NODIS Memcons, 1977. Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place at 10 Downing Street. The memorandum is scheduled to be printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.
