604  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
“internationalist” and centralist. This tendency was enormously rein­
forced during the period of Stalin’s ascendancy. He rose to undisputed 
mastery of the Soviet party at a time when other Communist parties 
were weak and had little prospects of attaining power. His organiza­
tional controls, his unquestioned ideological authority made him as 
much the absolute dictator over them as he was in the USSR itself. Only 
the Chinese Communists, isolated in the interior reaches of China, 
established organizational and even some degree of ideological auton­
omy. In the postwar period, after the Communist parties gained power 
in Eastern Europe and China, Stalin had become a towering historic 
figure in the Marxist-­Leninist hierarchy. Even where Moscow had other 
and more direct means of control over Satellite parties, its authority 
rested to a considerable degree on the magic of Stalin’s name and myth. 
Only the Yugoslavs challenged his authority and survived the assault 
of the whole Communist world, though they had to pay the price of 
exclusion. The Chinese, although able to go their own way, neverthe­
less accepted the ideological authority of Stalin.
197. Stalin’s death left a legacy in Eastern Europe of inefficient 
maladjusted economies and of hatred for Soviet domination; Moscow’s 
ideological and organizational control was crippled. The confusions 
resulting from divisions within the Soviet leadership, Moscow’s mod­
ification of Stalin’s oppressive controls and policies, the attempts to 
redefine ideological positions under new conditions, and the partial 
repudiation of Stalin himself contributed to factionalism in the Eastern 
European parties and facilitated the overt expression of latent popu­
lar hostility to Soviet domination. Communist China, which initially 
at least appeared to view with sympathy the desire of some Satellite 
regimes for greater local autonomy, emerged as a second ideological 
center within the Bloc. Since the events of 1956 in Poland and Hungary, 
the Communist leaders of all Bloc states, including especially the 
Chinese, have presumably recognized that the interests of all in the 
struggle against the non-Communist world depend upon preserving 
unity on essential issues. In Communist terms a necessary means of 
enforcing such unity is conformity to ideological programs. This was 
the point of the 12-­party pronouncement of November 1957 and subse­
quent insistence on ideological conformity.
198. On the surface, unity has been restored and the leading posi­
tion of the USSR has been re-­emphasized. But the unity of ideological 
program was achieved by collective discussion in which at least some of 
the parties evidently played an independent role, however heavy may 
have been the weight of Soviet views in the final outcome. We believe 
that the front of unity—­both ideologically and in terms of state policy 
on the international stage—­will be effectively preserved for some time. 
But over a longer period the divergence of state interests and the need
