318  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
retains significant effectiveness should an attacker re-­target to kill pop-
ulation per se (see Table S–3).
Table S–3
IMMEDIATE SURVIVORS OF A MAJOR NUCLEAR EXCHANGE  
IN THE MID-1980S (% OF TOTAL POPULATION)
Population Status
US
USSR
In place and targeted
25–40%
50–65%
In place and not targeted
35–65
60–65%
Evacuated and not targeted
60–90
80–90
Evacuated and targeted
50–70
70–80
If the US launched an attack at the mid-­point of a Soviet evacu-
ation, it would cause 30 million more fatalities than an attack when 
evacuation was complete. The use of large yield weapons would also 
increase blast and residual damage and consequently increase fatali-
ties. Detonating weapons on or near the ground could result in an addi-
tional 15 million fatalities in the Soviet Union due to early fallout.
There is uncertainty about the feasibility of sustaining popula-
tion evacuation for a long time (more than about a month), either in 
a continuing crisis with no nuclear attacks or one with nuclear attacks 
repeated every few days. Soviet evacuation planning aims to keep 
industry in operation, but some feel the discomfort and inconvenience 
of temporary housing and the transportation problems engendered in 
moving workers to and from their factories would lead to great inef-
ficiencies, low national morale, and eventual economic stagnation. 
Adopting a repeated attack policy would require alterations in current 
US employment plans.
D. What important aspects of civil defense and attack strategies remain 
unexamined?
The relationship between survival and recovery poses unexplored 
questions. Some argue that initial survivability is not a good measure of 
longer-­term recovery and reconstitution, and that, for example, a large 
initial surviving population would quickly deplete strategic stockpiles 
and may so overburden the severely damaged medical and industrial 
resources of a nation’s postwar economy that recovery could be hin-
dered rather than helped. Others contend that manpower is the most 
basic of a nation’s recovery resources and military strength, and that 
initial differences in leadership and population survivability will prob-
ably be translated into similar differences in reconstitution.
Another question concerns the relationship between initial survival 
and longer-­term survival. Some contend that longer-­term problems 
and “neglected” effects will be so severe that many initial survivors will
