184
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
65.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
Kabul, September 18, 1979, 1149Z
6978. Subject: Some Reflections on the Afghanistan Political Crisis.
1. (C—Entire text).
2. I think it must be quite evident to the Dept and addressee posts
that we are witnessing a very significant political crisis in Afghanistan.
In this regard, I would like to highlight some aspects and share some
personal thoughts:
—The crisis is not over. At this point in time the loyalty of the
DRA military units in such areas as Ghanzi, Kandahar and Kunduz is
not clear, and there are widespread reports (and some evidence) that
the three deposed military figures in the Cabinet (Watanjar, Gulabzoi,
and Mazdooryar) have managed to escape the city and are at large. It
is quite possible that civil war among major DRA military units could
ensue, led by pro-Taraki or otherwise anti-Amin elements. Here in
Kabul, we are very much aware that the political situation remains
tense. Major streets adjacent to important ministries remain blocked
off to regular traffic, and here at the Chancery, manned Soviet-built
tanks are stationed astride the three streets bordering the Embassy
property. We can’t enter or exit by the front gate because the street is
closed, so we are using our emergency back gate, but do so under the
barrel of a large T–62 tank. It is all a bit unnerving, but something
certainly to write home to mother about.
—For 18 months now we have watched this Marxist party (PDPA)
devour itself. An Afghan official last night quietly described the leader-
ship to an Embassy officer as a “bunch of scorpions biting each other
to death.” By way of illustration, there have been 25 Cabinet changes
since the original list was promulgated in April 1978. The number of
Deputy Minister changes has been even more: 34. Purge after purge
has occurred, and one can’t help wonder how the regime manages to
survive. Part of the answer is, of course, brutal suppression of perceived
opposition. The number of political prisoners killed may have reached
6,000, and probably more than four times that number have been in
and out of political jails.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790426–0729.
Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Sent for information to Islamabad, Moscow, New Delhi,
and Tehran.
