international agreements regarding arms and ammunition and implements of war, and that it is desirable that the international aspect of the manufacture of such arms, ammunition and implements of war should receive early consideration by the different Governments.” The protocol of signature provided that for the states enumerated in the preamble of the convention the period allowed for signature of the convention, the Declaration Regarding the Territory of Ifni, and the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, should be any date prior to Sept. 30, 1926. 64 A copy of the authentic final text of the convention, together with the annexes, has been here substituted for the copy enclosed with despatch No. 471. This text is printed in League of Nations, Proceedings of the Conference for the Supervision of the International Trade in Arms, transmitted to the Department with despatch No. 544, Sept. 18, 1925, by the Chargé in Switzerland (file No. 500.A14/403). 65 In English and French: French text not printed. Consented to by the Senate, June 6, 1935, with the reservation that the convention should not come into effect for the United States until it had come into effect for Belgium, the British Empire, Czechoslovakia, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Sweden, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (Congressional Record, vol. 79, pt. 8, 74th Cong., 1st sess., pp. 8790–8796). 66 Bracketed expression appears in the original. However, as not all of the delegates participating in the conference were empowered to sign the convention, and as the protocol of signature left to the states the right of appointing the plenipotentiaries they wished to have sign the convention, the Secretariat of the League of Nations adopted the expedient of leaving blank the space for the names of the plenipotentiaries until Sept. 30, 1926, the date when the period reserved for signature terminated (undated note verbale from the League of Nations Bureau, French Foreign Office, enclosed in despatch No. 5584 from the Embassy in France, Oct. 6, 1925, file No. 500.A14/409). 67 All reservations, except that of Great Britain, are in French only. The translations here used appear as footnotes in Proceedings of the Conference. 1 The imports included in this table shall be the general imports of arms and ammunition and of implements of war set out in the attached schedule, arriving from abroad, i. e., the total of the goods imported for home consumption, into warehouse, free zones, free ports and all other places excluded from the Customs territory, also temporary imports, improvement trade, etc., but excluding goods for transit or transhipment. When temporary warehousing pending transit or transhipment is permitted, arms and ammunition and implements of war arriving under these conditions shall not be considered as imports, provided that the consignments are accompanied by a licence or similar document mentioned in Article 4 of the present Convention showing some other country as destination.
