Chemical and Biological Weapons
199
cation of non-production of chemical weapons was possible. He said
the details of the visit are being worked out by the German federation
of chemical industry and that an announcement would be made at the
coming UNGA session. The visit will be modeled on a 1977 Pugwash
visit to a German chemical plant and will probably take place in the
spring or summer of 1979. Von Arz promised to stay in close contact
with the US Embassy in Bonn as plans are developed.
D. US reps outlined suggestion for quadrilateral consultations
later in the year on stockpile declarations and estimates with participa-
tion of political, military, and intelligence reps. Burns stated that it
would be best to discuss this matter among the four before raising it in
NATO. (Germans had suggested at an earlier meeting that stockpile es-
timates be discussed in NATO.) There was no immediate German com-
ment on the US suggestion, but during the luncheon that followed,
German reps eagerly sought further details on proposed consultations.
3. As in previous quadrilateral sessions, French sent Embassy rep-
resentative but did not participate actively. French representative said,
however, that in Paris interest in the CW negotiations is increasing. He
indicated informally that the French might send a technical expert to
the next session.
[Omitted here is the list of participants.]
90.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
Geneva, September 15, 1978, 0849Z
13849. Subject: US–USSR Chemical Weapons Negotiations. Prepa-
rations for Round Nine.
CW Message No. 18
We recommend that preparations for round nine focus on the
items listed below:
1. How should the U.S. react to the Soviet proposals regarding
non-transfer and declaration of previous transfers?
2. How should the U.S. react to the Soviet proposals regarding
non-circumvention?
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780375–0858.
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Moscow.
