reopening some of the questions which were debated by the Commission in Washington last May. With the exception of Article 31, which it is desired shall be amended in the manner suggested, you are authorized to approve of the convention on commercial aviation either in its present form or with any or all of the suggested changes specified above, but in the event that any further alterations are proposed you should request time to communicate with your Government for instructions before the question is put to a vote. It is needless to remind you of the importance to this country of operating under a satisfactory international convention regarding Commercial Aviation; and of the necessity for taking especial care that this country is not compelled under any international convention to sanction procedure and practices which might jeopardize the safety of the Panama Canal. Topic 2. Regulation of international automotive traffic. Automotive traffic in the United States is subject to regulation by the States and not by the Federal Government. The American delegation should give full consideration to this fact before taking or participating in any action on this subject. Any efforts to secure uniformity of regulation of international automotive traffic or the elimination of undesirable difficulties or formalities in connection there-with should nevertheless be considered as a laudable endeavor and receive the cordial support of the American delegation. However, such support must necessarily be limited to that consistent with the restrictions imposed upon participation in any final action taken by the Conference. The United States Government would view with pleasure, as representing the views of the Conference with regard to this subject, the adoption of the pertinent portions of the report of the Highway Transport Committee of the American Section of the International Chamber of Commerce, as revised for use at the meeting of the International Chamber of Commerce in Stockholm in June 1927 and enclosed as Appendix No. 15 to these
