1956 1025 These various possibilities have probably occurred to you in CA, and are probably being taken account of in planning our strategy in the talks, insofar as they are worth taking account of at all. This might be a good place to say again that in writing you these letters I am not attempting to force the pace of things, request answers to questions, or urge any particular direction of policy with regard to the talks. Since we have been relying on the services of one of the ConGen officers for the note-­taking spot, we have been working up the long tele­ grams on the basis of my shorthand notes, thoroughly cross-­checked with the long-­hand notes and Bob Ekvall’s notes of what Wang really said in Chinese, as well as approved by the Ambassador. In dictating off the telegrams to the secretary I have tried to comply with a recent instruction from the Department calling attention to excess verbiage in our previous traffic. I hope I have not been condensing to the detriment of intelligibility. If so, don’t hesitate to tell me. Regards to Walter and all in CA. Sincerely, David L. Osborn Enclosure Draft Comments by Osborn2 COMMENTS ON RENUNCIATION FORCE SITUATION In absence new move from me on renunciation next meeting antic­ ipate Wang will heighten threat resort public, justifying step along lines para. 15 long telegram (i.e., saying international opinion already deploring worthlessness these talks, and asserting it CHICOM right and duty inform public who is responsible for lack progress). Wang’s original hope may have been elicit my objections his May 21 draft, then submit another new draft allegedly meeting my objections, with plan of going to public following my rejection his “second successive effort reach agreement”. Plausibility this supposition supported by extensive bargaining room in his May 11 draft and by his determined efforts elicit my specific comments or suggested amendments. Accordingly it possible Wang may continue recent tactics one or two more meetings. However as and if Wang convinced I intend avoid specific comment text his draft, Peiping may feel self forced go to pub­ lic on basis that draft. 2 Confidential.
