National Security PolicyвҖғ 1203
underway. Secretary Gates believed inquiries would still be directed 
to the Pentagon. Captain Aurand pointed out that the DEFCONвҖ“3 
called last spring was not a drill. The President said that the DEFCON 
was really a drill. Captain Aurand said it was not called a drill. Mr. 
Gray pointed out that the chart proposed by the Special Committee 
was designed for the actual situation, not for a drill. The President 
believed there should be some way of calling an alert without frightВӯ
ening everyone.
General Lemnitzer thought that DEFCONs should be called regВӯ
ularly. The appropriate commanders should be informed that these 
DEFCONs are drills and if the public becomes aware of the DEFCONs, 
it should be announced publicly that drills are underway. The President 
agreed that if drills were called frequently, the public would become 
accustomed to them. Governor Hoegh pointed out that DEFCONsвҖ“Вӯ1 
and 2 probably indicated that strategic warning had been received. He 
felt a great deal of weight should be given to warning under conditions 
of nuclear war. When DEFCONвҖ“1 was called, the people should be 
warned so that they can help prepare themselves for attack. Secretary 
Gates said that under DEFCONвҖ“1 conditions, all planes would take to 
the air and the President would make a public announcement. Mr. Gray 
pointed out that the chart proposed by the Special Committee did not 
require Presidential participation. The President said the chart did not 
require Presidential participation but, nevertheless, he said such particВӯ
ipation would be desirable.
Mr. Gray then called on Governor Hoegh to indicate the signifiВӯ
cant non-Вӯmilitary actions which would be taken by OCDM in DEFCON 
situations. Governor Hoegh said that DEFCONsвҖ“Вӯ5, вҖ“Вӯ4 and вҖ“Вӯ3 primarВӯ
ily required only staff action. Under DEFCONвҖ“2 OCDM would verify 
conditions with its Regional Directors, notify the heads of agencies, 
advise on public information releases, notify the governors, brief the 
staff, update recommendations regarding the relocation site, recall key 
officials from leave, inform and notify the White House of the OCDM 
readiness status. Under DEFCONвҖ“l OCDM would issue a public 
announcement urging that readiness measures be taken, would recall 
all officials from leave, would order 50 percent of the pre-Вӯdesignated 
emergency personnel to occupy the relocation site, would call up 
the Executive Reserve, would assure the immediate availability of 
Presidential Action Documents, and would initiate twenty-Вӯfour hour 
operations at the relocation site.
The President said that there ought to be among the PresidentвҖҷs 
Action Documents a draft of the PresidentвҖҷs broadcast for use in 
DEFCONвҖ“1. When conditions became this serious, the President had 
a duty to inform the public right away. He felt a draft Presidential
