1120  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
The President referred to his recent discussion with Prime Minister 
Diefenbaker of Canada regarding that country’s joining the OAS.10 
Diefenbaker is somewhat cooler to the idea than the Canadian Foreign 
Minister but said that Canada should have an observer at the OAS now. 
Prime Minister Beltran confirmed that the Canadian Foreign Minister 
had told him recently in Lima that he favored Canada’s joining the 
OAS.11 The Prime Minister said that “time is not on our side”. “We must 
move faster in the OAS”, he added.
The President agreed saying that each country’s President should 
insist that the OAS take strong, imaginative and energetic action. It 
should be a “bastion of freedom”.
The Prime Minister, averting to the need to help the lower classes, 
questioned the Brazilian investment in its new capital. The President 
said it was one of the great experiments of the time—­it could be a 
fine thing or a dismal failure. The Prime Minister had doubts but the 
President said that if the “carrot” attracted enough people to the rich 
inner land of Brazil, then Brasilia would succeed.
The Prime Minister reiterated his belief that the lower classes have 
to be assisted—­fast. Mr. Achilles said that the lower classes need to 
have a stake in private property. The President said that man must be 
given an opportunity for both spiritual and material development. The 
Prime Minister said that his newspapers preached that line constantly. 
The President declared that we are all together and that no country 
could remain an island of freedom surrounded by tyranny. He referred 
to the Christian attitude which motivates the Americas and the Prime 
Minister said that Cuba was giving the lie to freedom. He finished by 
saying that “Time is of the essence”. The President urged him to state 
his views with the same frankness to the officials in the Department 
with whom he spoke, mentioning Mr. Dillon specifically because of his 
responsibilities in the economic field.
At the conclusion of the discussion the photographers came into 
the President’s office.
10 Prime Minister John G. Diefenbaker of Canada made an official visit to Washington, 
June 3–4; for documentation on U.S. relations with Canada, see volume VI.
11 In despatch 716 from Lima, June 2, the Embassy informed the Department that 
Howard Charles Green, Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs, visited Lima, 
May 27–29. (723.00(W)/6–260)
