1979  713
brought along. Moreover, since this would be in effect a reaffirmation of 
an existing Administration position, it should help us counter cries for 
equivalent increases in domestic programs.
For these reasons we recommend that you base your statement4 on 
such a reaffirmation and that you make clear that your determination 
applies to both present and future budgets (with, inevitably, less cer-
tainty—­up or down—­in future than at present). You need and should 
go no further than that now. The Secretary of Defense will amplify our 
defense program plans in a separate letter.5
One further point: All of us believe that the best form for your com-
munication is a letter from you to the leadership of Congress, to precede 
the budget resolution debate. Certainly this, accompanied by a public 
statement, will give the greatest impact and may be helpful should 
circumstances later require you to point out in subsequent weeks and 
months that you have made a firm commitment—­indeed one far firmer 
than any the Congress as a whole has made to date. Whether or not 
Congress accepts your proposals, it is important for SALT II that every-
one understand your own position on the issue.
Because your schedule is so crowded, and because the Second 
Budget Resolution will reach the Senate floor no later than Wednes-
day,6 we believe you should send the attached letter to the President of 
the Senate and Speaker of the House on Tuesday.7 But as soon as pos-
sible thereafter, which we understand to be Thursday, we urge that you 
meet with the appropriate Congressional leadership to get their views 
and reemphasize yours.8
4 For Carter’s September 11 message to Congress on the FY 1980 and FY 1981 
defense budgets, see Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book II, pp. 1628–1630.
5 Not found.
6 September 12.
7 September 11. Attached but not printed is an unsigned and undated draft letter to 
be sent to Mondale (as President of the Senate) and to O’Neill.
8 Carter discussed SALT II and the defense budget with select Senators on Thursday, 
September 13, in the Cabinet Room at the White House from 7:47 a.m. until 8:40 a.m. He 
also met privately with Nunn in the Oval Office from 5:03 p.m. until 6:20 p.m. (Carter 
Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No memorandum of conversa-
tion of either meeting was found. According to a report in the New York Times, “Carter 
told the senators he would ask for a 3 percent increase in defense spending in fiscal 1981.” 
(Charles Mohr, “Carter Expected to Refuse Senators on Arms Request,” New York Times, 
September 15, 1979, p. 3)
