234 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX How does this kind of approach strike you?6 FAVORABLY UNFAVORABLY As to more immediate tactics: I do not recommend that you answer Walter Roberts’ letter at all. He has avoided direct communication with me for nearly six months. Gronouski has likewise avoided contact and has been saying scurrilous things about you in Polish ethnic circles. I suggest I send a brief note (Tab C)7 to Roberts acknowledging his letter to you and proposing a meeting to review the problems caused by the failure of the BIB to implement the decisions on expansion of Muslim broadcasting we took eight months ago. I would not expect to accomplish much by such a meeting—Roberts may even refuse to come. But it would at least give us the opportunity to keep these people under pressure. (U) Keep in mind the fact that anything we do—and in particular anything I do—in respect to the BIB is bound to result in further attacks in the press and through congressional staffs and further allegations [1 line not declassified]. I am not willing to enter into a new phase of this without speaking out to defend myself. (U) In the medium to longer range we are not without allies. The commotion the BIB Staff generated against Leo Cherne, on balance, was counterproductive for it. At the moment morale in the radios and among all of us who would like to see the radios freed to maximize their potential is sagging. But if the Senate fails to8 confirm Gronouski’s reappointment (likely I suspect) the BIB Staff’s current resurgence of arrogance will be of brief duration. Meanwhile the Freedom House study of the radios will be progressing and the Reagan campaign is getting interested in them and in the BIB. Even if there is not a great deal we can accomplish now, radio jeszcze nie zginielo. (U)9 I have expended as much emotion on these problems as I intend to for the foreseeable future. If you wish to turn the problem over to someone else for independent assessment and action planning, I will not be in the least offended. In any event I will welcome advice from other concerned staff members on what might be done. (U) 6 Brzezinski did not check either option, but wrote in the margin: “I don’t get this?!” 7 Not attached. 8 Brzezinski underlined “fails to” and wrote in the margin: “what is the evidence?” 9 English translation of Polish: “Radio is not dead yet.”
