National Security Policy  999
controls and inspection in the USSR persists, and will almost certainly 
exclude anything more than limited agreements.
8. Even if Soviet policy seeks stabilization in Europe and a reduc­
tion of tensions in relations with the Western Powers, it will prob­
ably be increasingly active in the underdeveloped countries of Asia, 
Africa, and Latin America. The Soviets see in the political ferment in 
these areas growing opportunities for eliminating Western influence, 
and ultimately the likelihood of a revolutionary turn which will bring 
Communist controlled forces to power. The policy of appealing to gov­
ernments in such areas through trade and aid and other conventional 
forms of diplomatic influence will probably continue to provide the 
general framework for Soviet actions. From time to time, however, the 
Soviets will probably have to decide whether the prospective gains of 
a local Communist attempt to seize power in one or another country 
would justify compromising this policy and undertaking the risks and 
difficulties of supporting revolutionary action. During the period of 
this estimate there are likely to be cases in which the Soviets will be 
more disposed than they have recently been to support such militant 
action by local Communist parties, although they would probably be 
cautious about involving the Bloc in military support to such action.
INTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AND THEIR EFFECT ON THE 
SOVIET POWER POSITION
9. The challenge which the USSR will pose for the West over the 
next five years will rest upon a continuing growth in the bases of Soviet 
power—military, economic, and scientific. Advances in these aspects 
of national power can be expected in a great state which has reached 
a stage of development in which it can for the first time realize its full 
potentialities. But this process is accelerated in the USSR by the pres­
ence of a political leadership which is single-­mindedly committed to 
the aim of aggrandizing the power of the Communist system. It is 
always possible that the upward trend in the growth of Soviet power 
internally could be arrested by the appearance of political instabilities, 
either within the USSR or in its relations with other Communist states, 
but at present we see no basis for estimating that this is likely to be the 
case.
Military Developments
10. The single most important development affecting the structure 
of Soviet military power during the period of this estimate will be the 
buildup of an ICBM force. Long-­range missiles will enable the USSR to 
overcome its inferiority to the US in nuclear strategic attack capabilities, 
as it was unable to do with bomber aircraft. Because of the uncertainties, 
risks, and high economic cost involved in acquiring ICBM capabilities 
which would permit them to plan attacks on Western retaliatory forces
