1012
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
tablished a worldwide reputation for excellence, is to be expanded. The
State Department lacks the high level focus with technical competence to
permit adequate incorporation of health or basic needs concerns in gen-
eral into the formulation of foreign policy. More important, a change in
philosophy is needed so that concern for basic human needs is accepted
as a legitimate aspect of foreign policy. This I believe can only be over-
come by clear direction from you. They are moving now to create such
a competent high level focus. A similar problem exists in Treasury. The
Department needs to heighten its own awareness of International
Health in internal decision making. Treasury should acquaint the IDLIs
with evolving U.S. policies on International Health, and encourage
them to give greater priority to an appropriate role for projects
touching on health among their overall development loan programs. In
DOD, legislative constraints and old but perpetuated administrative
decisions continue to restrict adequate utilization of our single greatest
untapped resource in this field. A clear instruction from you to all of the
agencies to seek ways to make their resources more readily and effec-
tively available is important.
I believe that the steps outlined above, if you approve, would over-
come the problems of fragmentation and the present lack of clearcut
long range goals providing the framework for an effective Presidential
initiative in this area.
DECISION:6
B. Presidential Initiatives
In addition to the significant impact an improved and streamlined
planning and coordinating mechanism would have on world health, I
believe, certain specific new initiatives should be undertaken which
could be identified as reflecting your personal involvement.
(a) World Blindness—More than 30 million people in the world are
blind, most of them from preventable causes. A major administration
effort to reduce blindness worldwide would have dramatic appeal,
could be uniquely and distinctively identified with you from other
present International Health emphases, would be geared to the poorest
people in the world as well as being relevant to the industrialized na-
tions including the U.S., and would not be vulnerable to the criticism
that we were saving lives that would only amount to more mouths to
feed. It would of necessity result in a program with special emphasis on
the Middle East. It would overlap and complement, (without com-
peting with) the World Health Organization’s highly visible Tropical
Disease Research Program. I also believe it would generate strong in-
6 The President did not indicate his decision to approve or disapprove any of the
recommendations in this memorandum.
