382 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II through commercial channels. The definition of “security assistance” in section 502B includes licenses for the export of commercially-sold Munitions List items, and it may be argued, as DOD does, that failure to submit a human rights report would preclude the issuance of such licenses. The better view is that inasmuch as commercial exports are not, and have not been, “proposed” as part of the annual congressional presentation materials, Congress should not be presumed to have intended such an anomalous result in the absence of clear legislative history to the contrary. Thus for example, countries receiving only commercial exports are not included in the Congressional Presentation Document. It is our considered view that section 502B does not prevent the licensing of commercial exports to a country for which no human rights report has been submitted.) ARA and EB believe a report on Brazil should not be submitted to Congress absent a clear legal requirement or a specific request from the Congress. These bureaus believe that, because the Brazilians have gone to such lengths to remove the reasons for our submitting one (by rejecting security assistance), a voluntary submission would be interpreted as a deliberate and gratuitous offense which would do lasting harm to our bilateral relations. OPIC’s primary concern is to avoid a Congressional objection which might prejudice its efforts to secure an acceptable human rights provision, tailored specifically for OPIC, in the pending authorization bill. OPIC believes that the reporting requirement of section 116(d)(1), referring as it does to “countries” receiving assistance under Part I of the FAA, can be read as requiring a report solely because of the availability of OPIC programs, without necessarily concluding whether, at present, section 116(a) applies to OPIC absent foreign government participation. OPIC, therefore, is neutral as to the report-filing options set forth below, as OPIC understands that each would be pursued in such a way as to avoid prejudicing issues to be resolved in the House-Senate conference on the OPIC bill. Recommendation That you decide whether— (1) The Department should include human rights reports on the five “OPIC only” countries, explaining to Brazil in advance that we will do so because of OPIC insured and guaranteed projects in that country;17 or 17 H favors submission of reports, and has no position as to how this is handled with the Brazilians. [Footnote in the original. There is no indication as to whether Christopher approved or disapproved this recommendation.]
