National Security Policy 845 process. He felt the mobilization pattern had been set in US Policy in the Event of War (NSC 5904/1) and in the Strategic Stockpiling question considered by the Cabinet. It was difficult to define the terms, but sur­ vival and recovery were recognized as essential objectives. Language which did not include both these terms could carry the implication that no measures for recovery would be included in the mobilization base. He felt the NSC would not wish to be put in the position of hamstring­ ing recovery. Mr. Staats said the Bureau of the Budget was concerned lest the language proposed by State, OCDM, and Commerce in the draft para­ graph indicate to some that large recovery stockpiles would be estab­ lished. If the mobilization base paragraph was being formulated for the first time Budget would not feel so strongly, but in contrast to existing policy the State-O­CDM-­Commerce proposal placed undue emphasis on recovery. Mobilization planning was covered by existing law and policy. Stockpiling had been considered by the Cabinet, which had directed a further study. He would prefer to postpone further consid­ eration of this paragraph until the stockpiling study was completed, at which time the Council would be in a better position to judge the impli­ cations of the proposed policy language. The State-­OCDM-­Commerce proposal prejudged the stockpiling study and might also require a change in the law, since it went beyond the language of the OCDM statute. Mr. Patterson felt it would be undesirable to postpone a pol­ icy decision on mobilization pending the outcome of a study of one phase of stockpiling, which would require nine months or a year. Such a postponement would put the brakes on progress and planning. He wondered what harm there would be in adopting a mobilization para­ graph which would merely provide the opportunity for mobilization programs to be considered on their merits in the normal process of government. Secretary Herter asked whether assumptions for the study called for by NSC Action 2110–­c (the wartime situation which would probably exist following a nuclear exchange between the US and the USSR) had been worked out. Mr. Patterson answered in the affirmative. Secretary Herter said he seemed to recall that Dr. Kistiakowsky thought there were no agreed assumptions as to the extent of nuclear damage. Mr. Gray believed the Net Evaluation study provided as satisfac­ tory a crystal ball on damage as anyone was likely to find. He suggested amendment or the draft paragraph by striking the words “maintenance in a high state of readiness.” Mr. Scribner said measures essential to survival as a nation ought to be kept in a high state of readiness. No one objected to recovery; the question was whether scarce resources could best be used for defense
