276
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
103.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, December 17, 1979, 10:30 a.m.–12:30 p.m.
SUBJECT
The President’s Meeting with Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher
PARTICIPANTS
The President
The Vice President
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Ambassador Kingman Brewster
Ambassador at Large Henry Owen
George Vest, Assistant Secretary of State
Robert D. Blackwill, NSC Staff Member
Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Margaret Thatcher
Lord Carrington, UK Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs
Sir Nicholas Henderson, Ambassador to the U.S.
Sir Robert Armstrong, Secretary to the Cabinet
Sir Michael Palliser, Permanent Under Secretary of State, Foreign and
Commonwealth Office
Sir Frank Cooper, Ministry of Defense
Michael Alexander, Private Secretary to the PM
George Walden, Principal Secretary to the Secretary of State
The President began by saying how delighted he was to have Prime
Minister Thatcher in the United States. It was a thrill to have her visit
him in the White House. After noting that he and the Prime Minister
would have a few moments at the end of the general meeting to discuss
sensitive matters, the President expressed the deep gratitude of the
American people for the help that Mrs. Thatcher and her people had
given us during the Iranian crisis. Securing the release of the hostages
was the all-consuming concern of the American people. The President
noted that the U.S. had gained the almost unanimous support of the
world community in seeking to obtain the release of the hostages, but
the UK had especially been in the forefront of those who had been
assisting us. That UK role in the crisis; the President said, filled him
with admiration. (S)
[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]
The Prime Minister said that she assumed it would be appropriate
to talk first about Iran so that the UK could know our minds in order
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,
Box 31, Subject File, Iran 12/8/79–12/18/79. Secret. The meeting took place in the Cabinet
Room at the White House.
