900 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV efforts are expanding will set loose divisive US domestic debate which could seriously fray our alliances.19 This will be an uphill fight. Under pressure of economic difficulties, but in large measure because of political disarray, our European Allies are falling short of even 3% real defense growth. Japan is inching forward only under US pressure.20 Both they, and even more those LDCs of great strategic importance to us (like Turkey, Pakistan, Thailand, Korea), are weakened by the energy squeeze. Our developed Allies also fail to perceive the threat of growing Soviet capabilities as we do, or quail at confronting it.21 An all-­out effort to counter these perceptions and galvanize Allied efforts must become a central purpose of the next presidential term. As the leader of the Free World coalition, we must set clear goals and press unremittingly for their achievement, accepting the inevitable Allied recriminations but keeping them from becoming seriously counterproductive. Perhaps the best way to get our NATO Allies to accept 3% real growth for starters is to press them for 5%.22 We must also bring home to them the need for a genuine “division of labor” by actually shifting more US forces now committed to NATO to meet PG/IO commitments.23 As to Japan, no goal short of 1.5% to 2% of GNP for defense in the 80s offers much prospect of really meeting urgent common needs.24 We have asked Japan for so little for so long that modest incrementalism is all it offers. This will not suffice for the 80s (as was laid out in Issue #4) unless the US is prepared to spend a great deal more.25 Since greater effort by our Allies will be so hard to come by, indirect as well as direct contributions must be sought (the latter are often more palatable). For example, maximum host nation support of all kinds will significantly reduce US defense costs for which we must otherwise program, while involving (in the case of wartime rather than peacetime HNS) only contingent Allied allocation of wartime resources—­largely 19 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this sentence and wrote beside it: “yes.” 20 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this sentence and the portion of the previous sentence that begins with “political disarray” and ends with “defense growth.” 21 Brzezinski drew two vertical lines in the left margin next to this sentence. 22 Brzezinski drew two vertical lines in the left margin next to this sentence. 23 Brzezinski drew two diagonal lines at the end of this paragraph. 24 Brzezinski drew a vertical line and an arrow pointing to it in the right margin next to this sentence. 25 Brzezinski underlined “not” and drew a checkmark in the right margin next to this sentence.
