270  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
attitude of repugnance would tend to diminish and to be offset by con­
fidence in US deterrent power.
22. The adverse reaction to US use of nuclear weapons would be 
particularly strong throughout most of Asia. Here such use would tend 
to be looked upon as callous white indifference to the lives of Asians. 
Indeed the inflicting of large-­scale casualties on Asian civilians might 
have enduringly adverse consequences for the anti-Communist posi­
tion in Asia. The reaction in Japan would be especially adverse, in view 
of deep Japanese emotional antagonism to the use of nuclear weap­
ons, and Japan would probably not allow US use of bases on its terri­
tory. The adverse reaction might be mitigated to a limited extent if the 
Communists in turn employed nuclear weapons, but the US would still 
incur the odium of having used them first.
III. THE CASE OF NORTH KOREAN INVASION OF SOUTH KOREA
23. Assumptions. It is assumed for the purpose of this estimate 
that at a time when the situation in South Korea is confused following 
President Rhee’s incapacitation, and rival groups are seeking power, 
the North Koreans charge South Korean border violations, step up 
subversive activities in South Korea, and then invade. Chinese 
Communist assistance to North Korea is covert, including troops 
disguised as North Koreans. It is also assumed that most US forces 
have been withdrawn prior to the attack. However, the US intervenes 
initially largely with air power, and with subsequent commitment 
of ground forces as necessary. The US uses nuclear weapons against 
enemy military targets in Korea and China, the destruction of which 
is considered requisite to successful prosecution of the action. The 
US seeks UN backing, or, failing this, the support of the other fif­
teen members of the UN Command, but does not await such support 
before intervening.
A. The Sino-Soviet Military Reaction
24. The initial Communist attack on the ROK would probably 
only have been undertaken in anticipation that victory could be gained 
despite US counteraction, or that the US would be deterred from effec­
tive counteraction by the chaotic situation within the ROK, allied 
hesitancies, and fear of Sino-Soviet countermoves. Nevertheless, the 
Sino-Soviet leaders, recognizing that the US might use nuclear weap­
ons in Korea, would probably be prepared to counter this development 
by similar local use of nuclear weapons.
25. If the initial US reaction were quick, effective, and limited to 
Korea, the Bloc might attempt to achieve a cease-­fire, cut its losses, and 
redress its loss of face, in the belief that the fruits of victory were not 
worth the risks of expanded war. In this case it would attempt to exploit
