482
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
known, he was unable to accomplish anything. “Your situation is the
opposite, Mr. Jordan, you are never seen publicly, but everyone knows
that you guide the President in every decision.”
I quickly felt at ease with him. I told him that I was honored
to be able to meet with him and that I recognized the risk that he
was taking.
He said, “if this meeting is known to the Communists in Iran, I
will lose my job at least and possibly my head.”
I told him that while great difficulties remained between our two
countries, that I thought that it was important that we look to the
future to determine how and when the U.S. and Iran could begin to
build a new relationship based on the “new realities” of Iran and a
better understanding of the past.
I told him that it would be terribly helpful for me and President
Carter to understand better the origins of the revolution and the present
situation. That while we had the desire to learn and to understand, we
lacked a clear and direct presentation of their case and their view of
U.S.-Iranian relations in a historical context.
This approach hit a responsive chord.
Mr. S. said, “Mr. Jordan, for the past three months and the past
three days (his trip to Greece, Italy and France) all that I have heard
about is the American hostages. I realize that the taking of the hostages
was both a mistake for Iran and a violation of international law, but
the great frustration of my people is that no one cares to investigate
the circumstances leading to that action. I know that the hostages are
of great personal concern to you and your country, but your desire to
understand our revolution and grievances is a very encouraging sign
to me and will be conveyed by me to the Imam.”
He then, encouraged by me, launched into a 45 minute review of
the history of U.S.-Iranian relations. He divided his discourse into
three periods: 1900–1953, 1953 to 1978 and from Khomeini’s landing
in Tehran to the present.
Although certain things that he said were colorful and/or amusing,
his litany of allegations was predictable. I was impressed by both the
passion of his presentation and the sincerity with which he spoke, both
about “the revolution” and the “Imam.” His dedication to the Imam
exceeds loyalty and approaches a mystical reverence difficult for me
to comprehend. There is no question in my mind that it is real.
He was neither abusive or accusatory in his recital of Iran’s griev-
ances, but said it with a sense of sadness and regret that things between
us had gone so far and were in such a mess.
At one point in the conversation, I asked him, “How do you evalu-
ate President Carter? Do you see him in the tradition of American
Presidents anxious to intervene in the affairs of other countries?”
