322  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
agencies, and until funds for the program are forthcoming. Meanwhile, 
the OCDM is in the process of preparing an order providing guidance 
to the agencies concerned. As for the protection of Government facil­
ities housing essential functions, a guidance order to agencies is in 
preparation at OCDM—meanwhile the ICIS has circularized govern­
ment agencies alerting them to the necessity for determining the extent 
of safeguards required to protect Government buildings against clan­
destine attack by chemical, biological, and radiological means.
Insofar as the problem of excluding subversives from employment 
in vital industries is concerned, Administration efforts to obtain reme­
dial legislation has not resulted in action by the Congress.
With respect to the protection of classified U.S. defense information, 
the ICIS has continued to carry out the responsibility assigned to it by 
the NSC for surveying the implementation of the governing executive 
order issued in 1953. Its surveys reflect a general failure on the part of 
the agencies to effect downgrading and declassification of security infor­
mation. These surveys have resulted in recommendations by ICIS for 
the improvement of the program, which recommendations are awaiting 
action by State and Defense preparatory to the submission by Budget of 
recommended amendments to the governing executive order.
With respect to the protection of other strategic information, under 
current policies directed toward foreign intelligence collection activities 
in the U.S., appropriate restrictions are applied to Soviet bloc officials 
on a reciprocal basis, bloc personnel and establishments are required to 
be appropriately identified as such, and Defense and AEC periodically 
alert their contractors to the efforts of Soviet bloc officials to obtain stra­
tegic information in this country.
Our defenses against clandestine introduction of nuclear weapons 
continue to be inadequate. Indeed, we have not achieved the general 
objective of our Continental Defense policy wherein that policy directs 
that “The Soviet bloc should be confronted with internal security 
measures presenting such risks as will serve as a deterrent to covert 
attack against the United States”. While some improvement has been 
effected in the capability and operation of devices designed to detect 
the presence of radioactive material, the likelihood is remote that we 
will achieve in the near future a practical device which is capable of dis­
tinguishing fissionable material from other radioactive sources. While 
we do have less discriminating detection devices in operation at key 
points of entry, they are not being used in the numbers considered as an 
essential minimum by the Council’s Internal Security Committees. (To 
achieve that minimum program, 9 additional Mark I and 60 additional 
Mark II devices should be added to the 6 Mark I’s and the 162 Mark II’s 
now in operation). Meanwhile, the diplomatic pouch affords a chan­
nel of introduction for small, high-­yield nuclear weapons for under 
present practices, Soviet bloc pouches and other diplomatic shipments
