December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
723
your neighbors as well as on military power. We admire this special
strength and spirit of Israel. You and Egypt are fated to be neighbors.
This could be a first and major step in cementing your relations with
your neighbors based on fundamental changes. Israel could be at peace
with the most important Arab nation. This could be the basis for a
strengthened relationship.
In the context of peace, we will be more forthcoming on economic
and military issues. As cooperation grows, we can work to enhance re-
gional stability and to meet Soviet designs of intrusion. The events in
Iran and elsewhere show the effectiveness of dedicated martyrs to a
radical cause. Egyptian-Israeli relations will be a restraint on radi-
calism. We recognize the risk that Israel is taking in withdrawing from
Sinai. We know you need a secure supply of energy and oil. Egypt is
prepared to transmit this oil to us and then to you, and we’ll guarantee
the supply.
We will also try to minimize adverse Jordanian and Saudi reac-
tions. We may have some influence on Syria and Iraq as well. The
danger of losing this opportunity is very great. Once lost, it would be
almost impossible to redeem. I consider you to have been very forth-
coming. You have often been very generous. You have taken sacrifical
steps in the past to save the negotiations. Camp David was good for Is-
rael. When we are done, we will relay the results of our meeting to
Sadat,2 without any public discussion. I hope you will join us in
keeping down public discussion of these issues until we have commu-
nicated with Sadat.
I would like to explain the points on which the Cabinet has acted.
On Article 6–2, you have deleted language from Camp David on a com-
prehensive peace. You have often spoken of the comprehensive peace.
This is not crucial to the United States and it does not contradict Camp
David, but it is very important to Sadat. He has to justify his actions. It
would be a matter of generosity, with no harm to Israel, if you could
leave this in. It is important to Sadat and would be very much
appreciated.
The formulation on Article 6–5 should be acceptable to Sadat. On
the letter, the changes in the first sentence are all right. The addition at
the end of page 1 and the top of page 2 is okay. But on page 2 there is an
important issue to the United States. I am a signatory of the Camp
David Agreement. I am honor bound to carry out Camp David. On
page 2 Israel has asked for a revision on the part dealing with Gaza and
Egyptian liaison officers. This is of great concern to the United States. It
2 The President’s Daily Diary records that Carter spoke with Sadat by telephone
from 8:42 p.m. to 8:45 p.m., March 12. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials) No other
record of this conversation has been found.
