1955 93 tentative thinking and not formal proposal but I hoped incorporate it in exact form for next meeting. Wang inquired whether I differed in principle with respect to his draft agreement. I replied that as I had pointed out I differed on one point. It seemed entirely unnecessary provide for action at request of individual’s gov­ ernment. I reserved right make further comment later on draft. Wang declared we had already held six sessions on agenda item one and that his side not satisfied that so much time spent on it. From beginning he had given complete list Americans in China but American side failed reciprocate. First paragraph draft agreement sets out very clearly that nationals residing in other country wishing to return their respective countries entitled to do so. Said we should not discuss return civilians in abstract but find ways settle their return. As he had already stated he had basically accepted our arrangement and naturally was prepared to listen to our opinion on his draft agreement which was pre­ pared on basis arrangement suggested by US side. He felt there should be concrete ideas on all points rather than abstract. He could perceive only three possible alternatives regarding draft agreement, namely rejection, acceptance or amendment. Since original arrangement had been put forward by American side fourth meeting, he felt it difficult understand why I could not form explicit opinion concerning draft agreement. Wang continued he could not agree to separate announcements. It was very clear now as result joint declaration our governments that as result initiative taken by US Government we were able sit down together at Geneva. Furthermore at very beginning of talks joint announcement had been made concerning agenda. These two communiques very well received by world opinion. They were directed toward finding ways and means to solve questions facing us. Said he was puzzled that since we had agreed on common way to find settlement these problems we could not agree to joint announce­ ment. Effect of separate announcement on public opinion would be that we had failed find common method settle return of nationals. Impres­ sion would be each side had own way instead of common method which would be reverting to original situation before discussions began. It is not expressing sincerity to suggest separate announcement on this question. This is not first time our governments have made joint announcements or statements. He could not understand why today I should suddenly find I could not agree to joint statement. Said my sug­ gestion was not conducive to progress present talks. I said possibly I had not made myself clear. I was not suggesting that announcements not be issued together but referred to form they
