396 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 150. Memorandum for the Record by Henry Precht, Iran Working Group1 Washington, January 15, 1980, 3:30 p.m. SUBJECT Richard Cottom Conversation with Farhang and Ghotbzadeh I asked Cottam to explore with Farhang and Ghotbzadeh whether they thought there were still opportunities to move towards a settlement in the light of the vote on sanctions and the presidential campaign in Tehran. Farhang was very pessimistic. He told Cottam that the improved atmosphere that had been created with Waldheim’s visit was smashed by the vote on sanctions and would have to be recreated. Perhaps if an investigating team were to go to Tehran the atmosphere could begin to improve. Farhang said that the American problem was that we were rational. An additional complication was Waldheim who shared our views and was not forceful in presenting the Iranian point of view. Another difficulty was our failure to understand that a “package deal” was not possible. We would simply not be able to devise a complete agreement and present it to Khomeini for approval. Khomeini doesn’t think in terms of trade-offs or bargaining. Cottam agreed with me that we might be able to work out a package deal with the Revolutionary Council, but in doing so we would have no assurance that Khomeini would buy it as a package. It might have to be presented to him by the Council in stages. Farhang thought that nothing could be accomplished in Iran until after the elections. Bani-Sadr was the front runner and he would be prepared to seek a solution. During the period until the elections the only useful thing the US could do was to reduce the level of rhetoric and try to control the press. The ejection of the U.S. press from Iran would be helpful. Farhang said that a French and an Argentinian lawyer were working on extradition in Panama.2 The Iranians were clearly thinking of 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 31, Subject File, Iran 1/11/80–1/31/80. Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Precht and cleared in S/S–O. Copies were sent to S, D, P, NEA, Sick (NSC), [name not declassified] (CIA), and the Iran Working Group. 2 Villalon and Bourguet.
