Chapter 4, February–April 1990 619 Bartholomew: Let me sum up. We are agreed that the Moscow ALCM elements are the agreed Washington elements except for: — application of the 40% rule to future Soviet ALCM heavy bombers. — 100–115. In addition there are two issues: — range. — subceiling on ALCM heavy bombers. The US believes there is a third major question: — the Soviet proposal that any aircraft that carries a conventional ALCM above the agreed range would count as a heavy bomber in START. Akhromyev: This is correct. I want to say that the last issue you are adding is a mine that might explode the entire package on ALCMs. With your approach the 600 km range would become useless and pointless. Why insist on this number if the US Air Force can have longer range ALCMs on tactical aircraft? This puts the START treaty in question. Burt: We don’t disagree that a nuclear ALCM on an aircraft makes it a heavy bomber. But a conventional ALCM should not be regulated by this treaty. Bartholomew: Turning to SLCMs, as I see it we have one issue. Akhromeyev: We have not reached agreement on anything on SLCMs. Bartholomew: We have one major issue. The Soviet side stated it is essential to have an agreed common binding limit that is real. Akhromeyev: That is the main issue. Bartholomew: The US position is that we cannot agree to this and believe the parallel politically-­binding limits in the Moscow joint statement are real and politically binding and do the job. The Soviet side stated that its position reflected the views of the President, the Prime Minister, and others and it would be for the Soviet leaders themselves to take a new decision after they received a report of this exchange. This is the heart of the SLCM question summarized into those three points. Akhromeyev: Da. If we start listing points of difference on the SLCM issue: — First, the level for SLCMs. We believe it should be a common limit, binding for both sides, reached as a result of an agreement. The US believes it should be unilateral in a declaration. — Second, we propose verification measures—­on-­site inspection—­ while the US is against. There are other differences that are not as big. Bartholomew: Should we understand that you are prepared to include only nuclear SLCMs in the context of 600 km range? Akhromeyev: Yes, we are prepared to propose such a swap.
