Chapter 5, May–June 1990  793
familiar with the debate on SALT II, Backfire was a major factor in the 
failure of the Senate to ratify that treaty. We are asking for a number on 
air force Backfire and a freeze on naval Backfire.
(Meeting breaks for 30 minutes while Secretary Baker and Foreign 
Minister Shevardnadze leave to address other subjects)
Shevardnadze: On the issue of a guaranteed level on Backfire, the 
Soviet Union has no plans to deploy more than 400 such airplanes. 
This number does not include the naval TU–22M airplanes. The num-
ber of naval medium bombers will be frozen as of December 31, 1990. 
Consequently the talks in Vienna would continue.
Baker: I have two comments. You use “deploy,” we use “possess.” 
Second, we need an overall limit on Backfire, just as we have for SLCMs.
Shevardnadze: We can say will not “have.”
Burt: The freeze is on the number of naval TU–22M aircraft.
Shevardnadze: Naval medium bombers.
Burt: I have a question. Under the Soviet formulation, would the 
number of naval TU–22M be frozen?
Akhromeyev: What we will be freezing will be the number of 
medium range bombers of Naval Aviation as of December 31, 1990.
Burt: So you could increase the number of TU–22M.
Akhromeyev: On account of reducing other types of medium 
range bombers currently operational.
Baker: We have problems with this. What we need is a political 
deal. We need limits on Backfire, just like you needed with SLCMs. 
What you have put forward here would permit a build-­up of Backfire 
with the elimination of older models.
We are running out of time. The joint statement on future negotia-
tions is important to you. We should make every effort to conclude it. 
Let us disengage, and leave these as issues remaining to be decided, 
and see if we can reach closure on the joint statement.
Shevardnadze: We should give it another try. Why not have a state-
ment on range and refueling, and defer the other Backfire questions?
Baker: Let’s say we have testing of heavy ICBMs, Backfire, and 
non-­circumvention remaining. These will need to be resolved later. 
Now let’s try to close the statement on future negotiations.
Shevardnadze: Take paragraph 1, and delete what you have in 
brackets. We can drop what you have in brackets.
Bartholomew: We should go [to] the the main issue. When that is 
resolved, this won’t be a problem.
Shevardnadze: On page 2 then, what is the main issue? In your 
language in the second section, instead of removing “incentives,” we 
should remove “capability.”
