National Security Policy  139
of a shelter program, because the country demands it, we should do 
as little as we can to satisfy this demand. If we went further than that, 
and became too involved in a shelter program, we would be bound 
to lose the correct balance between active and passive defenses. This, 
concluded the Vice President, was the right line to take in dealing with 
the Holifield Committee.
General Cutler asked the Vice President if he had observed strong 
pressure in the Congress for a large-­scale shelter program. The Vice 
President said that he thought not, and added that he was inclined to 
agree with Under Secretary of the Treasury Scribner, that the Planning 
Board suggestion—­that a selection for pilot studies might be made on 
the basis of the first five cities to volunteer matching funds—­was polit­
ically impractical. The Vice President counselled against stirring up the 
public when at the present time all they want us to do is to spend our­
selves out of the recession.
General Cutler next called on Governor Hoegh, suggesting that he 
speak to the point of the Federal example as a necessary stimulant to 
the construction of private shelters. He asked Governor Hoegh how we 
could possibly proceed with an effective public education program if we 
did not set some kind of example to our citizens by building shelter at 
the Federal level. Had this not been the gist of Governor Hoegh’s argu­
ments? Governor Hoegh replied emphatically in the affirmative, and 
enlarged on his point. It might be possible to reduce the size of the rec­
ommended program for the construction of prototype fallout shelters, 
but it was absolutely essential to build some such prototypes. Governor 
Hoegh also felt that the construction of shelter in new Federal buildings 
was a necessary example for the States and local communities.
At this point General Cutler undertook to describe the consensus 
of the meeting. He believed that this consensus favored going forward 
with the research programs which had been recommended by the 
Interdepartmental Committee and by the Planning Board. He believed 
also that the sampling surveys and pilot studies were approved by the 
Council. It likewise seemed to favor starting a program of public edu­
cation and the program with respect to providing the elements of a base 
for rapid acceleration; but the consensus opposed adoption of the other 
programs recommended in NSC 5807.
(At this point, the President announced to the Members of the 
­Council that he had just been brought a note indicating that ­Khrushchev 
had replaced Bulganin as head of the Soviet Government.)
General Cutler went on to say that he was not sure of the attitude 
of the Council toward the pilot studies, but he was sure that the rest of 
the Interdepartmental Committee’s recommendations were not accept­
able until the Council had had another look at the matter after comple­
tion of the research programs which the Council apparently endorsed.
