1977 61 All-­in-­all, in short, a unilateral, general no-­first-­use pledge would encourage our enemies, frighten our friends, and frustrate our purposes. A2. No-First-Use of Strategic Weapons The US could, conceivably, declare that it would never be the first to initiate use of strategic nuclear weapons. This would require weaving into the declaration a careful definition, contrived to fit our policy, of what systems or targets are “strategic” rather than tactical. Such a posture could have certain advantages in terms of propaganda value. It would show that the U.S. is “responsible,” sees a middle ground between capitulation in conventional war and apocalyptic conflagration, and realizes what many believe has become obvious in the last decade: the coupling of the US strategic deterrent to European defense, when exercising it would entail the otherwise avoidable utter destruction of American society, has indeed lost much of its credibility. The disadvantages of such a posture are, however, still major. (1) It detracts from deterrence. By making explicit and official that the US recognizes the incredibility of strategic coupling, it gives away the advantage of the “irrationality” factor, i.e. the disincentive for a Soviet attack which flows from the possibility that the US might indeed respond to such an attack spasmodically or suicidally. (2) It would preclude use of LNOs to counter limited conventional initiatives ([less than 1 line not declassified]). To define away such strikes as “unstrategic” would be unconvincing. (3) Our allies and friends would still be greatly alarmed. NATO allies continue to prefer the coupling of the strategic deterrent to European defense and place substantial weight on retention of the US “irrationality” factor in deterrence. Moreover, the PRC might see such a pledge as weakness in American will, or a gratuitous gift to Soviet planners. (4) The disadvantageous effects on our nuclear force-­posture would be comparable to those of a general no-­first-­use posture. A3. No-First-Use Except in Defense of Self and Allies The US could declare that it would never use nuclear weapons first unless the territory or forces of the US or its allies were attacked. This has several advantages. (1) Who could object? Only those who seek more limitations on first-­use, and this would make them no more unhappy than the present US stance. (2) It would counter some of the propaganda advantage that accrues to the Soviets from their requests for a no-­first-­use pledge, and their portrayal of the US as more trigger-­happy than they.
