1977ÔÇâ 61
All-┬şin-┬şall, in short, a unilateral, general no-┬şfirst-┬şuse pledge would 
encourage our enemies, frighten our friends, and frustrate our purposes.
A2. No-First-Use of Strategic Weapons
The US could, conceivably, declare that it would never be the first 
to initiate use of strategic nuclear weapons. This would require weaving 
into the declaration a careful definition, contrived to fit our policy, of 
what systems or targets are ÔÇťstrategicÔÇŁ rather than tactical.
Such a posture could have certain advantages in terms of propa-
ganda value. It would show that the U.S. is ÔÇťresponsible,ÔÇŁ sees a mid-
dle ground between capitulation in conventional war and apocalyptic 
conflagration, and realizes what many believe has become obvious in 
the last decade: the coupling of the US strategic deterrent to European 
defense, when exercising it would entail the otherwise avoidable utter 
destruction of American society, has indeed lost much of its credibility.
The disadvantages of such a posture are, however, still major.
(1) It detracts from deterrence. By making explicit and official that 
the US recognizes the incredibility of strategic coupling, it gives away 
the advantage of the ÔÇťirrationalityÔÇŁ factor, i.e. the disincentive for a 
Soviet attack which flows from the possibility that the US might indeed 
respond to such an attack spasmodically or suicidally.
(2) It would preclude use of LNOs to counter limited conventional 
initiatives ([less than 1 line not declassified]). To define away such strikes 
as ÔÇťunstrategicÔÇŁ would be unconvincing.
(3) Our allies and friends would still be greatly alarmed. NATO 
allies continue to prefer the coupling of the strategic deterrent to Euro-
pean defense and place substantial weight on retention of the US 
ÔÇťirrationalityÔÇŁ factor in deterrence. Moreover, the PRC might see such 
a pledge as weakness in American will, or a gratuitous gift to Soviet 
planners.
(4) The disadvantageous effects on our nuclear force-┬şposture 
would be comparable to those of a general no-┬şfirst-┬şuse posture.
A3. No-First-Use Except in Defense of Self and Allies
The US could declare that it would never use nuclear weapons first 
unless the territory or forces of the US or its allies were attacked.
This has several advantages.
(1) Who could object? Only those who seek more limitations on 
first-┬şuse, and this would make them no more unhappy than the present 
US stance.
(2) It would counter some of the propaganda advantage that 
accrues to the Soviets from their requests for a no-┬şfirst-┬şuse pledge, and 
their portrayal of the US as more trigger-┬şhappy than they.
