Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II As for economic assistance, the Interagency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance, which I chair, currently brings human rights considerations to bear on bilateral and multilateral economic assistance programs. (The Group includes representatives of State, Treasury, DOD, AID, and the NSC staff, as well as participants from Agriculture, Commerce, OMB, Ex-Im and OPIC. State’s participants include HA, EB, S/P, L, H, E, P, C, T and each of the regional bureaus.) The Group is authorized, under a recently adopted procedure, to consider military programs, but only after any dispute as to them has gone through the usually quite time-consuming PM and T review set forth above, and upon referral from you. As a result, the Group is not likely to be seized of military issues in a timely fashion. In short, we have a situation in the human rights area in which: (a) decisions on economic matters concerning a particular country are isolated to a very substantial degree from decisions on military matters concerning that country, and (b) the full range of our fundamental interests with respect to a particular country is not clearly brought to bear in the decision-making process. The disadvantages of this anomalous situation are quite substantial. The risk of making inconsistent decisions is plain. The Congress is particularly aware of the disjunction in our current procedures. The Recommended Solution To remedy this situation, it is proposed (a) that the Interagency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance should also review military issues as soon as it appears that there is an inter-bureau or interagency dispute involving the human rights implications of the issue in question, and (b) that when the Group is seized with an appeal on economic or military programs for a given country, the regional bureaus should present for discussion by the Group an overall strategy for coordinated use of economic and military programs for that country. Under the proposal, PM would continue to conduct its case-bycase review of military programs, but as soon as any bureau or agency raised a human rights objection to the case in question, the matter would be referred to the Interagency Group. (T is currently represented on the Interagency Group; a PM representative should be added under this proposal.) The Group would promptly review the matter and make a recommendation to the Secretary. As part of this consolidation, the Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance, Science and Technology would become Vice Chairman of the Interagency Group. (Let me say that while I do not covet regularly chairing the group for both economic and military matters, I think it would be best if I do so, for two reasons. First, economic and military issues will have to be considered together as part of a countrywide approach, and it would not be practical to alternate the chairmanship as one or the other type of issue
