344
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Iran’s Military Potential
While reportedly Iran’s military forces are not demoralized and
are still being paid, there is little doubt that the Army’s old political
influence has been greatly diminished. The Shah, who still reportedly
holds the loyalty of the majority of Army officers, has become a sha-
dowy and generally uninfluential figure in the background of political
affairs. Scrutiny of Army ranks gives little reason to hope that a strong
military leader will arise like Naguib Bey in Egypt. However, the Army
is still a potent force for maintaining internal security in Iran and so far
the Mosadeq Government has not taken measures which would de-
stroy the Army’s effectiveness to meet internal situations.
Amid rumors and counter-rumors of British intrigue, the tribes in
Iran continue generally in the old pattern of life and retain about the
same political significance. In their local areas they are regaining some
of their old dominance as the Army’s influence wanes. However, ex-
cept for the Qashqais and to a lesser extent the Bakhtiaris, the tribes
wield only slight political influence on the central government. As yet
no tribal leader has appeared who could be depended upon to main-
tain stability throughout the nation in a situation of chaos.
Economic Situation
Before Iran can achieve any measure of political stability, its
economy must be restored to some measure of health. The loss of oil in-
come can be replaced either by resumed sales of oil abroad or by for-
eign budgetary aid. Such a dole would obviously make political black-
mail and commercial unrealism pay. It would not salve the constant
irritation of the oil dispute nor win friends for the United States in a
country where generosity is regarded with great suspicion. This would
be particularly true if any strings were attached to such a dole either to
control disbursements of the funds or to bring the Iranians to a settle-
ment of the oil dispute. It is far more sound to base a healthy Iranian
economy on sales of Iran’s petroleum resources. Enclosure No. 3 is a
considered review of Iran’s economic situation.
The so-called “blockade” of Iranian oil sales has been largely the
product of (a) commercial concern regarding the price, specifications,
and guaranteed flow of Iranian oil, (b) AIOC legal claims to ownership
of oil products presently stored in Abadan, (c) major oil companies’ co-
operation in refusal to take advantage of the AIOC’s misfortunes,
(d) United States Government discouragement of private American
companies who have shown an interest in purchasing Iranian oil or as-
sisting in operation of the Iranian oil industry. Since the decision of the
ICJ that it had no competence over a dispute between the Iranian sover-
eign government and a private foreign oil company on Iranian terri-
tory, the AIOC legal claim against Iranian oil products is in consider-
