3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
390
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
complete elimination of nuclear weapons and to using nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes exclusively. The program adopted by the XXVth
Congress of the CPSU, a program the Soviet Union was constantly
striving to implement, was also aimed at disarmament and peace. In
fact, the Soviet side referred to it as the “Program of Peace.” Still, no
matter what proposal was advanced by the Soviet Union to further
these aims, these proposals were invariably rejected out of hand, in-
cluding proposals to put a halt to the arms race. Surely this policy pur-
sued by the Soviet Union was completely contrary to the allegation of
an arms buildup to which the Secretary had referred. Even in the face of
the ring of military bases surrounding the Soviet Union and aimed
against its territory the Soviet Union was ready and willing to take ap-
propriate steps toward disarmament. However, it could not agree to
unilateral disarmament. Its leadership was not so naive or myopic as to
accept the possibility of unilateral disarmament. It was necessary to en-
sure the security of all countries in an identical degree and not to harm
the security of any one of them.
Gromyko said that the Secretary had also mentioned the question
of military expenditures and budgets.
The Secretary interrupted at this point to say that no one was sug-
gesting that the Soviet Union take unilateral disarmament measures.
He thought both of them were pragmatic enough to recognize that uni-
lateral disarmament made no sense. Disarmament measures had to be
such as to benefit both sides, such as could be negotiated together. The
proof of the pudding was in the eating—if we could demonstrate by
joint deeds that we can sit down together and conclude arms control
agreements, it would prove to the world that we were setting an ex-
ample for others to follow.
Gromyko referred back to the question of military budgets. He had
to tell the Secretary categorically that the Soviet Union had numerous
times proposed reductions in military budgets, first naming specific
percentages, then altering the percentages to meet the wishes of the
Western powers, etc. The Soviet leadership was struck, however, that
there had not been a single occasion when these proposals were taken
seriously. They had always been rejected out of hand. The Soviet Union
had proposed an arms freeze in order to begin the process of arms con-
trol. That, too, had been rejected. Now, at the current U.N. Special Ses-
sion on Disarmament the Soviet Union had suggested a new method
for dealing with this problem. When it had proposed certain per-
centage reductions in the past, it had been told that since force struc-
tures were different, all this was very complicated indeed. In the Soviet
view, such responses were not sincere, because all these problems and
objections could easily be overcome. At the current SSOD the Soviet
proposal was stated not in terms of a percentage, but in absolute
