Chapter 4, February–April 1990  503
simple ways to change START to rebuild support on the Hill for our 
ICBM modernization program.
B–2. Your budget proposal calls for $5.5 billion and the authori-
zation to produce five additional aircraft. Last fall Congress reduced 
the plan from five aircraft to two and added a number of testing and 
reporting requirements. This year support for the aircraft is weakening 
further, and the aircraft cost makes this an easy target (although about 
half of the total program cost already has been spent).
The full program is for a buy of 132 aircraft and that is what is 
presented in your budget. Dick Cheney has ordered a full review of 
the program by March, after which he will make his recommendations. 
Best guess now is that he will call for a total buy of 75–85 aircraft instead 
of the 132 now planned.
Nunn and Warner should be generally supportive of the program 
but will be concerned about the costs—­both monetary and political. 
Both have supported the technology but will not support the full 132 
aircraft buy. Nunn argues, I think correctly, that we have not done a 
good job defining the mission for this aircraft. We do need the B–2 if 
we are to enter the next century with a penetrating bomber. Numbers 
much below 75 do not make much sense to me from either a financial 
or operational point of view.
Congressional support of the B–2 will be important, however, for 
ratification of START. As you recall, bombers that do not carry ALCMs 
only count as one warhead against the 6000 weapon limit of the treaty. 
Without being able to take advantage of this treaty feature, the JCS will 
have real difficulty supporting the treaty.
Trident/D–5. The Trident submarine program is in good shape on 
the Hill. This next year’s budget funds the production of the 18th boat 
along with long-­lead items for the 19th and 20th. We anticipate that 
START will permit this many boats. Next year, however, we will need 
to decide if we want to begin funding the 21st submarine.
SDI. The FY 1991 budget calls for $4.8 billion for SDI. This level 
of funding is required to support large-­scale space-­based experiments 
necessary to making the decision on SDI deployment during your first 
term. Budget support has been eroding—­last year’s initial request was 
for $5.6 billion, later revised in your budget to $4.9 billion and eventually 
funded at $3.9 billion. As with other programs, the changes in the polit-
ical environment are increasing calls to cut back or cancel this program.
In the past both Nunn and Warner supported the program 
and Nunn feels he carried the Administration’s water during last 
fall’s Congressional budget action. Some on the Hill question the 
Administration’s support of SDI because we acquiesced to last year’s 
cut in the program. We anticipate a substantial cut again this year 
unless you go to the mat for it. Nunn and Warner will want to know
