Nicaragua 861 On June 4, the OAS approved sending a fact-­finding mission to report on the situation. Neither the Nicaraguan Ambassador nor President Somoza formally charged the Costa Rican Government with complicity in the invasion, but instead levelled charges against the Government of Cuba. By June 12, after several engagements with the Nicaraguan National Guard, the invaders either surrendered or were isolated and driven into the jungle. Documentation on the invasion attempt is in file 717.00. The text of the OAS resolution on Nicaragua is printed in the Department of State Bulletin, July 6, 1959, pp. 30–32. NI–15. Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Nicaragua1  Washington, June 15, 1959, 8:36 p.m. 333. FOR AMBASSADOR Your consistent viewpoint that popular support/lacking for attempt overthrow present government borne out by failure ­revolutionary group rally adherents its cause. However it is DEPT’s considered opinion that dedicated oppositionists will not cease attempting overthrow regime or assassinate PRES Somoza as long as they receive friendly support, moral or otherwise, from U.S. and Latin American liberals, extremists in Cuba, as well as communists everywhere, latter whom anxious only create chaos in Nicaragua. So-­called anti-­dictator forces in hemisphere appear to be girding for showdown with Trujillo and because of long dictatorial record of Luis Somoza’s father are prone associate present Nicaraguan regime with that of GDR. DEPT believes Luis Somoza has brought Nicaragua long way toward democracy and he deserves more favorable consideration. Your valued assessment of present climate for a deal between PRES Somoza and the responsible opposition (EMBTEL 371)2 is hereby requested. If AMB Drefer has any free time in Managua he will undoubtedly wish to discuss the matter with you. He has participated 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 717.00/6–659. Confidential. Drafted by Stewart; and initialled by Rubottom. 2 Telegram 371 from Managua, June 6, not printed, transmitted the Ambassador’s impressions of the attempted overthrow of Somoza’s government and a brief report on the ­current situation. (717.00/6–659)
