but as yet it is not apparent. The agitation is purely anti-Christian education or antimission school to date.” 4. For explanation of the challenge of Chinese educators to mission schools see the report of the resolutions, especially resolution number 7, passed by the Tenth National Conference of Chinese Educational Association[s] held at Kaifeng, Honan, October 15th to 28th, 1924 as enclosed in despatch to the Department number 898 December 17th [15th] from the consul general at Hankow.40 5. It may be questioned whether the association’s proposal to restrict and eventually to terminate the educational work conducted under the auspices of foreigners in China and to prevent the use of foreign schools or other educational agencies for the propagation of religion, is, as our Shanghai missionaries and educators declare, an agitation “purely anti-Christian.” Besides the religious mistakes, in [sic] which among a people so essentially nonreligious and tolerant as the Chinese may indeed be the weakest, I suspect the presence and operation of the following influences: (1) the ever-present Chinese aversion to foreigners and a new sense of the danger of foreign control of education, (2) the rising consciousness of nationality and the aspiration for a system of national education, (3) Bolshevik propaganda against other nations in China which has been especially successful in winning over and utilizing educators and students, and (4) a Bolshevik and Chinese drive against the so-called “Anglo-Saxon nations” who support most of the foreign missions and schools in China. France and Italy are scarcely mentioned in this connection and of course Japan not at all. 6. Japan is not averse to this agitation against foreign, that is, Christian nations in which she is naturally regarded as on the side of China. Foreign diplomats often speak of national value to America of her thousand missionaries and hundreds of schools and hospitals in China. In this respect America comes first, Great Britain poor second. In the present agitation Japan sees us attacked at our most vulnerable point as the friend and helper of China while she is entirely immune. 7. I do not associate Christian General Feng Yu-hsiang41 or even Sun Yatsen42 with this anti-Christian agitation. Both, it is true, demand the revision of “unequal treaties” between the foreign nations and China and in this respect Chinese public opinion is unanimously behind them. They are exponents not of Bolshevism but radical nationalism though they may be willing to utilize the Bolshevists in their political maneuvres as, in Hunan, Feng’s lieutenant, Hu, is today using bandits in his army. Both Sun and Feng have taken pains to disassociate their political movement from Bolshevism;
