Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 663 The Director of Central Intelligence said that we would be asking Khomeini to back off his current and most recent statement which was quite categoric and firm. The President said that he could always finesse the problem by constituting the Parliament. Admiral Turner pointed out that they have not gotten their elections completed for that purpose yet. The President asked the Secretary of State what options he saw. Secretary Vance replied that he preferred a rescue over mining although he said there would be substantial loss of life. Dr. Brzezinski suggested that we move forward on a more flexible program. We could tell Khomeini that by May 15 we would undertake military action. We could tell the Allies that unless they pressure Iran we would be taking more severe action. We could, at the same time, authorize the caching of the fuel and then, by the third or fourth week in April, we could make up our mind which route we wish to go. The President said he thought setting a deadline in our messages to the Iranians is ill-advised. It would put their nation on alert. Dr. Brzezinski pointed out that this would not affect the mining option, but the President added it would affect the rescue. In reply, Dr. Brzezinski said we could nonetheless go earlier on the rescue, before the deadline, in fact: we could begin by setting June 1 as the deadline. Dr. Brzezinski then asked what about the daylight problem. The Chairman said that there were two problems. First, the nights were growing shorter, thus reducing the time we have for operations and forcing us to consider a three-day operation. Second, by mid-May, the temperature will have increased to the point that it will be difficult to get the helicopters over the mountains fully loaded with the Delta team. Thus, we may have to consider the use of even more helicopters and more prepositioned fuel. The President asked why the fuel cannot go into the rendezvous zone on the same night that the helicopters go in. The Chairman replied that it is a possibility and, indeed, is one of our options. However, we then have a large number of C–130s and refueling aircraft going over Saudi Arabia in daylight of the first day of the operation. The President asked at what point the helicopters needed to be refueled. The Chairman replied that the helicopters only have the range to get half-way to Tehran. The President asked whether they needed to refuel on the first night. The Chairman replied, “yes”; they would enter Iran on the first night, get refueled and then go on to Tehran. The Chairman went on to explain that they are also exploring the possibility of having the C–130 tankers come out of Diego Garcia, but this required a lot of C–141 tankers as well.
