400  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
difference of view between China and US on status of Taiwan since 
status of Taiwan was very clear and precise. He said that Taiwan was 
indisputably an inalienable part of Chinese territory. He then expressed 
agreement with me that on this question disputes did exist between our 
two sides. He expressed agreement also that the Taiwan situation had 
“led to a grave and explosive situation” and that there was “danger of 
the situation being enlarged.” He said that this was why it was neces­
sary to call Sino-US conference to discuss situation in Taiwan area.
22. He said that while he agreed discuss this problem, he could not 
but trace “root causes” leading to present grave situation. He stated 
that failure find these causes would be similar to patient in whom doc­
tor fails find cause of illness. Wang cited Chinese proverb that doctor 
should make prescription according to illness of patient. He said that 
failure to find cause of illness makes cure impossible.
23. Wang stated that his government had always opposed resort 
to force and has stood for peaceful settlement of problems. He agreed 
with me that negotiations cannot be conducted under threat of force. 
He said that if we are to discuss threat of force, we have to ask who is 
threatening whom. Wang declared that he considered that American 
armed forces which occupy Taiwan are precisely threat in question.
24. Wang said that I had said that it is necessary to renounce use of 
force to prevent situation from leading to armed conflict. Wang declared 
that as he had stated this morning his side welcomed this point of view. 
However, a mere statement outlining principles does not solve prob­
lem. Wang stated that if US were to withdraw its armed forces from 
area, it would show that US is sincere in this regard. Wang stated that 
therefore he hoped after consideration of his proposal I would express 
my views on this point. He concluded by stating that such withdrawal 
would indicate that present talks can really solve questions and are not 
mere discussions. He said he hoped this was case.
25. I replied that questions Wang had raised are complicated and 
that I still did not see why he rejected my suggestion. I stated that I 
hoped I was right in interpreting Wang’s remarks as not a complete 
rejection of my proposal. I said that first and simple thing we can do 
is to say to each other that we would not resort to use of force except 
defensively. I stated that I agreed that this would not by itself solve 
basic problems in area, but that it would remove danger of conflict and 
establish atmosphere in which we can freely negotiate and in which 
there would be hope of finding solutions to basic problems.
26. Wang replied that we can certainly consider that a mere state­
ment would not remove danger or resolve disputes between China and 
US in area. Only actual deeds by US will convince people that ques­
tions are being resolved. Wang cited example of return of Chinese in 
US. He said that if merely a statement had been made that they would
