Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
767
rifice. To suggest otherwise in the hope of gaining partisan advantage
is not leadership but expediency.
Achieving Peace
A second element of a foreign policy of freedom is to build peace:
to help achieve peaceful, negotiated settlements to dangerous disputes
in the world.
You know of President Carter’s patient efforts to bring forth an
agreement between Israel and Egypt at Camp David. That agreement
was a beginning, not an end. It was the beginning of a long and difficult
process that is not yet over. Camp David was one of the finest achieve-
ments of this or any other Administration. It has already produced
peace between Israel and Egypt. And it provides the only practical
process yet devised that can lead to a comprehensive peace.
In a similar fashion, the Panama Canal Treaty, which ended 14
long years of negotiations, healed festering resentments in Latin
America and laid the groundwork for sounder relations between the
United States and our neighbors in this hemisphere.
To build peace and buttress our strategic position, we have nor-
malized relations with the People’s Republic of China.
President Carter’s unswerving support for a negotiated settlement
in Rhodesia helped end a bitter and bloody civil war. It helped bring
forth a new nation, Zimbabwe, based on majority rule and minority
rights.2 It helped calm a dispute that could have become a broader con-
flict in Africa. By working toward a settlement, by refusing to lift sanc-
tions against Rhodesia until a fair settlement was insured, we empha-
sized not only our commitment to peace but our willingness to support
abroad the principles of democracy and freedom we espouse at home.
Lloyd McBride3 and the steelworkers stood by the President in that
difficult moment. You supported continuing the sanctions until a fair,
free election could be held. You can be proud that this union has con-
tributed in an important way to a solution that fostered peace.
There is a lesson in this experience. The same people who call now
for a narrow vision of our foreign policies were bitterly opposed to our
approach in southern Africa. Had they prevailed, there would not have
been a settlement in Rhodesia. The fighting would have raged on. This
would have been bad for the people of Zimbabwe, bad for the region,
bad for our allies, bad for us, and good only for the Soviets who stood
to profit from conflict.
2 Zimbabwe achieved independence in April.
3 President of the United Steel Workers of America.
