(b) It is further held by the American Government that the claim of the Mitsui
Company in question is incompatible with the basic principle of equal
opportunity laid down in Article 3 of the Nine-Power Treaty of Washington.1
It should, however, be observed that the Mitsui contracts had been concluded
long before an agreed definition of the principle of equal opportunity was
adopted at the Washington Conference. Moreover, the prohibition of
monopoly or of preference contained in the first paragraph of the cited
Article of the Nine-Power Treaty is qualified by the provisions in the second
paragraph of the same Article, which permit the acquisition of such
properties or rights as may be necessary to the conduct of a particular
commercial, industrial or financial undertaking, and which, in the opinion of
the Japanese Government, properly cover the case of wireless enterprise.
(c) The Japanese Government are not unmindful of the needs of the United
States to secure an efficient radio service across the Pacific, to supplement
the present inadequate cable service. The plan of the Mitsui Company is
intended exactly to supply such needs, and if any exclusive authorization to
the nationals of one foreign country to work a wireless station in China
should appear objectionable to the United States, the Japanese Government
have already manifested their readiness to see the abandonment of the system
of such exclusive operation by Japanese of the station constructed by the
Mitsui Company. With this feature of exclusive operation definitely
eliminated, there should remain no grounds for apprehension of
discriminatory treatment, as among nationalities, in the working of the
station.
3. It is reported that the cost of construction fixed at U. S. $5,417,500 in the original
contract of the Federal Telegraph Company was, under the supplementary agreement,
raised to U. S. $13,000,000, one-half of which is to be charged to the liability of China.
She has already incurred obligations to the Mitsui and the Chinese National Radio
Telegraph Company to an amount of approximately $7,000,000 Silver. Upon the
completion of the undertaking now contemplated by the Federal Telegraph Company,
the whole indebtedness of China on account of wireless installations will thus reach the
substantial figure of some $20,000,000 Silver. This would surely aggravate the
financial difficulties of the Chinese Government, which are already assuming serious
proportions. It is also believed that the general conditions in China do not require or
justify the immediate establishment of two high power wireless stations in that country.
The unwisdom of such an extensive program will be evident when it is considered that
even in the whole region of the highly commercialized Pacific Coast of the United
States, there is only one trans-oceanic wireless station open for public use.
4. The Japanese Government are unable to bring themselves to the conclusion that they
are in any way precluded from extending support to the present claim of the Mitsui
