Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Yugoslav concern with this question.3 Subsequently, a Foreign Ministry official (Budimir Loncar) advised the Ambassador that the information provided had received close attention and that he would discuss the paper “privately” with him some day soon.4 3. Considerations: a. One factor in considering a resumed intelligence exchange is a determination of what the US could provide and what the US is likely to receive in return: [2 paragraphs (40 lines) not declassified] b. There are other factors to be considered beyond the potential intelligence value. One is the possible improvement in US-Yugoslav relations in that an exchange would signal a positive US attitude. In the over-all context of US-Yugoslav relations, however, such an exchange may not loom large in Yugoslavia’s estimation compared to matters such as arms sales or the Joint Defense Working Group now being established. On the other hand, it was Ljubicic who raised the issue. Another possible advantage to the US is the useful contacts that would be developed within the Yugoslav military establishment from which we might benefit in more troubled times. Also, US-provided information might sharpen the Yugoslav perception of the Soviet threat. Finally, a Soviet perception of closer ties might act as a deterrent to precipitous Soviet actions against Yugoslavia. c. Against this possible benefit to the US are the potentially negative factors to be considered: Key among these is the security implications since it would be through a “leak” that other negative factors would be operative. Utmost care would be required to make certain that intelligence passed to the Yugoslavs would not in fact divulge sources and methods. While the Yugoslavs are not likely to provide the USSR with any information, a Soviet penetration of the Yugoslav government cannot be ruled out. [2 lines not declassified] —Another security aspect is that in passing intelligence requirements to the Yugoslavs, the US would tend to reveal its intelligence gaps.
