858
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Yugoslav concern with this question.3 Subsequently, a Foreign Ministry
official (Budimir Loncar) advised the Ambassador that the information
provided had received close attention and that he would discuss the
paper “privately” with him some day soon.4
3. Considerations:
a. One factor in considering a resumed intelligence exchange is a
determination of what the US could provide and what the US is likely
to receive in return:
[2 paragraphs (40 lines) not declassified]
b. There are other factors to be considered beyond the potential
intelligence value. One is the possible improvement in US-Yugoslav
relations in that an exchange would signal a positive US attitude. In
the over-all context of US-Yugoslav relations, however, such an
exchange may not loom large in Yugoslavia’s estimation compared to
matters such as arms sales or the Joint Defense Working Group now
being established. On the other hand, it was Ljubicic who raised the
issue. Another possible advantage to the US is the useful contacts that
would be developed within the Yugoslav military establishment from
which we might benefit in more troubled times. Also, US-provided
information might sharpen the Yugoslav perception of the Soviet threat.
Finally, a Soviet perception of closer ties might act as a deterrent to
precipitous Soviet actions against Yugoslavia.
c. Against this possible benefit to the US are the potentially negative
factors to be considered: Key among these is the security implications
since it would be through a “leak” that other negative factors would
be operative. Utmost care would be required to make certain that
intelligence passed to the Yugoslavs would not in fact divulge sources
and methods. While the Yugoslavs are not likely to provide the USSR
with any information, a Soviet penetration of the Yugoslav government
cannot be ruled out. [2 lines not declassified]
—Another security aspect is that in passing intelligence require-
ments to the Yugoslavs, the US would tend to reveal its intelligence
gaps.
3 In telegram 250569 to Belgrade, October 2, the Department provided Eagleburger
with the Department’s analysis on the situation in Moscow. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D780403–0615)
4 Eagleburger briefed Loncar on October 4 on the substance of the information
provided by the Department on October 2. On October 18, following a discussion on
other issues, Eagleburger noted that “Loncar took me aside out of earshot of his North
American desk assistant to say that the info we provided [on October 4] is extremely
interesting and has received close attention. As a next step in the process, Loncar said
he would see me ‘privately’ some day soon to discuss the paper.” While unsure if the
Yugoslavs “will give us more than the map coordinates for Moscow,” Eagleburger
undertook to tell Loncar that “we hope the exercise can be repeated from time to time.”
(Telegram 7686 from Belgrade, October 18; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D780436–0800)
