National Security Policy 91 25. Memorandum of Conference with the President1 Washington, March 10, 1958, 10:20 a.m. OTHERS PRESENT Dr. Killian Dr. Kistiakowsky General Goodpaster Dr. Killian spoke from a memorandum, the original of which he handed to the President. With regard to the proposal for a well-­conceived basic research effort on solid propellants, the President strongly stressed that an over­ all group, such as ARPA, should conduct this research. Otherwise, it would be done in bits and pieces. In fact, he thought that all research on fuels should be kept centralized, avoiding the wastes of duplicating effort. Dr. Kistiakowsky reported that there has really been very little support for, or interest in, a solid propellant development program. There have been many starts and stops, and the effort that has been devoted to these fuels has been very small. In the interest of economy of effort and continuity, he would agree with putting the program into ARPA. The President suggested that it might even be put in the civil agency now under consideration. Dr. Killian stressed the need for a review by the President of pro­ posals for “second generation” missiles. The President strongly agreed and asked that necessary directives be developed. The President further agreed with the recommendation for a pro­ gram of improvement on the TITAN missile, and for phasing out the ATLAS as soon as consistent with an adequate rate of buildup of total missile forces. The President said that he conceived of the missile activity as sep­ arate and distinct from traditional air, ground, and sea operations. He would accept the logic of a decision by the Department of Defense to assign a submarine-­based missile such as POLARIS to the Navy, but he saw no reason for the Air Force or for the Army to try to preempt the field. Instead, he would incline toward a single missile command. Specifically, he agreed that we should not rush into the proposed Minuteman program; he asked that there be no approval along these lines until the matter had been much more carefully considered, and presented to him. Dr. Killian repeated his recommendation that Defense 1 Source: Centralizing direction of missile program. Secret. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Additional Records of the Office of the Special Assist­ ant for Science and Technology. Drafted on March 11.
