1979  583
Director Seignious asked whether any Soviets perceive any mean-
ingful advantage to be gained from any form of nuclear conflict.
Secretary Brown replied that some Soviet military believe war 
should be fought to win and try to plan accordingly.
Mr. Stoertz observed that in Soviet eyes, this does not mean that 
they would commit willful aggression, but rather that beleaguered 
capitalist states would precipitate a war in which they might want to 
preempt.
Secretary Brown voiced the opinion that concern about destabiliz-
ing implications of US hard target capability was probably misplaced, 
but that this was nonetheless a matter of concern on the Hill. Some peo-
ple in Congress suggest that we should make M–X inaccurate to pre-
serve crisis stability and to leave the Soviet Union more confident of the 
survivability of their strategic forces. He voiced the fear, however, that 
such Soviet confidence coexisting with a Soviet ability to threaten US 
forces could lead to adventuresome Soviet actions. And we, being on 
the low end of this asymmetry, might be either deterred from respond-
ing to Soviet challenges or compelled to preempt with our vulnerable 
strategic forces.
Mr. Aaron commented that this situation was a recipe for 
miscalculations.
Secretary Brown commented that if we had effective hard target 
capabilities, it would be appropriate to target them against silos.
Mr. Aaron asked whether we couldn’t get hard target capabilities in 
SLBMs, preferably because they are invulnerable.
Secretary Brown responded that while SLBMs can in time become 
accurate enough to kill silos, C3 problems may not allow them to be 
launched quickly enough.
Mr. Utgoff noted that good communications to SSBN’s close to the 
U.S. were possible and that this is one of the reasons that a long range 
SLBM was important.
Dr. Brzezinski asked how was this an issue for the President, what 
must he decide?
Secretary Brown responded that we are going to have some improve-
ment in hard target capabilities if we modernize our forces. ICBMs are 
going to be more accurate, and SLBMs will follow close behind. The 
key issue is that we need less vulnerable quick response hard target 
capabilities.
Dr. Brzezinski asked if one could say that we need an improved 
hard target kill capability because the Soviets have closed the gap in 
overall strategic forces capabilities?
Mr. Aaron asked whether we could achieve the needed hard target 
capabilities with cruise missiles.
