Preface
XI
negotiations with the Hungarian Government. The return of the Crown
marked a turning point in U.S.-Hungarian relations.
U.S-Romanian relations were focused on two competing tracks.
The first, emphasizing the importance of maintaining Romania as a
Communist-bloc critic of Soviet policies, sought to provide Bucharest
with the needed diplomatic and economic support to maintain its for-
eign policy independence. Romanian President Nicolae Ceausescu’s
visit to Washington in 1978 served to underscore the importance the
administration placed on his continuing to play that role. The second
track was the management of reactions to the deteriorating human
rights record of the Romanian regime. Congressional pressure and
threats to derail Romania’s Most Favored Nation status caused a flurry
of diplomatic activity, with Department of State officials facilitating
meetings between Romanian diplomats and congressional staffers to
defuse the crisis. A series of defections of Romanian intelligence of-
ficers, most notably Romania’s spy chief Ion Mihai Pacepa, further
tested the relationship.
Policy toward Yugoslavia was dominated by planning for Yugo-
slavian President Josip Borz Tito’s death and succession. Yugoslavia
maintained its strategic importance to the United States. The adminis-
tration believed that Tito’s death would offer an opportunity for the So-
viet Union to reestablish its influence in the country or attempt to
overtly or covertly undermine the post-Tito leadership and change
Yugoslavia’s foreign policy orientation. The seeds of the economic col-
lapse and the political impasse that eventually led to the collapse of
Yugoslavia in 1990 were already discernable by 1980, and the Carter
administration took extensive efforts to secure a viable, united, and
independent post-Tito Yugoslavia.
Acknowledgments
The editor wishes to thank officials at the Jimmy Carter Library, in-
cluding Brittany Parris and James Yancey, but especially Ceri
McCarron, who provided invaluable professional and personal sup-
port during the research at the Carter Library. Special thanks are due to
the Historical Staff of the Central Intelligence Agency, and to officials at
the Department of State, the Department of Defense, the National Secu-
rity Council, and the National Archives and Records Administration
facility at College Park, for their valuable assistance. Michael McCoyer,
the Joint Historian with the Central Intelligence Agency was instru-
mental in locating relevant sources in the CIA files, and coordinated the
declassification effort for these materials.
Research for this volume was a collective effort by several people
in the Office of the Historian, including David Zierler, Carl Ashley, and
Mircea A. Munteanu. Carl Ashley began the compilation of the volume
