948 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX flict with Egypt). But Libya has more planes and tanks. He said to Harold Brown on the Phantoms: 35 is not a fair number. That means no replacements, and there will be nothing else until 1983. But what about spare parts? Therefore they ask for more Phantoms: it is easier to get them than the F–15 or F–16, which would not come before 1983. Brown said that the U.S. could speed up some F–16s, before the end of 1981. Egypt needs more modern aircraft; and the quickest way to cover that is with F–4s, just to face what is going on in the area. If they have to wait for the F–16s, what can they do in these two years? With regard to Libya, the Soviets push from time to time. Egypt must face this, and help stability; it can’t just sit on its hands. With regard to the Navy, there was a plan for two destroyers. Brown had agreed that they are very old. One can get to Alexandria safely, but it is not sure that it can carry on; and the other one might not get there. This would create a very bad image in Alexandria. The Soviets would seize the opportunity to point that out. Egypt is keen to keep the image of the United States in good shape. He told Brown that a worsening image would be detrimental to both of us. The Arabs would raise hell; and the Soviets would point to it—therefore, there would be a bad image. Brown was convinced, and talked with Defense Minister Ali. There could be two frigates; but these are too costly—$800 million each. The Defense Department is looking for a solution in lighter ships, on the condition that they would have enough range, to reach places like Oman. There has been no answer on the Phantoms. Brown had said that it would be difficult to take them from the U.S. Air Force. This could not be in 1980, as Sadat had asked, but maybe a few. Egypt would consider this very vital. They need more Phantoms now. They need to train on them. They can’t go to 1981–82 without covering this period with active airplanes. His third point is what Sadat did in Haifa. He has sent this message. There is one other thing: Sadat found Begin not to be in good shape. He put no pressure on Begin at Haifa. Sadat says that he will build bridges, and prepare the floor, to give the President a chance to act in the good atmosphere which Sadat is working to create. Now there is the role of the U.S. Sadat is doing as much as he can in preparing the way for the U.S. Sadat says he knows the President will do his best. Sadat does not want to have heavy U.S. pressure on Begin now. The U.S. needs to start convincing Begin of the importance of the full autonomy issues. The U.S. should be talking issues now, building to the end of the year, to reach a precise conclusion. Ambassador Strauss said he wanted to make the record clear. Do the Egyptians want a completion of Powers and Responsibilities by the end of the year? Our record shows that Egypt wants to start at the end of the year with possibilities.
