Afghanistan
79
Taraki has not been able to allay Iran’s and Pakistan’s deep suspi-
cions of his and Moscow’s intentions, and poor relations with both are
likely to continue.2 [classification marking not declassified]
[Omitted here is the body of the assessment.]
2 Highlights of the remainder of the report include CIA’s assessment that Taraki’s
major achievement since taking power “may have been to survive;” that “there is no
good evidence of a rift” between Amin and Taraki; “the degree to which Taraki has
maintained his independence from Moscow is unclear, perhaps even to Taraki and the
Soviets;” and “religious and tribal groups in Pakistan are aiding Afghan rebels, and
Afghan dissidents are allowed to operate fairly openly in Pakistan, but at this time the
Pakistani Government does not appear to be encouraging this activity.”
33.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
Kabul, December 6, 1978, 0435Z
9599. Subject: Afghan-Soviet Relations on the Eve of Taraki’s Trip
to Moscow.
1. Summary: Noor Mohammad Taraki, Afghanistan’s President
and Prime Minister, departed Kabul on December 4 to visit the Soviet
Union. In many ways it is fitting that Taraki’s first trip outside Afghani-
stan since the April 27 revolution should be to Moscow. The pro-Soviet
views of the Afghan leadership have become increasingly apparent
recently, a development which may stem from deep ideological convic-
tions, as well as this regime’s genuine and increasing need for Soviet
support in several fields. Aside from the symbolic and public relations
aspects of the trip—which are significant in their own right, the Afghan
delegation will probably raise a number of issues, which, if Moscow
is reasonably forthcoming, could solidify the already close bilateral
relationship, especially the link between the People’s Democratic Party
of Afghanistan (PDPA) and the Communist Party of the Soviet Union
(CPSU). The capstone of the visit could be the signing of a new bilateral
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780502–0817.
Confidential. This telegram repeated, for the Department’s information, the telegram of
the same number sent December 5 to Moscow, and for information to Ankara, Islamabad,
London, New Delhi, Peking, Tehran, and CINCPAC for POLAD. A copy of this telegram
was also found in the Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 7, USSR in
Afghanistan (1978).
