Haiti 743 HA–6. Memorandum of a Conversation, the White House1  Washington, August 7, 1958. SUBJECT: Call of Haitian Foreign Minister on the President PARTICIPANTS: The President Dr. Louis Mars, Foreign Minister of Haiti Under Secretary Herter William A. Wieland, Director, Office of Middle American Affairs During a call at 4 p.m., August 7, on the President, Haitian Foreign Minister Mars delivered a letter from President Duvalier saying that the Haitian Government hopes for United States military support.2 He recalled the efforts to overthrow President Duvalier during the last days of July and said the Government expects further revolutionary attempts. The President asked the Foreign Minister to convey his sincere regrets to President Duvalier that United States citizens had been involved in the plot and that the United States Government had not known this in time to stop it. In reply to a question from the President, the Foreign Minister said that the revolutionary plotting against the Duvalier Government has assumed serious proportions. He cited two clandestine radio stations broadcasting threats that the Presidential Palace will be bombed and 2,000 rebels will march on the capital. He said that President Duvalier has “knowledge” that President Trujillo of the Dominican Republic is financing the revolutionary attempts with a $500,000 fund established for the purpose. The Foreign Minister said that President Trujillo aspires “to be President of the entire island” and “does not like” that the Duvalier Government is attempting to build a sound economy in Haiti. 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File. Confidential. Drafted by Wieland. In a memorandum to President Eisenhower of August 7, Acting Secretary of State Herter recommended that the President meet with Foreign Minister Mars as it was “highly desirable that you receive the Foreign Minister in order to dispel any impression that we countenance the organization of revolutionary expeditions in the United States against Dr. Duvalier’s government.” (Eisenhower Library, Herter Papers) 2 In this letter of August 2, President Duvalier maintained that the attack on Haiti of July 28–29 was part of an international Communist conspiracy and requested U.S. military assistance to help defend Haitian territory. An unofficial translation of the letter is in the Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File.
