220  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Reductions
Our current START proposal emphasizes deep reductions. 
Reductions in and of themselves, however, do not contribute to sta-
bility. An agreement that reduced the total number of weapons, but 
failed to reduce those weapons that are most destabilizing, discouraged 
efforts to reduce vulnerabilities, or created opportunities for significant 
cheating, would undercut our goal of a stable, effective deterrent.
Moreover, an agreement that reduced both sides to low, equal num-
bers of weapons could make the stability of the strategic balance more 
fragile and more sensitive to cheating, as well as place even greater 
burdens on verification. This can be illustrated by a simplistic example: 
if each side had, say, 10,000 weapons, cheating which gave one side an 
advantage of 500 weapons probably would not be militarily significant 
and strategic stability would be largely unaffected. If the same cheating 
were to occur when both sides had a balance of 1000 weapons, the con-
sequences could be quite different.
START has been characterized by the promise of deep reduc-
tions—50 percent. The current U.S. approach, however, would heavily 
undercount bomber-­delivered weapons and would exclude SLCMs, 
resulting in a reduction in deployed weapons that would be more like 
25 percent (with somewhat deeper cuts in ballistic missile warheads). 
Under this approach, each side could have 8000–9000 or more weap-
ons, not the 6000 popularly believed.
The question is not whether there will be reductions as a result 
of START: politically there is no other option. The question is whether 
it should continue to be the centerpiece of our START approach. By 
changing the emphasis in START to improving stability and reducing 
the risks of war, we could more accurately portray our central strategic 
objective of a stable, effective deterrent, more sharply define the ratio-
nale for other changes we may make in our negotiating position (nota-
bly how we deal with mobile ICBMs), and more accurately represent 
the meaning and magnitude of the reductions that would result.
At the same time, there are political risks in seeming to ignore 
the widespread yearning to reduce, if not eliminate, nuclear weapons. 
A shift of emphasis in START that appeared to sanction a continuing 
nuclear arms race would fare very badly.
Missiles versus Bombers
Our current position emphasizes large, reductions in ballistic mis-
siles and relatively loose constraints on “airbreathers” (i.e., bombers 
and cruise missiles). This approach flows in part from the premise that 
ballistic missiles (“fast-­flyers”) are relatively destabilizing because of 
their distinctive advantages in conducting a surprise attack.
