Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  401
nuclear arms control. We shouldn’t be too worried. We have agreed 
mandates in Vienna which exclude naval forces as such from CFE (but 
do include land-­based naval air) and which exclude most air and naval 
exercises from the CSBMs talks (but do include those integral to land-­
based operations). We are in a strong position on SLCM in START. We 
have the Incidents at Sea Agreement, and we have clarified rights of 
innocent passage in territorial seas. We need our navy because of geog-
raphy as much as because the Soviet Union has a huge navy, but obvi-
ously as the threat to our vital interests and allies overseas diminish, 
we can reduce the size of our naval forces as appropriate. For the time 
being, we have a full arms control agenda.
Given that broader agenda, Gorbachev could well raise many 
other arms control issues, some general, some specific. The Reykjavik 
meeting grew out of a Soviet public campaign to draw the U.S. into 
a nuclear testing moratorium. At Malta, we will be agreeing that the 
Nuclear Testing Talks will soon complete the verification protocols to 
the TTBT and PNET. Gorbachev could well raise the question of “next 
steps,” especially in the context of the 1990 NPT Review Conference 
and the LTBT Amendment Conference. We should make clear that a 
responsible nuclear superpower must test its nuclear weapons.
Gorbachev will likely press for a commitment not to produce 
binary weapons. He may call for a moratorium now, or he may call for 
an end to production when we enter into either a bilateral reduction 
agreement or the multilateral ban. Indeed, knowing of the President’s 
personal commitment to CW arms control as expressed in his UNGA 
initiatives, but also knowing the President’s past votes on the binary 
program, Gorbachev may offer a deal of deep bilateral cuts in exchange 
for an end to binary production. We should make clear that we will 
continue production until we have the safe stocks necessary, but we 
should keep our options open until we are certain of the exact relation-
ship between our binary program and our CW arms control timetable.
Numerous other arms control related issues may come up—­nuclear, 
chemical and missile proliferation, outer space cooperation, technology 
transfer controls, etc. In general, Gorbachev’s theme on these issues 
will stress cooperation in a new global security environment. But on a 
number of these issues, he may try to position the Soviet Union as being 
more supportive of the aspirations of developing nations, even as he 
presses for more open Soviet access to the economies and technologies 
of developed nations.
