Paraguay  997
Washington visit,3 that unjustified insinuations and veiled threats are 
not repeat not conducive to cooperation toward solution Paraguay’s 
economic problems. Meanwhile will appreciate cable summarizing 
your responses to FM on above aspects of his statements4.
ACTING
3 Rubottom met with [illegible in the original] in New York and later reported to 
Ambassador Ploeser in Paraguay that [illegible in the original] had expressed views sim-
ilar to [illegible in the original] described in Embassy despatch 111, but that he has not 
pressed them in any objectionable way. Rubottom also indicated that he made no com-
mitments to [illegible in the original]. (734.5-MSP/9–2658)
4 In telegram 61 from Asuncion, September 19, 1958, [illegible in the original] Albert 
S. [illegible in the original] responded that the Ambassador had repeatedly pointed out 
the generosity of the United States aid program in Paraguay and the importance of a 
sound fiscal policy. (734.5-MSP/8–1958) The Embassy’s further response is printed as 
Document PA–6.
PA–6.	
Telegram from the Chargé in Bolivia (Carter) to the 
Department of State1

Asunción, September 22, 1958, 10 p.m.
64. DEPTEL 59.2 Under Secretary Foreign Office3 today again 
referred GOP desire massive aid and cited news reports additional 
aid Bolivia and Bolivian Congress recommendation trade and diplo-
matic relations Russia. I took occasion emphasize all points reference 
telegram leaving no doubt our attitude. Emphasized our aid based 
GOP need, that aid Bolivia also aids Paraguay. Later in day confidant 
President Stroessner approached me same subject and I replied similar 
vein adding would be better if this new approach abandoned before 
going any further. He said he would report this back to President. My 
impression is conversations had sobering effect both individuals.
Carter
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 734.5 MSP/9–2058. Confidential; 
Priority.
2 [illegible in the original].
3 [illegible in the original].
