148
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Soviet ideologue and chairman of the special Soviet Politburo commis-
sion on the Polish events Mikhail Suslov reported on the December 5
PCC meeting: “Most importantly, the Polish comrades understand the
great danger that hangs over Poland, and they recognize the great
harm of the actions of the anti-socialist elements who represent a great
threat to the socialist gains of the Polish people.” Kania, concluded
Suslov, “noted that the Polish United Workers’ Party, the Polish people,
its healthy forces, its armed forces, the organs of State Security and
police, which support the PUWP, will be able to deal with and normal-
ize the situation by their own means.” Brezhnev’s speech at the meeting,
Suslov told the Politburo, “contained all the necessary instructions for
the PUWP and the Polish comrades.” (From Solidarity to Martial Law,
pages 167–168)
In his December 19 NSC Weekly Report to the President, Assistant
to the President for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski
reported: “The same Soviet clandestine source who provided the report
detailing Soviet invasion plans now reports that the invasion has been
postponed for the ‘indefinite future.’ The principal reason for the post-
ponement, according to the sources, was the effectiveness of the West-
ern counter propaganda campaign which convinced the Kremlin the
West would retaliate ‘massively’ with political and economic sanc-
tions.” (Carter Library, Plains File, Subject File, Box 30, NSC Weekly
Reports, 6–12/80)
43.
Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of
State1
Warsaw, December 9, 1980, 1558Z
12334. Subject: Poland: Post-Intervention U.S. Policy.
1. (C-entire text.)
2. Summary: In considering the U.S. response to Russian/Warsaw
Pact intervention in Poland, the guiding principle should be to distin-
guish between the Russians and the EE’s. The former, not the latter,
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800586–1050.
Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information to Belgrade, East Berlin, Bonn,
Bucharest, Budapest, London, Moscow, Paris, Prague, Sofia, Vienna, USMission West
Berlin, Munich, and USNATO.
