World Hunger and Food Policy The Commission Report supports international efforts to create price stabilizing agreements for products of particular interest to developing countries. As you know, negotiations on the Common Fund11 have just been completed, and we expect implementing legislation will be prepared and submitted to the Congress in your next term. Attempts to renegotiate the International Tin Agreement have begun, and the U.S. Senate recently ratified U.S. participation in the International Rubber Agreement.12 The U.S. is also a member of the International Coffee and the International Sugar Agreements and is participating in efforts to negotiate a new international cocoa agreement. A reaffirmation of our willingness to negotiate economically sound and mutually beneficial commodity agreements would also be appropriate at the outset of your next term. The Food for Peace Program and Food Reserves—Another set of recommendations focuses on the PL 480 program and making that program developmentally more effective. You have endorsed that objective and the Departments of Agriculture and State are working with us to achieve it. The Commission calls for a complete revision of the program. At this point, we are not convinced that such a revision is either needed or politically feasible. We do have underway, however, a number of steps to strengthen the program without legislation and will be reviewing the range of more extensive changes that might be undertaken. We are also taking steps to strengthen our substantive involvement in the operations of the United Nations programs and agencies working in the hunger field—particularly the FAO and its World Food Program. Many of the Commission’s specific recommendations on measures to improve world food security are being implemented or negotiated. The United States has, for example, pledged 4.47 million tons of grain to the new Food Aid Convention and has encouraged new and increased contributions from other donor governments.13 Under the auspices of the International Wheat Council, the United States is working to develop a basis for a new international wheat agreement. We have actively supported efforts by the World Food Council to promote food sector strategies in developing countries. More than thirty food priority countries have indicated an interest in developing these strategies and have approached donor countries, including the United States, for tech-
