World Hunger and Food Policy
925
The Commission Report supports international efforts to create
price stabilizing agreements for products of particular interest to devel-
oping countries. As you know, negotiations on the Common Fund11
have just been completed, and we expect implementing legislation will
be prepared and submitted to the Congress in your next term. At-
tempts to renegotiate the International Tin Agreement have begun, and
the U.S. Senate recently ratified U.S. participation in the International
Rubber Agreement.12 The U.S. is also a member of the International
Coffee and the International Sugar Agreements and is participating in
efforts to negotiate a new international cocoa agreement. A reaffirma-
tion of our willingness to negotiate economically sound and mutually
beneficial commodity agreements would also be appropriate at the
outset of your next term.
The Food for Peace Program and Food Reserves—Another set of recom-
mendations focuses on the PL 480 program and making that program
developmentally more effective. You have endorsed that objective and
the Departments of Agriculture and State are working with us to
achieve it. The Commission calls for a complete revision of the pro-
gram. At this point, we are not convinced that such a revision is either
needed or politically feasible. We do have underway, however, a
number of steps to strengthen the program without legislation and will
be reviewing the range of more extensive changes that might be under-
taken. We are also taking steps to strengthen our substantive involve-
ment in the operations of the United Nations programs and agencies
working in the hunger field—particularly the FAO and its World Food
Program.
Many of the Commission’s specific recommendations on measures
to improve world food security are being implemented or negotiated.
The United States has, for example, pledged 4.47 million tons of grain
to the new Food Aid Convention and has encouraged new and in-
creased contributions from other donor governments.13 Under the aus-
pices of the International Wheat Council, the United States is working
to develop a basis for a new international wheat agreement. We have
actively supported efforts by the World Food Council to promote food
sector strategies in developing countries. More than thirty food priority
countries have indicated an interest in developing these strategies and
have approached donor countries, including the United States, for tech-
11 Documentation on the Common Fund is in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume
III, Foreign Economic Policy.
12 The first international natural rubber agreement, which sought to establish a
550,000-ton rubber reserve, was adopted in Geneva on October 5, 1979. On May 22, 1980,
the Senate voted 90–1 to ratify the agreement. (“Ways and Means Votes Against Carter’s
Oil Import Fee,” The Washington Post, May 23, 1980, p. A–6)
13 See footnote 5, Document 269.
