North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 d. it would enhance the fund’s standing on the market over time through the financial solidarity derived from the participation of major industrialized countries. 6. In advancing our arguments in the OECD we have brought along the major industrialized countries to the point where—despite some misgivings on the part of the UK and France—they are now willing to support our approach as a credible opening position, although LDC pressure could result in a breakdown of OECD cohesion during the course of the November session. 7. The scheme has been criticized, even within the USG, on the grounds that its credit worthiness could be strengthened; that—aside from the economies derived from pooling cash resources under ICAs— the fund would not provide any benefits beyond those the ICAs could obtain on their own; and that since it would have no resources of its own, it is no more than a useless financial intermediary. In this view, tabling of such a proposal would be viewed by the LDCs as a failure by the industrialized countries to live up to their commitment at CIEC and could, therefore, lead to a major confrontation. Negotiating Strategy 8. An immediate issue is whether a common fund of the sort outlined above is of sufficient scope to be a valid basis for negotiations throughout November and beyond. The basic conceptual difference between the US and G–77 centers on the provision of direct financial contributions to the common fund and whether such contributions can be used for purposes other than price stabilization through international buffer stocks. The following paragraphs discuss a number of proposals that have been put forward as possible additions to our current proposal: Producer/Consumer Co-financing of ICA Buffer Stocks 9. Link the proposal to an explicit statement by industrialized countries accepting the principle of consumer participation in the financing of buffer stocks negotiated by producers and consumers. Although The Executive Branch has already accepted this principle, further consultations with the Congress will be necessary. The Germans, in a major policy reversal, have endorsed this principle as well. The British are referring it to Ministers and the Japanese have not yet accepted it. A joint industrialized country statement on this issue would represent a genuine step forward in assuring adequate financing of buffer stocks. It would also significantly enhance the credibility of a pooling arrangement. Support for Backup Mechanisms 10. Provide government contribution(s) to the fund as a backup reserve, either directly or through each ICA for the purpose of enhancing
