410  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
illustrates growing concern US over Chinese failure implement their 
agreement. (Deptel 910) US Government seriously concerned by PRC’s 
continued evasion its express commitments, which cannot fail have 
unfavorable effect on other aspects these talks.
2. At last meeting Wang introduced subjects such as status Taiwan 
and presence US forces in area on which US and PRC hold different 
views. These not subjects which can be usefully discussed under pres­
ent conditions. Remind Wang that fundamental and pressing need 
is for both parties renounce use force so as to remove threat of war. 
Whenever Wang attempts divert discussion to other topics you should 
endeavor bring it back to this simple basic proposition.
3. With reference Wang’s demand that US withdraw its forces from 
Taiwan area you should point out that this is in effect a demand that US 
change its policy and abandon those whom it has pledged to defend 
from attack, under threat that armed force will be used if US does not 
accede to that demand. US does not intend yield to threat of force. Force 
is not an admissible means settling differences between us. US is not 
demanding that PRC alter its views and objectives. We only ask that 
both sides declare their willingness renounce force. Then and only then 
can differences be freely discussed.
4. Discretion on unaccounted-­for military personnel continues in 
accordance with Deptel 870 paragraph 3 and on embargo accordance 
paragraph 5 same telegram.
5. As opportunity arises endeavor smoke out Wang on what other 
issues PRC may wish discuss under Item 2 so that we may know of all 
questions Chinese Communists want settled. Purpose questions raised 
latter paragraph is to lay basis for our inability solve embargo item uni­
laterally (your letter Oct. 13).
6. While Secretary in Geneva, responsibility for issuance your 
regular instructions will remain in Department. Telegraph promptly 
any instructions you may receive direct from Secretary in order keep 
Department fully informed. Department will keep Secretary informed 
of all instructions to you.
Dulles
