480  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
its international problems. This unfortunately, cannot be guaranteed. A 
factor auguring well for the future, however, is the current absence of 
the bitter diatribes against Betancourt in the local press which appeared 
both before and since his inauguration as President of Venezuela and 
the tangible steps taken to normalize relations between the two coun-
tries. The result of this campaign are, however, problematical.
The most influential group of Dominicans today consist of those 
who are wealthy industrialists and property owners and who have 
benefitted directly from the Trujillo regime. Because of their influence, 
numbers, and popular support which they control, this group must 
be considered in any analysis of future political developments in the 
Dominican Republic. The recent policies of Castro have unquestionably 
had a profound effect and have noticeably instilled fear in this import-
ant element. During recent weeks members of this group have indi-
cated to Embassy officers their strong belief that if Trujillo were to meet 
his demise today, by natural causes or violence, they and their support-
ers would through the framework of the Dominican Party supported by 
the military, be able to continue for some time the status quo with a view 
to gradual transition to a more democratic government. While mem-
bers of this influential group have long supported the Generalissimo, 
they have not indicated they wish to continue indefinitely with Ramfis 
or other members of the family. This group could be visualized as sup-
porting a figurehead (perhaps President Hector Trujillo) while moving 
toward a more democratic government similar to that of the Somzas in 
Nicaragua.
Whatever happens, a most significant factor to bear in mind is the 
basic friendliness of the Dominican people to the United States. There 
is unquestionably a reservoir of goodwill toward the U.S. among all 
levels of Dominican society. At the time of the June 16 resolution of 
the Dominican Congress to cancel aid agreements with the United 
States, it was apparent from numerous indications that knowledge-
able Dominicans did not agree with the official line attributing the 
Dominican Republic’s economic and political woes to the United States.
One final factor in the analysis of the political future of the 
Dominican Republic which should not be overlooked is the fact that the 
people are not now politically educated to accept democracy as it exists 
in the United States. The person who emerges either from the ashes of 
the Trujillo regime or from a relatively peaceful transition must be a 
forceful leader, albeit not necessarily as dangerously leftist as Castro or 
extremely rightist as dictator Trujillo.
In conclusion the Embassy must, perforce, qualify the above by 
stating that dependable and objective Dominican sources of informa-
tion, as in all totalitarian countries, are scarce and hard to find.
Harry M. Lefton
