National Security Policy 689 (3) The 4238th Strategic Wing at Barksdale Air Force Base would conduct an exercise involving one of the B–52 squadrons. This would involve one sortie daily, which would receive two refuelings from Westo­ ver Air Force Base. (e) This exercise would be conducted under current manning levels. 7. The briefer then requested approval of the conducting of Headstart II. * * * * In discussing the briefing, the President questioned the proposed direction of flight of the 92nd Bomb Wing from Fairchild toward the Aleutians (Headstart II).This, he feels, is a bad direction since it is head­ ing directly toward the USSR. General LeMay said this can be easily fixed. He pointed out that this flight is not within known Soviet radar range nor within an area where Soviet reconnaissance aircraft might be operating. However, Secretary McElroy and Secretary Quarles were of the view that this route should be pulled back closer to the American Continent, and the promise to do so satisfied the President. The President then questioned the matter of the flight routes. In view of the fact that for a certain portion of each sortie an aircraft would be incapable of diversion to strike the USSR, it appeared to him that our overall capability during this ineffective period would be lessened. He asked why we do not shorten these routes to eliminate the ineffective time. General LeMay answered that the purpose of this exercise is to determine the best flight time. If we do not stretch these flights to the maximum, it will not be possible to determine the optimum. To this Colonel Brown added that the efficiency of the B–52 is increased due to increased length of time in the air. This fact is the result of the greater proportion of time at optimum altitudes per flight. General Lemay also added that another purpose of this test was to determine data on metal fatigue. These answers appeared to satisfy the President. The President then questioned the effect of this exercise on the calendar life of the aircraft involved. Mr. McElroy added that we will probably discard most of these aircraft before they are worn out. The President inquired of General LeMay whether provisions are made for the crew to be rested while airborne, and General LeMay answered in the affirmative. The crew is organized so as to allow ade­ quate rest. The President now turned to a political question which is of some concern to him. In the light of the pressures from Congress to maintain an “air-­borne alert,” the President dislikes that name. He is concerned
