556  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
have our dispute in Taiwan area. As I understood his remarks, effect 
is that his government reserved right at any time interpret situation as 
domestic matter in which it entitled take offensive military action.
9. I said stated in another way his proposal appeared to me to 
have been that although we would seem to have agreed renounce force 
between us, his government would maintain threat at any time of its 
choosing to initiate hostilities that area. We consider it important that 
whatever is said on renunciation of force, it be made clear that even 
though there may be differences in interpretation of situation in Taiwan 
area, announcement also apply that area.
10. I said this was somewhat long introduction my question, but 
I wanted make clear our line of thinking. Questions whether or not 
Wang willing consider mention in some specific way of Taiwan area 
in order make clear we both consider announcement applies Taiwan 
area. Said I might add I perfectly willing this be done in manner not to 
prejudice his government’s position and pursuit by peaceful means of 
its policies.
11. Wang said we had already spent long period of time discuss­
ing this question. Purpose discussions was overcome obstacles in way 
of settlement between us. Proposal for both of us make announce­
ment originated with myself. Now we have before us two drafts for 
announcement. Each of us has points which he cannot accept in draft 
of other one.
12. Wang said however at last meeting I had indicated we agreed 
on principle making announcement and also agreed on need for 
peaceful settlement disputes but differed on text of agreement. At last 
meeting I had also repeatedly indicated that so long as we agreed in 
principle, there should be no difficulty in agreeing on text. So long as 
we both serious and sincere in search of agreement, there should be no 
difficulty.
13. Wang said his side had now made new effort in that spirit. I 
would note that new proposal did not contain anything to which we 
not able agree between us at present time. He considered that issues 
between PRC and US must necessarily be solved step by step. His 
idea was first to agree on points in common between us. So long as we 
employed peaceful means for settling disputes, he saw no reason for 
not reaching agreement.
14. Wang said in regard to mention of Taiwan area, he wished to 
renew his statements made in past meetings. We must not confuse 
international with domestic issues. Internal conflict naturally not 
within scope of present talks. In explaining fourth paragraph October 
27 draft and also in presenting present draft, he had made clear dis­
putes between two countries include dispute between us in Taiwan
