1452  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
private conversations with military personnel on this matter. They run 
something like this:
This country depends upon great strength in a few types of weap­
ons to deter the over-­all more diversified military threat of the Soviet 
Union. Thus, US–USSR bilateral arms control of a few weapon types 
(or to be more specific, manned bombers and ICBM’s) would leave this 
country at a severe military disadvantage. Furthermore, if this country 
discusses controls on individual weapon systems with the Soviets at 
Geneva, we are likely to be drawn into such an agreement by Soviet 
propaganda and public opinion. If such an unfavorable agreement 
were to materialize, the situation would probably become even more 
serious since Congress, as a result of a false sense of security, would 
probably reduce military funding.
If one tries to counter such an argument by stating that the 
forthcoming talks are only technical discussions, and that any actual 
agreement would be realized in later political negotiations where this 
country would pursue disarmament on a comprehensive basis, they 
answer: This is the same story that was given to us on technical test ces­
sation discussions! They continue by noting that our policy prior to the 
Geneva test cessation talks stated that we would entertain test cessation 
only as part of a comprehensive program that included a monitoring 
system, the control of fissionable material and the ultimate abolition 
of nuclear weapons. They then point out that because of the “technical 
success” at Geneva and as a result of world opinion and Soviet pro­
paganda, we have now been forced into a test cessation yet we do not 
even have an inspection system to monitor it.
I feel that the JCS are sufficiently dogmatic in their position on this 
subject that they are likely to exercise their prerogative to take this basic 
policy decision to the President. In the light of this possibility, I wonder 
if it would be advisable to invite Gordon Gray to the meeting on the 
25th so that he may be apprised of the situation at the earliest possible 
date.
Over and above the major policy question that needs to be resolved, 
there are three other minor points that you may wish to bring up for 
discussion. The first involves the identification of “space vehicles” as 
instruments of surprise attack. Inasmuch as this country does not have 
such an exotic weapon capability, it does not seem reasonable to dis­
cuss an inspection system for space vehicles at the Geneva meeting. 
The technical discussions should point out, however, that modifica­
tions of the inspection system may be necessary as weapon technology 
changes.
The second item involves the wording of the footnote on page 3 
of the attached document. I believe the footnote should read: “At this 
point, it is not essential that agreement be reached among the two
