3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 July–December 1978 479 Summary: Gromyko’s presentation was generally tough. This has been standard fare at each initial meeting we have had over the past 20 months. He made constructive proposals on heavy mobiles, depressed trajectories and advance notice of launches and may have implicitly accepted averaging concept for ALCM numbers limits, but strongly rejected the number of 35. He repeated Soviet positions on new types linkage to ALCM numbers issue (without referring to the 10/6 issue) and cruise missile definition. He rejected the concept of irreversible inoperability, but said that reductions would take place throughout the period. He rejected any fixed date for protocol expiration. He rejected the U.S. draft of the Backfire statement, agreeing only to omission of the flight profile and radius, and said that there would be no Soviet confirmation of the production rate number or anything else. On telemetry encryption, he was confused, saying there is no necessity for agreement and nothing will come of attempts to reach agreement. End summary. 1. Expressing recognition that there were some positive elements in the proposals made by the President 30 September,3 and the hope that our meetings would be marked by “a major step forward,” Gromyko also said the obstacles to progress lie in the unrealistic nature of some U.S. positions, unreasonable linkages, and the raising of new questions. On substance, his presentation was generally tough, especially on Backfire, cruise missile definition, protocol expiration, and telemetry encryption. Septel reports his agreement on heavy mobiles, etc., and his proposals on advance ICBM launch notice and to defer depressed SLBM trajectory issue to SALT III along with other measures to reduce danger of surprise attacks. 2. After repeating familiar point that Soviet agreement to non-increase in RV’s on existing ICBM’s is linked to U.S. agreement on ALCM numbers limits, he rejected our first alternative, the unilateral U.S. statement, as unacceptably linking limits on strategic arms to the non-strategic issue of air defenses. As to the second U.S. alternative, the averaging approach, he said the fixing of the obligation to limit ALCM numbers in the treaty text was a positive step but the specific figure proposed is unacceptable because it would make it possible almost to double the number of 20 per aircraft. Comment: This seems a clear signal that the averaging concept is acceptable with only the number in dispute. 3. Gromyko in his brief discussion of new types did not refer to either definition issues or to the 10/6 question. 4. Gromyko strongly rejected the U.S. cruise missile definition position, saying that no argument would change their minds, because it 3 See Document 150.
