722 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI (S) 6. In the long term, however, our current position may need to be reexamined in light of the agreements reached in Moscow. I know that the Ungroup scrubbed the current position carefully. If we can get it that position, fine. But I’m afraid that we’ll find this a tough sell. Thus I believe that, after the summit, it may be necessary to make a political, cabinet level judgement about how much future flexibility we are going to try to protect. I’m afraid that if we fail to do this, the ALCM vampire will keep coming back to life. (U) 7. Lets talk about this while I’m in Washington after the summit. Cheers, Rick 133. Letter From Senator Helms, Grassley, McClure, Thurmond, Lott, Symms, Hatch, Pressler, and Wallop to President Bush1 Washington, May 23, 1990 Dear Mr. President: Reports of Secretary Baker’s trip to the Soviet Union last week for the purpose of drafting a proposed framework statement for a START treaty have raised two profound concerns. The first is that the Jackson Amendment to the 1972 SALT I Agreement requires, in the language of the Amendment, “equal levels” of strategic forces in any future treaty between the United States and the Soviet Union limiting intercontinental strategic forces. Of course, this is still the law of the land on the fundamental U.S. objective in strategic arms control treaties. Yet reports of the meeting between Secretary Baker and Foreign Minister Shevardnadze suggest that the United States conceded to the Soviets a 40% advantage [210 vs.150] in the number of heavy bombers carrying air-­launched cruise missiles (ALCMs), and also a more than two-­to-­one advantage over the United States [3,700 vs. 1,800] in the potential number of ALCMs carried by these bombers. 1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, Brent Scowcroft Collection, USSR Chronological Files, START Files, OA/ID 91122–005, Soviet Power Collapse in Eastern Europe—Strategic Arms Control (May 1990). No classification marking. All brackets are in the original text.
