838 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 255. Editorial Note On March 9, 1978, President Jimmy Carter and Yugoslav President Josip Broz Tito met again from 9:34 to 11:04 a.m. in the White House Cabinet Room. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) This time Secretary of Defense Harold Brown also joined the U.S. delegation, while Vice President Walter Mondale was absent. No transcript of the conversation has been found in U.S. archives. The Yugoslav Government prepared its own memorandum of conversation, available in the Archives of Yugoslavia, Belgrade, Serbia. A copy of the document and its translation are available in the Woodrow Wilson Center’s Cold War International History Project (CWIHP). The excerpts below are taken from the CWIHP translation. Noting that the March 8 discussion between Secretary of State Cyrus Vance and Yugoslav Foreign Minister Milos Minic was successful, Carter suggested continuing their discussion of international issues, unless President Tito felt it necessary to clarify some of the remaining bilateral issues. Tito replied: “I would like to talk about the issues of détente as one of the key issues in the relations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union.” “I have been convinced,” Tito stated, “that you are making efforts from your side toward détente.” Noting that more trust was necessary to improve the relationship between the two superpowers, Tito assured Carter that he would “report to Brezhnev the general impression I got from you about the issues of international problems and détente, including my opinion that it would be necessary for the two of you to meet and have a dialogue among yourselves.” Informing Tito of the outstanding invitation to the White House he had extended to Brezhnev, Carter added: “I would be grateful, Mr. President, if you could influence him so that he accepts the invitation and visits the U.S.” The two leaders discussed the developing situation in Somalia, as well as their respective positions vis-à-vis the situation in Rhodesia and Namibia. The United States and United Kingdom had carried out joint negotiations on the Rhodesia problem, Carter informed Tito. Carter continued: “There are good contacts with the presidents of the so-called Frontline States and with the members of the United Nations. We cannot recognize the so-called internal settlement of the problem if it is not in the line with the Anglo-American negotiations. We hope we will be able to help the national leaders to meet in the near future.” Carter expressed his hope that, when the new Rhodesian Government was formed and recognized, it “will refuse the involvement of the foreign forces, which should not interfere with the internal issues of Rhodesia.” Turning to the upcoming Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) Foreign Ministers’ conference in Belgrade, Tito informed Carter that the Yugo-
