Human Rights
365
governments be repressive. As noted, this is sometimes because we
think our own security interests are at stake, or because sales of military
equipment contribute to such vital objectives such as oil price stability,
or help pay for oil imports. In Korea, it is because we are engaged in a
delicate maneuver to reduce our military involvement without dam-
aging our security interests. But the apparent discrepancies in our ap-
plication of human rights criteria to economic as opposed to military
decisions can give the impression that we are less interested in human
rights—including economic development of the LDC’s—than in tradi-
tional cold war criteria for “friends.”
The Weak vs. The Strong
We sometimes seem to be “punishing” countries which don’t
matter very much to our security or economic interests (Paraguay, Uru-
guay, the Central African Empire, Benin, Guinea) while glossing over
the human rights record of some who do (Iran, Zaire, Saudi Arabia, Is-
rael, the PRC, even, of late, the Soviet Union).
The charge is not always justified. In the case of Israel, our ap-
parent leniency is in fact part of a general strategy to resolve, inter alia,
its only serious human rights problem—the military occupation of
Arab lands. At the CSCE, we have been harder on Moscow’s human
rights failings than is generally realized. And when the charge is true, it
sometimes is for the good reason that our human rights concerns are
being kept in context with other important national interests, or that we
are concentrating on countries where we have some hope of being ef-
fective (i.e., recipients of our aid) rather than posturing toward, for in-
stance, the PRC. Nonetheless, we risk the unhappy image of being
tougher on the weak than the strong.
Regional Discrimination
Our actions can also be read as focusing on Latin America as the
best theater for human rights activity, at little risk to other American in-
terests. As earlier noted, we have opposed or urged deferral of 22 IFI
loans to Latin America; seven to Africa; and four to East Asia. Our mili-
tary programs in Latin America have been massively affected by
human rights considerations; only marginally so in East Asia; and not
at all in the Middle East.
There are reasons for this, some better than others: we have a good
deal of leverage in Latin America; more countries there are traditional
recipients of our economic and military assistance than in, for instance,
East Asia; our security and economic stake is less than in East Asia or
the Middle East; Latin American governments are ideologically disin-
clined to turn to Moscow; we expect more of it because it is part of the
West and therefore more culturally attuned to the claims of individual
