186
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Saunders suggested that the Egyptians provide us with appropriate
language.
The Secretary asked whether the use of the term “consensus” will
solve the Egyptian problem. The Egyptians responded unanimously
that it will not. Saunders pointed out that the Israelis are a party to the
problem during the transitional period. El-Baz agreed to provide us
with pertinent language.
El-Baz then referred to the paragraph in our paper on Jerusalem.
He expressed understanding that the problem is difficult and sensitive.
But, he pointed out, Arab Jerusalem is part of the West Bank. Neither
the United States nor Egypt recognize the amalgamation of Arab Jeru-
salem into Israel. Jerusalem, he insisted, is included in the Israeli obli-
gation to withdraw. Egypt agrees that the city should not be redivided.
He drew a distinction between the issue of sovereignty in East Jeru-
salem and that of the life of the people. The Secretary pointed out that
our paper says that Jerusalem should not again be divided. El-Baz
noted that the United States also agrees that Jerusalem is not a part of
Israel. The Secretary observed that trying to solve the Jerusalem
problem now is a mistake. It will simply create problems. He suggested
it be left to the Jordanians for the future. Kamel observed that we want
Hussein to come in. El-Baz stated that if this is our common concern,
the United States formula is harmful. The “future relationship” phrase
used in the American paper, he contended is Israeli phraseology. The
Secretary pointed out that it is not, it is our language. El-Baz insisted
that two sovereignties in Jerusalem should not be allowed. The issue
should be handled first by Israeli withdrawal, and thereafter by agree-
ment not to redivide the city. The starting point should be non-
recognition of the Israeli occupation. Unfortunately, the phraseology in
the American paper leads to the conclusion that the Israelis may re-
main. The Secretary pointed out that we are simply saying that the ulti-
mate arrangements for Jerusalem must be worked out some time in the
future. Atherton suggested that the final sentence in the paragraph on
Jerusalem should take care of the Egyptian concern. The Egyptians in-
sisted it will not. The Secretary asked whether the Wailing Wall should
be under Jordan. El-Baz said it should be so far as jurisdiction is con-
cerned. The Jews might have the right to visit, and claimed this is al-
ready taken care of by the reference to freedom of access to religious
shrines. El-Reedy pointed out that internationalization of Jerusalem is
another possibility. The Secretary wondered whether anyone would
support this. El-Baz did not answer the question, but urged that
nothing be included to prejudge the final outcome. Doing so would
mean that the status quo will be perpetuated. The Secretary observed
that the more one goes into detail with respect to Jerusalem, the greater
