Special Session on Disarmament
1213
2. Cut-Off of Fissionable Material Production
ACDA has proposed that the US continue its traditional position
of favoring a cut-off by proposing to “seek to achieve the worldwide
cessation of the production of fissionable materials for weapons pur-
poses.” Among other things, they argue that:
(a) [2 lines not declassified]
(b) [2 lines not declassified]
(c) [3 lines not declassified]
(d) [5 lines not declassified]
(e) we have no plans to resume production of fissionable material;
no agency is asking for such authority.
Attached at Tab B is a memorandum from ACDA setting forth
their case at greater length.6 USUN supports the ACDA proposal. All
the other relevant agencies—State, DOD, DOE, JCS, OSTP, NSC—
firmly oppose the ACDA initiative (DOD and JCS with particular vehe-
mence), although some think we should be “positively noncommittal”
if a similar proposal is advanced by other states (as, indeed, several
non-aligned states will do). The opposition to the cut-off argues that:
a. [4 lines not declassified]
b. [4 lines not declassified]
c. It is very dubious whether the Soviets would ever agree to IAEA
inspection and other safeguards necessary to police a cut-off.
d. In the longer term, new HEU production facilities utilizing ad-
vanced technologies (i.e., gas centrifuge and laser isotope separation)
[1½ lines not declassified]
e. Even with a cut-off, production of HEU for marine propulsion
reactors and of tritium would have to continue, and it will be very diffi-
cult to develop verification techniques which would not compromise
sensitive data.
f. The UK and probably France oppose a cut-off.
As you know, this issue is very sensitive politically; a decision to
go ahead with the cut-off proposal could have significant repercussions
on our efforts to get SALT and CTB agreements. A repudiation of our
traditional support for the cut-off could have adverse impact on our
overall non proliferation efforts.7
The issue thus is:
Should the US propose negotiations designed to lead to the worldwide
cessation of the production of fissionable materials for weapons purposes?
Yes
No8
6 See Document 491.
7 Underneath this paragraph, Brzezinski wrote “(I also attach a strong negative
from Harold),” a reference to Document 490.
8 Carter checked the “No” option.
