wireless companies had informed him of their being interested in the Mitsui
Station at Peking.
8. I said to him that the Ambassador from Japan was insisting to me
constantly that the Mitsui Station was adequate to meet China’s needs in
regard to overseas radio communications and that construction of more
stations would only increase China’s financial burdens unnecessarily.
General Harbord replied that he was not able to understand how any such
claim could be advanced by the Japanese, for according to his information
the Japanese station was antiquated and not capable of meeting
requirements of overseas communications. He said he believed the Japanese
would abandon any such claims in negotiations.
9. I inquired of him whether the Radio Corporation would regard an AEFG
arrangement as acceptable, and I informed him of the reply to the Japanese
Government which I had considered making, and which I gave above in
paragraph 4. His answer was that from the beginning the Radio Corporation
had been in favor of an international arrangement, but it had subordinated
its wishes in 1921 to those of the Department in the interest of Chinese-
American control of radio communication directly between the United
States and China. He declared the proposal as I outlined it acceptable to his
company, provided it did not involve, as proposed by Japan, a straight loan
by the Radio Corporation, which has no interest in financing as such.
10. He suggested it was necessary to get some definite decision from the
Chinese Government for Chinese-American control of communication by
radio with the United States, or else for an internationalization of such
communication which was the only alternative that seemed to offer. He
proposed that instructions be sent in accord with the lines of Department’s
97. I agreed to this. Should there be no responsible member of the
Government of China in Peking at present to whom you can make the
statements in Department’s 97, action should not be taken until such an
individual appears. It is understood in any case that the Radio Corporation
will require the return of Davis by June 30.
11. My desire is that you carefully consider the proposals now placed
before you and give me your frank comment and suggestions concerning
the best means of arriving at some settlement that is practical and workable.
