530 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI this, several Permreps asked questions about the possibility of a START II negotiation, reflecting an overall feeling that a START agreement is near. End Summary. SLCM’s 3. Canadian Permrep Smith, who had strongly criticized the U.S. position on SLCM’s at previous NST briefings, noted that the Soviets had dropped their opposition to U.S. insistence on handling SLCM’s in a declaratory regime. He wondered whether discussions on SLCM limits had focused on production rather than deployment. He also wanted to know whether the Soviet had received a quid pro quo in return for agreeing to a declaratory SLCM regime. 4. In response, Ambassador Burt reminded Permrep Smith that he had told the NAC back in November3 that the Soviets would move toward our declaratory approach. There had been no quid pro quo. He indicated that the U.S. had originally wanted to declare inventories as part of the regime, but the Soviets insisted this would require verification. When we changed our position to declaration of deployments, the Soviets agreed to drop verification measures. 5. Belgian Permrep Thuysbaert asked whether the U.S. wanted to exclude conventional SLCM’s from any declaratory regime. Ambassador Burt confirmed that this was the case, but that the issue remained to be resolved with the Soviets, who wished to include both nuclear and conventional SLCMs. Burt said this issue and the question of range, where the U.S. proposed 300 km and the Soviets 600 km, were the only two unresolved issues on SLCMs. Deputy U.K. Permrep Beattie asked whether there would be ay formal linkage between the START Treaty and the side declaration on SLCM’s, for example, with respect to duration. Ambassador Burt responded that there would be no linkage between the two agreements, although he anticipated that they would be coterminus. He noted that the U.S. was seeking a 15-­year limit for START. 6. Norwegian Permrep Kristvik suggested that the U.S.–Soviet decision to deal with SLCM’s outside the START Treaty was essentially “political” and then asked whether the U.S. would disclose to the Soviets any information in its SLCM declaration that was not already available in public documents. Ambassador Burt said he did not agree that parallel SLCM declarations were only a political solution. The main problems surrounding SLCM verification and limitation had been rooted in profound technical and operational concerns. 3 In telegram 6214, November 9, 1989, the Mission to NATO transmitted the discussion following Burt and Smith’s presentation to the North Atlantic Council. (Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, D89980-0274).
