Chapter 2, January–June 1989 99 the first place, a START agreement is not imminent. Until START negotiations enter the end game, pressure to reach an accommodation with the Soviets in DST is not likely to increase appreciably. In the meantime, SDI testing will yield valuable information on the potential effectiveness of a ballistic missile defense which may have an important bearing on the Administration’s decision on this question. Ultimately, if the Soviets remain adamant in their START/DST linkage, the decision will hinge on an assessment of the importance to U.S. national security of START relative to the deployment of effective ballistic missile defenses. (S) Second, it is not clear that a START agreement would require the United States to make concessions on one or more of its DST objectives (just as they were not required to achieve an INF agreement). If the United States were perceived by the Soviet Union to have achieved a favorable consensus on President Bush’s SDI program decision, the Soviets might eventually view cooperation with the United States—­with the object of influencing the course of the SDI program—­to be an approach that would better serve Soviet interests than taking an obstructionist approach on DST and/or START. (S) Finally, as a practical matter, if a START agreement is reached in return for U.S. concessions on its DST objectives that reduce the viability of SDI, such an exchange could create a political climate in the U.S. Senate that would make it more difficult to achieve the 2/3 vote necessary to ratify a START agreement. (S) DST Concessions May be Necessary—The other view is that because U.S. agreement to a nonwithdrawal period may be a necessary quid pro quo for Soviet agreement to START, and because the Soviets may require limitations on testing during the nonwithdrawal period, we will need to decide whether to insist on the broad interpretation, even if it risks blocking a START agreement. Assuming that a START agreement could be concluded in the next two years—­well before the projected SDI program deployment decision point—­we may need to reach an accommodation in the next year. Specifically, in the context of postponing SDI deployments in order to achieve START reductions, the following questions need to be answered: a) how long we can live within the narrow interpretation; b) when—­and for what purpose—­we will need the broad interpretation; and c) the duration of the nonwithdrawal period. (S) Second, it is not clear that we could get a START agreement without adjustment to our DST position. The Soviets view the linkage between offensive reductions and defensive deployments as much more organic than the artificial linkage between INF and defenses, and may not delink the two without assurances regarding SDI. The United States already has lost much bargaining leverage as a result of the domestic debate over ABM Treaty interpretation. As long as the Soviets
