Arms Control and Disarmament  1655
rejection of either of alternatives suggestions we have made and that 
they will not make any major new proposals on basic issues in next few 
days. So line of action that we will probably have to follow is the one you 
have laid out in next to last paragraph of your telegram.
We may meet Soviet objections to idea of formal recess before 
­Foreign Ministers meeting but I do not think they will press these objec­
tions and, in any case, we will be in a strong position just to say that 
time terms of resumed negotiations should be set by our Foreign Min­
isters. The fact that no one can accurately foretell how long the Foreign 
Ministers meeting will last will in itself help us avoid setting a date for 
re-­opening our conference at the time that we recess.
The only point on which I differ, and I think this is a very important 
point, is on question on how we handle staffing issue. I agree completely 
that we should try to play down the staffing issue and have it not appear 
as equal in importance to inspection and the veto. But I sincerely believe 
the only way we can do this, in present situation, is to make a limited 
movement from our present position. I think all we really have to do is to 
say that since the Soviets have now agreed that the business of control is 
really carried out by actual technical staff, and since they have abandoned 
their previous idea of controllers, we have decided to accept the idea of 
having a strictly limited number of host country nationals in the control 
posts. The number should be strictly limited so as to guard against any 
obstruction of the control function. But the presence of a limited number 
of host country nationals could be justified on grounds that host country 
also has an interest in seeing that control posts operate properly.
I would not expect that we would expose ourselves to any detailed 
negotiations on the staffing issue. And I would not put forward any 
specific formula on staffing. But I think some movement off our present 
staffing position is required to give plausibility to our claim that this 
issue can be resolved and to clearly remove it as one of the decisive 
issues. If we continue to stand pat on staffing I am afraid any talks at 
Foreign Minister level will be cluttered up by Soviet challenges on this 
point. Some slight modification of our previous position will avert the 
risk of Gromyko emphasizing this issue and thus cutting into efforts 
you have in mind to focus attention sharply on Soviet intransigence on 
basic control issues of veto and inspection.
Otherwise I agree that we are in first rate position to put our prop­
osition squarely to the Russians and put on them the onus for any 
breakdown or lack of progress in negotiations.
As I have said, I think the tactics you have outlined are sound and if 
I am authorized to make the kind of statement on staffing that I have sug­
gested, I am sure we can handle the situation so that you will have a strong 
and clear position to field when your meet with the other Foreign Ministers.
I am sending a separate message on the details of tactics we would 
like to follow over the next two weeks.
Villard
