Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX We should begin negotiations on a conservative level of U.S. commitment, but be prepared to move to a level you now decide on. For Israel, I would strongly recommend that you decide now that we will be prepared to seek grant aid for the airbase relocation, in the amount of $1.0 billion. Since the U.S. intends to perform all the work on the contract, much of this amount would be spent in the United States and not adversely impact on balance of payments. The rest, $1.5 billion, would be FMS credits (of which half is customarily forgiven). This extra $1.5 billion could be spent, in a mix to be determined by the Israelis, among equipment, extras for the relocated airbases, and other Sinai relocation costs. For Egypt, I recommend a 50–50 credit-cash split. The cash for sales would have to be found by them, presumably from Saudi Arabia, though this is chancy given likely violent Arab League reactions to the Peace Treaty. We could also seek grants from other western countries and from Japan. If Egypt obtains such a Saudi or other grant, then their terms would be equivalent to the terms we extend Israel for FMS credits, i.e., half forgiven. Alternatively, we might extend Egypt the FMS terms (half forgiven, the rest paid over 20 years beginning 10 years later, at commercial interest terms) that we customarily provide Israel. The total package shown amounts to $4.0 billion over the three year period, although the amounts required to be appropriated would be much less. The first year costs and their financing will have to be determined based on how quickly we can get programs going. We can envisage, for instance, that an Egyptian program, frontloaded, might require $300 million in FMS financing in the first year. The airbase relocation will require as much as $500 million in the first year, in order to insure completion within the three year limit. These would require an FY 1979 supplemental to get going, while other initial costs might be accomplished by a change in the FY 1980 budget proposal. The U.S. Government will also need to consider economic aid for Egypt. Egypt’s economy is not in good shape, and such aid might be very important to Sadat’s political survival. He may well have difficulty in obtaining continued assistance from other Arab states, including Saudi Arabia, which in the past has amounted to around $500 million a year in non-military aid. Recommendation: That you authorize me to negotiate financial arrangements (covering a three year period) with Israel and Egypt up to, but not exceeding the following: a. Israel: $1.0 grant assistance for airbase construction (Israel would pay all costs above this amount), and $1.5 billion FMS (half forgiven) credit.
