United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 113 ETA–47. Editorial Note On August 8, 1960, President Eisenhower sent a Special Message to the 2nd Session of the 86th Congress, which reconvened on that date, commenting on the Administration’s legislative program, and indicating that he would present new matters to Congress for the purpose of promoting free world stability. The first new program involved “an authorization in the magnitude of $600 million to help our Latin American neighbors accelerate their efforts to strengthen the social and economic structure of their nations and improve the status of their individual citizens. This program, which should include further assistance for the rehabilitation of devastated Chile, will promote the dynamism and effectiveness of all our efforts in this Hemisphere. I urgently request enactment of this authorization prior to the Economic Conference of the American Republics, which convenes at Bogotá on September 5, so that discussions leading to the development of detailed plans may be initiated there.” For the full text of the President’s message, see Public Papers of the Presidents: Eisenhower, 1960, pp. 612–619. ETA–48. Instruction from the Secretary of State to All Diplomatic Posts in Latin America1  Washington, September 2, 1960. SUBJECT Policy Information Statement (ARA-308) Special Committee of the Council of the Organization of American States to Study the Formulation of New Measures for Economic Cooperation (Committee of 21) 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.00/9–260. Confidential. Drafted by Robert Ross of the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs on August 11, 31; cleared with Alexander M. Rosenson, Deputy Director of the Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs; Simon N. Wilson, Officer in Charge of Inter-American Organizations and Conferences; Juan N. Gorrell of the Bureau of Public Affairs; and Frank A. Mau of the Executive Secretariat’s Reports and Operations Staff; and approved by Francis M. Herren, Deputy Director of the Bureau of Public Affairs’ Policy Plans and Guidance Staff. The instruction was also addressed to the consulate generals at Guayaquil, Maracaibo, Porte Alegre, Puerto la Cruz, Recife, Salvador, and São Paulo.
