Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
169
48.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Appointment of New Chairman of Board for International Broadcasting
Appointment of a new Chairman of the Board of International
Broadcasting (BIB—the RFE/RL sponsoring organization) should take
place as soon as possible to forestall possible controversy over this
organization. The outgoing Chairman, David Abshire, and certain other
Board and Staff members are maneuvering to control new appoint-
ments and are drawing Senators Percy and McGovern into arguments
with the Administration over who should serve on the Board and how
it should operate.2 This has resulted over the weekend in distorted
stories (Tab A)3 in both the New York Times and Washington Post attack-
ing Professor William Griffith of MIT, whom I have suggested be
appointed a Board Member.4 The newspaper stories do not mention
our choice5 as Chairman, John Gronouski, but advocate appointment
of Frank Stanton as Chairman.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 9, Board for International Broadcasting (RFE, RL, VOA): 2–12/77. Confidential;
Outside System. Sent for action. Carter wrote at the top of the document: “To Ham[Hamil-
ton Jordan]—O.K. with me. Check w/ State first. JC.”
2 In a May 4 memorandum to Brzezinski, Henze reported that Percy had introduced
an amendment to have VOA set up autonomously, as well as other changes to the USIA/
CU reorganization which, Henze suggested, amounted to implementation of the Stanton
report. Henze recommended that the White House make clear to key Senate and House
members its opposition to the Stanton report. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free
Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of America: 1977)
3 Attached but not printed
4 Brzezinski forwarded a memorandum to Jordan on June 17 that recommended
the nominations of Rita Hauser and William Griffith to membership in the BIB Board.
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File,
Subject Chron File, Box 64, Board of International Broadcasting: 1977) Although Griffith
was not nominated, Hauser’s nomination was announced on November 14. Frank
Markoe, Jr., was nominated to replace Foy Kohler who had resigned earlier. (Public
Papers: Carter, 1977, Book II, p. 2024)
5 An unidentified hand, possibly Jordan, circled the words “our choice” and wrote
in the margin “whose?” Carter submitted Gronouski’s nomination to the Senate on June
8. (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, p. 1073)
