3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
688
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
greater interest in the SALT II Treaty than the United States, and that
therefore we would agree to reexamination of, or addition to, any pro-
vision of the Treaty—whether de facto or de jure—to bring it into force.
232.
Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary
Brezhnev1
Washington, November 13, 1979
Dear Mr. President:
I am writing in reply to your letter of October 11.2 It raises a
number of different issues which we and our NATO allies have under
consideration.
Let me state at the outset that I share your belief in the importance
of detente, in Europe and in our general relationship. At the same time,
I am firmly of the view that progress in Europe is possible only if based
on the principle of equality.
In your letter you indicate that the Soviet government is prepared
to discuss limitations on medium-range nuclear systems in Europe. I
have taken note of your statements on this issue. The matter of negotia-
tions on limitations on such US and Soviet systems within the SALT III
framework is under active consideration in the North Atlantic Alliance.
The purpose of any negotiations dealing with medium-range systems
must in our view be to enhance stability and security; they must be
founded on the principle of equality for both sides.
The situation as regards these systems is far from satisfactory at
present. The past decade has seen significant improvement in Soviet ca-
pabilities in medium-range systems, including your deployment of ex-
tended range and multiple-warhead missiles. It is against this back-
ground that we and our NATO allies are considering both the
modernization of our own systems and also ways in which US and So-
viet medium-range systems might be limited on an equal basis. Let me
emphasize in this connection that we are not prepared to negotiate a re-
gime which would preclude modernization of the capabilities of the
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Country Chron File, Box 54, USSR: 11/79. No classification marking. Brze-
zinski sent a copy of the President’s signed letter to Vance under a November 13 memo-
randum, directing Vance to forward the letter to Watson for delivery. (Ibid.)
2 See Document 229.
