532
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
“Egypt, Israel and Jordan will agree on the modalities for estab-
lishing the elected self-governing authority in the West Bank and
Gaza.”
Had Israel sought to resort to “evasion” we could have declared
that since Jordan—as one of the three above-mentioned parties—does
not join now the negotiations, they should be held in abeyance. We
have not said so, on the contrary, we have agreed that, notwithstanding
the absence of Jordan, Egypt and Israel will conduct the negotiations
with the aim of achieving an agreement. No further proof is necessary,
if any, of Israel’s sincere intentions towards its commitments. Else-
where in your letter you employ the phrase, “what you call administra-
tive autonomy.” You put it as a negation. This is unjustified.
At Camp David we agreed on autonomy, on full autonomy for the
inhabitants of Judea, Samaria and Gaza. We did not agree on sover-
eignty. We did not agree on a “Palestinian state,” nor on a nucleus for
such a “state.” As the text declares, we both clearly agreed on a freely
elected “self-governing authority (administrative council)”. This is the
commitment we have both underwritten.
As far as a timetable is concerned, it is of course not indicated at all
in the Camp David Agreement. Moreover, as I have already men-
tioned, we have to negotiate freely together with the aim of reaching an
agreement in accordance with the Camp David Framework on the mo-
dalities, the powers, the responsibilities and other related matters con-
cerning the administrative council and its election.
We, perforce, object to a timetable in connection with this matter.
The example you give in your letter to determine the timetable for the
exchange of diplomatic relations, for the conclusion of an agreement on
trade and commerce, for the conclusion of another agreement on cul-
tural exchange, or of a civil aviation accord—all these are proof of my
thesis that a timetable cannot be applied to the matter of autonomy
under the given circumstances. Each of the elements you mentioned
are under the absolute control of the two sovereign states concerned,
the states that sign the peace treaty and its specified annexes.
This is not the case with regard to the issues concerning the au-
tonomy. As matters presently stand very many, if not all the elements
are beyond our control. To hold an election one needs an electorate and
candidates. At present, we have neither and they cannot be forced. I
could send you a collection of original, exact quotations by PLO men
threatening every Palestinian Arab with death if he dares support or
cooperate with the autonomy scheme in any way. Recently, in Judea
and Samaria, three meetings were held in which thousands partici-
pated. Words of incitement of the worst kind were voiced. We reacted
with restraint although in other countries such inflammable incitement
is either not tolerated or is punished. To my deep regret you, too, Mr.
