42
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
12.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, March 22, 1977, 10:35 a.m.
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Takeo Fukuda, Prime Minister of Japan
Vice President Walter Mondale
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Iichiro Hatoyama, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Zbigniew Brzezinski, National Security Advisor
Sunao Sonoda, Minister of State and Chief Cabinet Secretary
Thomas Shoesmith, Charge d’Affaires, American Embassy, Japan
Fumihiko Togo, Japanese Ambassador
Keisuke Arita, Deputy Vice Foreign Minister
Richard Holbrooke, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia
Toshio Yamazaki, Director General
Hisashi Owada, Private Secretary to the Prime Minister
Koji Watanabe, Division Chief, First Section, North American Affairs Bureau,
Foreign Ministry
Henry Owen
Michael Armacost, Senior Staff Member, NSC (Notetaker)
Robert Hormats, Senior Staff Member, NSC
Ryuichiro Yamazaki (Interpreter)
James Wickel (Interpreter)
William Sherman, Japan Country Director, Department of State
The President began by outlining to the large meeting the points
discussed in his preceding private talk with Prime Minister Fukuda.2
[Omitted here is discussion of non-proliferation and nuclear
reprocessing.]
The President, turning to a new subject, referred to the impact of
accelerated imports of certain commodities from Japan on the U.S. un-
employment rate. He noted that the shoe and color TV industries are
particularly hard hit at present. Noting the International Trade Com-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 34, Memcons: President: 3/77. Secret; Noforn. The meeting, which took place in the
Cabinet Room, ended at 11:37 a.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s
Daily Diary) Fukuda made an official visit to the United States March 20–23. Memoranda
of conversation of Carter’s March 21 meetings with Fukuda are in the Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 34, Memcons: President:
3/77.
2 Carter and Fukuda met in the Oval Office from 10:03 until 10:35 a.m. (Carter Li-
brary, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) A memorandum of conversation is
in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 34,
Memcons: President: 3/77.
