530  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
less in our SALT II projection than we believe they would be if Soviet 
programs were unconstrained.
—SALT II limitations would not prevent the development and 
deployment of a broad spectrum of improved weapons, but it would 
foreclose some Soviet options—­such as deploying follow-­on systems 
as add-­ons rather than replacements, building more than one wholly 
new ICBM, and taking full advantage of the USSR’s large ICBM throw 
weight by pressing fractionation still further.
—One effect of SALT II would be to reduce some US uncertainties 
about the future size and composition of those Soviet forces which were 
limited, though many critical uncertainties are independent of SALT.
29. Likely Soviet Hedges. Some Soviet developmental activities prob-
ably represent hedges against possible future US threats, deterrents to 
US withdrawal from arms control agreements, and efforts to give the 
Soviet leaders options—­including options to break out of arms con-
trol agreements themselves—­which could be exercised if they came to 
judge that the situation warranted it. These include:
—An R&D program in antiballistic missiles could give the Sovi-
ets the option to deploy widespread ABM defenses, but probably not 
before the early 1980s or later. The ABM system now under develop-
ment could probably be deployed at some 25 urban target areas some 
five years after a decision to begin such deployment, or in as little as a 
year if the Soviets stockpiled components and trained troops covertly 
for several years beforehand. [2 lines not declassified] We have no reason 
to believe, however, that the USSR would abrogate the ABM Treaty in 
circumstances approximating those of the present US-Soviet political 
and strategic relationship.
—A mobile ICBM program could give the Soviets the option to 
deploy ICBMs with better survivability should their fixed silos be 
threatened. A mobile ICBM system has been developed. Its production 
and deployment are evidently now in abeyance, but R&D on a modi-
fied or follow-­on missile continues.
—A long-­range air-­launched cruise missile program may represent 
another hedge against potential vulnerability of Soviet ICBM silos or 
an attempt to demonstrate the USSR’s capability to compete with the 
United States in systems of this type. We assume that the Soviets will 
deploy at least some such missiles under SALT II, on existing aircraft 
beginning in the early 1980s or on an aircraft specifically designed to 
carry them somewhat later. A small cruise missile similar in size and 
capability to the US Tomahawk could probably be ready for flight-­
testing in the mid-1980s.
30. Soviet Civil Defense Program. We have acquired no new evi-
dence during the past year that alters any of our principal conclusions 
about the scope, objectives, pace, and effectiveness of the Soviet civil 
defense program. Soviet civil defenses remain capable of protecting 
most leaders, a crisis work force, and some of the urban population in 
blast-­resistant shelters. The critical decision for protecting most urban 
dwellers, however, is and will remain whether to order evacuation in a
