Venezuela 1227 ment was arranged through President-­elect Betancourt’s Secretary to meet with Betancourt Sunday evening at the mountain retreat of a friend of the President-elect. Mr. Betancourt had been relaxing at this country home over the weekend. Ambassador Sparks and Mr. Burrows arrived at 9:20 p.m. and the conversation with Mr. Betancourt continued from then until 12:45 a.m. over a wide range of subjects. Betancourt, who was relaxed and easy, spoke with obvious frankness on everything that occurred to him. Ambassador Sparks opened the conversation by speaking of the possibility of a visit to Caracas by Assistant Secretary Thomas C. Mann for the purpose of discussing the petroleum situation and the problem created by the present excess of supply over demand. The Ambassador spoke of Mr. Mann’s close knowledge of this situation and of the value of conversations between him and President-­elect Betancourt as well as appropriate officials of the present Venezuelan Government. Betancourt acknowledged with agreement the Ambassador’s references to Mr. Mann, as well as to Mr. Mann’s long-­standing friendship with Mr. Betancourt, but he did not openly express an opinion on the proposed visit. Ambassador Sparks finally asked President-­elect Betancourt directly if he thought it was a good idea,4 at which point Betancourt assented but without particular enthusiasm.5 It was obvious that Mr. Betancourt did not know exactly what the conversations would encompass but it was also obvious that he agreed that conversations would be of value. Ambassador Sparks then offered his own personal congratulations as well as the congratulations of the Department on Betancourt’s election and also expressed on behalf of the Department its satisfaction over the important contribution of the election to Latin America’s democratic institutions in general. Betancourt was obviously pleased at these statements and in response spoke of his own recognition of the great responsibilities he now has and his serious intentions to carry out those responsibilities to the best of his ability. The Ambassador asked him when the inauguration would be scheduled. Betancourt replied that the inauguration probably would be either late in January or early in February. Ambassador Sparks explained that sometimes the period between the election of a President and his inauguration offers an opportunity for an informal visit to be made to the United States but in view of the shortness of the Venezuelan pre-­inaugural period 4 A typewritten marginal notation reads: “On Monday and again on Tuesday, however, Betancourt himself and then his Secretary called to inquire as to the exact date of Mr. Mann’s arrival. Betancourt on the occasion of the first call said that he wanted to call his ’petroleum expert’ back from Mexico to participate in the conversations (Perez Alfonso?).” Jan Pablo Perez Alfonso had been Minister of Production, 1945–1948. 5 A handwritten marginal notation reads: “Probably knew impending tax ’coup’!”
