893.113/820
[Document 487]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
AIDE MEMOIRE
Referring to his Note No. 252 of March 12th respecting the suggested prohibition of
export of aircraft to China and the possibility of strengthening the Arms Embargo
Agreement of 1919, Sir Esme Howard has been instructed by Mr. Chamberlain to bring
the following points to the attention of Mr. Kellogg.
It appears not altogether improbable that at the forthcoming Conference on Arms
Traffic to be held at Geneva in May71 the question may arise whether China should be
scheduled as a prohibited area.
There is no doubt that there is cause for grave disquiet as regards the present state of
China. Sooner or later the change in the conditions of Chinese internecine warfare,
brought about by the increasing supply of modern weapons, may involve the Powers in
increased military commitments in the Far East. This is a matter of international
concern and it is for consideration whether, since the present Arms Embargo
Agreement has not proved capable of arresting the progress, some more comprehensive
international remedy should not be sought. With this end in view Mr. Chamberlain
recently invited the views of His Majesty’s Minister in Peking, Sir R. Macleay, of
whose reply Sir Esme Howard begs to enclose a copy.72
In the opinion of His Majesty’s Government the Powers, so long as they are unable or
unwilling effectively to prevent their nationals from making money out of a traffic that
merely increases the miseries of the Chinese people, are exposed to some measure of
moral reproach and are in a position less strong than they would be otherwise to deal
with the calumnies of the agitators who exasperate anti-foreign feeling by representing
the sufferings of China as due to the “imperialism” and greed of foreigners.
Again, so long as they cannot keep arms out of China, the hands of the Powers are pro
tanto weakened for any pacific influence they may wish to exert to promote the
evolution of a stable and effective Government in China which is their prime interest in
the Far East—That is impossible so long as China swarms with hordes of soldiers who
are indistinguishable from brigands and the difficulty of disbanding these hordes is
perpetuated so long as military adventurers can obtain copious supplies of modern
weapons from Europe.
