Afghanistan tion of the PDPA necessarily related the Afghan party to the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU). He thought that “all parties in the world” have similar organizational structures. In reply to a question, Puzanov said there are no party ties between the PDPA and the CPSU. He explained that, after its 1967 split, the Afghan party had dissolved into “political groupings” which could not be regarded as parties. Since the Khalqists and the Parchamists only recently reunited, i.e., in mid- 1977, there has not been sufficient opportunity for the CPSU to react to this event. The Afghan party had never participated in any international Communist meetings. F) Membership of the PDPA Politburo: Puzanov thought that there are “either nine or eleven members.” During a recent conversation with Chairman Noor Mohammad Taraki, he got the impression that the latter had not yet decided what to do about the Politburo positions which had been occupied by (the diplomatically exiled Parchamist leaders) Babrak Karmal and Noor Ahmad Noor. It is possible, he conjectured, that these two might retain their Politburo seats. G) Government decision-making: Although arguing that the governmental decisions of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (DRA) are being made by the Revolutionary Council, which he initially defined as the country’s “state and legislative organ,” Puzanov acknowledged that the Central Committee of the PDPA provides overall political guidance. Puzanov went on to describe the Afghan Cabinet as the “executive organ” and the Revolutionary Council as the “legislative element” of the government. H) Regional security: Puzanov noted with satisfaction that there were no “border problems” between Iran and Afghanistan. Observing that Afghanistan requires peace in order to be able to resolve its domestic challenges, he asserted that the USSR endorsed the Afghan regime’s stated intention to negotiate peacefully Kabul’s major “political difference” with Pakistan (i.e., the “Pushtunistan” issue). Puzanov welcomed warmly India’s willingness to expand its political and economic contacts with Afghanistan. He noted benignly that Kabul’s relations with the People’s Republic of China (PRC) are “normal.”3 Puzanov recalled that the PRC had offered the Daoudist regime a 60-million-dollar lineof-credit which had not yet been fully committed. He cited as Chinese accomplishments here: Irrigation projects in Parwan Province, textilemaking assistance, and a hospital at Kandahar. I) Afghanistan’s future: Puzanov noted that impoverished Afghanistan was now working on a five-year-plan which will require help 3 China recognized the new government in Afghanistan on May 7.
