Summary of Print Volume III  XXXV
underground explosions. If this initiative failed, Herter authorized 
the delegation to work for a phased approach that would include an 
immediate ban on atmospheric testing, and a subsequent ban on under­
ground testing once sufficient controls, based on Hardtack II data, were 
established. If the Soviet Union rejected these proposals, the delegation 
was to announce the U.S. decision to end the conference because of the 
Soviets’ disinterest in a treaty and to reveal its plans for a unilateral ces­
sation of atmospheric tests. (213) President Eisenhower believed that 
worldwide public anger over nuclear testing would force the United 
States to stop atmospheric testing in the long run, and thus a partial 
or comprehensive bilateral ban would be better for U.S. interests than 
unilateral, unreciprocated actions. (216)
Perhaps also aware of the importance of maintaining worldwide 
public support for its disarmament policy, the Soviets also seemed 
unwilling to break off the talks. They refused to consider, however, that 
the conclusions from the meeting of experts in 1958 were anything but 
viable. Consequently, they would not discuss either an adequately safe­
guarded comprehensive plan or a phased plan. The negotiations dead­
locked when the United States refused to consider any agreement that 
did not contain a sufficient number of inspections. (223)
As the Geneva disarmament talks dragged on, many in the Eisen­
hower administration became concerned that the voluntary U.S. testing 
moratorium first announced in October 1959 was giving the Soviets 
exactly what they wanted. The moratorium supposedly stopped U.S. 
and Soviet testing, but it was not controlled. (234) Of further concern 
was the fear that the British desire to reach any agreement, including 
an uncontrolled moratorium, would weaken Western positions on dis­
armament negotiations. The United States spent a large proportion of 
time at the Geneva test negotiations trying to reconcile the Allied posi­
tions on disarmament. (227)
In December 1959 U.S. and Soviet technical experts met for a 
second time to discuss difficulties relating to testing controls. For the 
United States it was an opportunity to try once again to revise the data 
from the 1958 conference. The Soviets, however, saw U.S. concerns over 
up-­to-­date safeguards as a U.S. propaganda ploy to disengage from a 
disarmament accord. Because the Soviets “refused to give serious con­
sideration to anything relating to criteria for inspection” while the U.S. 
side insisted on talking about elaborate and effective inspection sys­
tems, the talks ended without any agreement. (238)
As a possible compromise to the conflicting U.S. and Soviet posi­
tions, Kistiakowsky suggested in January 1960 the threshold concept, 
whereby all tests above a certain measurable seismic magnitude would 
be banned. Under a threshold agreement, the United States and the 
Soviets would conduct joint research to improve inspection techniques
