178
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
nomic benefits, imposing countervailing duties, discrimination by host
governments against investors of a violating country, and discrimina-
tion by home governments against investments in a violating country.
50.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, August 9, 1977
SUBJECT
Results of My Paris Trip (August 5–7)
I went to Paris last Friday and Saturday2 for two purposes: 1) for a
meeting with German Finance Minister Apel to clear the air about recent ex-
change rate movements and to explain U.S. exchange rate policy, and
2) for a meeting with other industrial country and OPEC repre-
sentatives to try to work out arrangements for supplementing the resources of
the International Monetary Fund through the so-called “Witteveen
Facility.”
Meeting on Exchange Rates
The meeting with the Germans on the exchange rate issue went ex-
tremely well. Over the past several weeks the dollar-DM rate has moved
noticeably—though not as sharply as on a number of other occasions
during the period of floating exchange rates since 1973. The German
press had made a major issue of recent rate movements, claiming that the
U.S. was acting irresponsibly, “manipulating” the exchange rate and
trying to “talk the dollar down” for competitive and other reasons, and
charging that the U.S. should intervene on the exchange markets to re-
verse the rate movement. The German official reaction to the rate move-
ments had been much more restrained, though there was suspicion that the
press comments were stimulated by government spokesmen.
I explained and reaffirmed our exchange rate policy to Minister Apel—
that we support a floating exchange rate system; that our policy is that
the dollar’s value should be determined by underlying economic and
1 Source: Carter Library, Anthony Solomon Collection, 1977–1980, Chronological
File, Box 2, 8/1/77–8/15/77. Confidential. Sent for information. Marked “FYI.” A
stamped notation reads: “The President has seen,” and Carter wrote at the top of the
page: “Mike—good job. J.C.”
2 August 5 and 6.
