Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 that indeed the Federal Republic is irreversibly part of the West as well as a rooted democracy. Development in three areas could throw those assumptions into doubt: (1) The reassertion of German power; (2) the domestic and inter-German political crisis; (3) U.S. policy toward Europe and the USSR. German power, military and economic, is once more a source of concern in Europe. The NATO alliance has increasingly become a U.S.-German military affair that inspires thinly veiled concern among the NATO allies, especially France and Britain. The European Community has its economic center of gravity in Germany. The FRG stabilizes the EC and plays a key role in the international monetary system. German economic wealth causes no less concern in both Eastern and Western Europe than Germany military power. Thus, the possibility of German political pre-eminence in Europe is again a shadow haunting Europe. The FRG domestic political crisis has several sources. First, economic prosperity, the German salve for defeat in the last war, has recently been threatened by the specter of inflation and unemployment, seriously undermining the public confidence. Even a change of political leadership will not likely change the popular mood. Second, the SPD Ostpolitik has not produced the kinds of results that were promised, either in inter-German relations or in relations with Moscow. That makes the SPD vulnerable to attack by the German right, especially the southern German CSU which is Catholic and anti-Communist. Moreover, the SPD is ex-Marxist and has a northern Protestant following, making the SPD’s cultural ties to the East German populace suspect as being more natural than ties to Bavaria. Third, some FDP members of the SPD coalition are already openly dealing with the opposition CDU/CSU. The weakness of the SPD’s political base is now also reflected in the loss of control of the Bundesrat. Thus, Helmut Schmidt is in serious political trouble, but the CDU/CSU does not offer a strong alternative.14 U.S. policy toward Europe and USSR puts additional pressures on the FRG at a time when its ability to manage them is declining steadily. The nuclear energy question, of course, touches the issue of economic prosperity for the Bonn leaders no less than our demand that they risk inflation by loosening up credits and stimulating imports. In the MBFR negotiations, we have recently joined with the NATO participants to overcome Bonn’s resistance to tabling manpower strengths by national totals, a move Genscher (of the FDP) has opposed because it could be one more step toward allowing Soviet eventual success in using MBFR 14 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, the President wrote: “I’m not an expert on German politics—Some of the initials are confusing.”
