First Responses
13
were watching the situation with bated breath. It was a test of how
we would react.
The Vice President interjected that this was this week’s test.
Secretary Vance reviewed the situation briefly. We had succeeded
in reaching Ayatollah Beheshti in Tehran.2 He felt that the sending of
emissaries was a good idea and he promised to raise this idea with
the Revolutionary Council. We had a plane standing by to fly the
emissaries first of all to Athens where they could wait for a decision.
There was a short letter from the President which they would take
with them.3 The plane was large enough to bring back sixty hostages
if they are released.
The President wondered whether bringing the Americans out of
Iran would constitute breaking relations.
Secretary Vance said only if we say that we are breaking relations.
We may simply say that we are going to take everyone out. If the
Iranians ask for the Chargé to remain, Ramsey Clark has said that he
will remain with the Chargé in Tehran.
Hamilton Jordan asked whether it may be presumptuous for us to
send these emissaries off before we have an answer from the Iranians.
Secretary Vance said yes it was, however, we wanted to have them
close at hand in the event the answer was yes. If they flew directly
through, they could arrive in Tehran tomorrow morning and be in
Qom around 10:00 in the morning. It is extremely important that public
knowledge of this initiative remain quiet until we have their answer.
Hamilton Jordan noted that Frank Moore had told him that the word
was already out on the Hill. It was a secret that was not well kept.
The President said he saw no downside to having the emissaries in
Athens, if the answer is no they can simply come home.
2 In a telephone call of November 6, Precht informed Beheshti that the United States
wanted to send Clark and Miller to Tehran or Qom to discuss “all questions outstanding
between our two governments once the Americans have been released,” and that the
emissaries were bringing a letter from Carter to Khomeini. Precht also asked that a
representative from the Red Lion and Sun or one of the Islamic embassies visit the
hostages. Beheshti agreed to take up the issues with the Revolutionary Council. (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 30, Subject File,
Iran 11/1/79–11/10/79)
3 See Document 7.
