Afghanistan 320. Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 [cable number not declassified] Washington, September 26, 1980 COUNTRY Pakistan/Afghanistan/USSR SUBJECT 1. Views of President Zia as to Reason for Soviet Helicopter Attack Against Pakistan Border Post 2. Report of Wreckage of Downed Soviet Helicopter Involved in This Attack [less than 1 line not declassified] SOURCE [1 line not declassified] 1. Pakistan President Zia ul-Haq believes that the attack of 26 September 1980 by Soviet helicopter gunships against the Pakistan border post in the Mohmand Agency east of the Konar River is a deliberate attempt to intimidate Zia just prior to his departure for the United Nations and his talks with President Carter.2 Pakistan’s Interservices Intelligence Directorate commented that the attack might also have been stimulated by Zia’s recent interview with a New York Times correspondent, in which he predicted the Soviets would take advantage of the Iraq-Iran fighting.3 2. The Directorate also commented that the Afghan insurgents had achieved a major success a few days ago in an attack on Khandahar airfield, when a dozen Soviet aircraft were destroyed on the ground and many Soviets killed. ([less than 1 line not declassified] comment: This incident may have influenced the Soviet decision to hit at Pakistan.) (Headquarters comment: There is no independent evidence that this insurgent attack took place.) 3. The wreckage of a helicopter downed during the attack is located only a few hundred yards from the Ghakhai border post (3450N 7117E). It appears that the Soviet helicopters tried to remain on the Afghan side of the border while firing on the border post on the Pakistan side 1 Source: Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 1, Cross-Border Operations—Pakistan. Secret; Immediate; [handling restriction not declassified]. 2 The memorandum of conversation of Carter’s meeting with Zia is printed as Document 326. 3 See Michael T. Kaufman, “Pakistan Predicts Gains By Soviets in a Long War,”
