Peru 1041 democracy in Peru. France was not the only country struggling at the moment with a “crise de regime”. Peru was too and for the same reason, a very wide-­spread feeling that the Government did not or could not exert sufficient authority to deal with the country’s pressing problems. I said that until a few months ago most of the dissatisfaction in Peru had been directed not toward revolution but toward more or less complete Cabinet changes. This was encouraging evidence of a growing maturity of democracy in Peru. At the present time, unfortunately, many people, and not just habitual conspirators or malcontents such as the Miro Quesadas,3 junior Army officers or the Accion Popular but honest and substantial people, were saying that it was too late for the situation to be solved by a Cabinet change since the President himself was unwilling sufficiently to face up to the problems involved. I hoped profoundly that they were wrong and that Peru could still show that political maturity which I believed it was capable of showing and which I knew was his primary objective. I hoped that the situation could still be saved but believed that the hour was already very late. It would be presumptions for me or any foreigner to offer him advice but I hoped that he could profit from the advice of the wisest, most honest, strongest and most patriotic Peruvians he knew, particularly those outside the Government, since there were always more good men outside any Government than in it, and that he would then act as his conscience dictated, but firmly. To my surprise the President both listened to what I had to say without interruption and took it in good part. He launched into a long discussion which he continued for half an hour, although he was repeatedly interrupted by telephone calls and his aides advising him that others were waiting. He began with a diatribe against Pedro Beltrán. During his previous Administration4 he had offered Beltrán various Cabinet posts but the latter had declined and accepted only the Embassy in Washington.5 During his present Administration he had again at various times offered Beltrán Cabinet posts but the latter, while incessantly criticizing, refused to accept responsibility. Beltrán was playing a double game, accusing the Government of not exercising authority and at the same time stirring up dissatisfaction against it. He turned to attack the leading bankers, particularly Enrique Ayulo, President of the Banco de Credito, and Alfredo Alvarez Calderon, principal lawyer for the Bankers Association. He recounted their past 3 Reference is to the Miro Quesada family which stood on the extreme right in Peruvian politics. 4 The previous administration of President Prado was during the period December
