of water for power purposes both in the international stretches where
compensation may be determined and in the international stretches below
Cornwall in the Province of Quebec. In that regard, Lord Byng of Vimy
desires me to point out that the limit of 10,000 cubic feet of water per
second, as contemplated by the proposed legislation, is about 1.500 cubic
[feet] per second more than is being diverted at present, and His Excellency
considers it possible that the proposed legislation may mean that 10,000
cubic feet per second is allowed for diversion and power at Lockport, while
additional water power will doubtless be required for lockages.
 
In view of the above, I have the honour to inform you that the Government
of Canada are unalterably opposed to the proposed diversion of water from
the Great Lakes watershed to that of the Mississippi, to the great detriment
of navigation from Sault Ste. Marie to tidewater. The diversion that has
already taken place at Chicago has lowered the waters of the Great Lakes to
an extent that is now common knowledge. This affects harbours upon which
many million dollars have been expended in deepening operations. It also
affects the locksills of the Sault Ste. Marie Canals, the Welland Canal and
the St. Lawrence Canals and, further, this diversion of water has a most
injurious effect upon the ocean shipping channel between Montreal and the
sea, where the Government of the Dominion have spent many more
millions of dollars in dredging operations. How great have been the injuries
sustained by navigation interests may be seen from the fact that every inch
of navigable water means an additional 60 to 80 tons of carrying capacity.
The waters of the Great Lakes are the heritage of both the people of the
United States and the people of Canada, and the Dominion Government are
of opinion that it is quite obvious that these waters should be conserved for
the interests of both peoples. The Government of Canada, therefore,
sincerely hope that the Government of the United States will not only not
permit any further diversion of water from Lake Michigan, but will intimate
to, and if necessary insist upon, the Sanitary District of Chicago adopting
some more scientific method of sewage disposal than is foreshadowed at
present.
