August 8–September 17, 1978
13
6.
Paper Prepared in the Department of State1
Washington, undated
PLANNING FOR CAMP DAVID
General Considerations
Our problem in the area is confidence; it is acute in Jordan but se-
rious also in Saudi Arabia and in Egypt. Hussein quite frankly tells us
he sees an erosion in our position, not only since Leeds2 but since 1967.
The Saudis and the Egyptians are a little less openly skeptical, but they
too think that we have moved off of our position or fear that we will
once the Israelis and their friends in Congress begin to put on the heat.
To a large extent, the erosion of Arab confidence has been brought
about by our search for ways to get around Israel’s refusal to commit
itself to turn the West Bank and Gaza back to full Arab control at the
end of five years. There are two problems here:
a) —The various schemes that we have thought up, while admit-
tedly imaginative, have been too complex. At times we have not been
clear even in our own minds about exactly what we meant. No wonder
the Arabs were confused.
b) —The above notwithstanding, it is true that the moderate Arabs
will buy, albeit reluctantly, things like a five year transition period and
Israeli security arrangements on the West Bank and Gaza. But not
without the assurance, in advance, that the West Bank and Gaza will be
turned back to Arab sovereignty. Some ambiguity on this point might
be allowable, but Sadat would at least have to be able to claim that he
had gotten a commitment from the Israelis to withdrawal. If he accepts
anything less (he probably won’t) he will be repudiated.
In short the Arabs want us to stop trying to find schemes for get-
ting around Israel’s refusal to make the commitment to withdraw—
schemes that in their minds leave too much uncertainty—and start
trying to find ways to get the Israelis to change their position. We are
now at the point where we are going to have to do that if we want to
keep Sadat and the Saudis with us, and if we are to have any chance of
ever getting Hussein to join the negotiations. Further devising formulas
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Af-
fairs, Files of Alfred L. Atherton, Lot 80D166, Box 5, Preparations for Camp David
Summit—August 1978. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Korn on August 14. The paper was in-
cluded as part of a briefing book prepared during Camp David preparatory strategy
meetings attended by Vance, Saunders, Quandt, and Atherton at Ambassador Averell
Harriman’s estate near Middleburg, Virginia, beginning on August 11. The complete
briefing book is ibid. For Vance’s account of the Middleburg talks, see Hard Choices,
p. 218.
2 See footnote 3, Document 3.
