Nicaragua 845 NI–6. Editorial Note On April 25, 1958, a group of Nicaraguan exiles, led by Manuel Gómez Flores, launched a plot to invade Nicaragua. After stealing an aircraft in Miami, two Nicaraguan air force officers, already implicated in an earlier invasion attempt, flew to Honduras and rendezvoused with Flores and his followers. The plot was frustrated by units of the Honduran armed forces who seized the aircraft, an arms cache, and arrested Flores and some of his followers. Documentation on the incident is in Department of State File 7l7.00. NI–7. Telegram from the Ambassador in Nicaragua (Whelan) to the Department of State1  Managua, May 20, 1958, 6 p.m. 302. During past week public opinion in this country re Nixon ­incidents2 has somehow veered around nearly 180 degrees. After viewing U.S. few days ago as the offended they are now analyzing U.S. as the offender on basis revival all the old myths about our economic aggression and neglect of Latin America plus in case of opposition here the old canard about our supporting dictatorships. Such press material from other LA countries as I have seen suggests this phenomenon has occurred in greater or less degree throughout hemisphere. By dedicating ourselves to a re-­examination of our LA policies we have given a fine example of Christian humility but Latinos seem to be mistaking this for admission of basic guilt and are responding to it as children would. Some sort of spanking seems called for to sober them up and bring them to realization they bear a large share of responsibility for cracks in hemispheric solidarity. It is time they did some ­re-­examining too. While I am confident Doctor Eisenhower can be protected in this country from gross discourtesies shown Nixon in South America, I fear unless we can do something to regain psychological offensive and awaken Latin Americans to necessity for constructive unemotional 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100–NI/5–2058. Confidential; Priority. 2 For the demonstrations in Caracas on May 13 during the course of the Vice President’s goodwill trip to Latin America, see Documents VE–9–10, 13, 16, 22.
