Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I We also hope to lend greater assistance to the peoples of neighboring nations whose lives have been disrupted by the crisis in southern Africa. Namibia In Namibia a solution leading to independence is being sought through the efforts of the five Western members of the Security Council, with South Africa, the United Nations, and other interested parties, including the South West Africa People’s Organization. That solution would include free elections in which the United Nations is involved, freedom for political prisoners, repeal of discriminatory laws and regulations, and the withdrawal of instruments of South African authority as the elections are held and independence achieved. On the basis of our discussions thus far, we are encouraged by the prospects for an independent Namibia, one which will take its rightful place in the African and world community. We welcome the indications of flexibility on the part of South Africa. We are gratified by the confidence shown by many African governments in the efforts of the United States and Western associates on the Security Council. Differences remain, however, and progress will require a willingness on all sides to be openminded and forthcoming. But we will persevere. South Africa While pursuing these efforts for peace and justice in Namibia and Rhodesia, we have also expressed to the South African Government our firm belief in the benefits of a progressive transformation of South African society. This would mean an end to racial discrimination and the establishment of a new course toward full political participation by all South Africans. The specific form of government through which this participation could be expressed is a matter for the people of South Africa to decide. There are many ways in which the individual rights of all citizens within South Africa could be protected. The key to the future is that South African citizens of all races now begin a dialogue on how to achieve this better future. The South African Government’s policy of establishing separate homelands for black South Africans was devised without reference to the wishes of the blacks themselves. For this reason, and because we do not believe it constitutes a fair or viable solution to South Africa’s problems, we oppose this policy. We did not recognize the Transkei, and we will not recognize Bophuthatswana if its independence is proclaimed in December, as scheduled. We deeply hope that the South African Government will play a progressive role on the three issues I have discussed. We will applaud such efforts. If there is no progress, our relations will inevitably suffer.
