1044
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the internal situation. The posture we strike as we come out of the hos-
tage crisis will have an important and long-lasting impact on the
Saudis, and on their willingness to look to us for the long term.
Thus Hermann’s mission could usefully get to the Bandar ap-
proach by indirection, by emphasizing the overall context of our policy
towards the region. Indeed, if his presentation (and our policy) is cred-
ible in terms of overall Saudi interests—centering on security, the Saudi
connection with us, and the overall future of the region—then any
move on the Arab-Israeli problem would assume its rightful place, and
we will be better able to relate what Fahd may have in mind to what
Bandar told us.
We recommend therefore, that the Eilts mission to begin with
focus on our overall strategic thinking for the region. He would use this
to probe Fahd’s thinking about Arab-Israeli questions, without himself
raising the particular points (and contentious issues) in the Bandar ap-
proach. If Bandar speaks for Fahd [less than 1 line not declassified], then
Fahd can speak for himself. Elements of this approach might include:
—Our views on the strategic importance of the region, including
the Soviet dimension, Gulf security, nature of regional friendships, the
flow of oil, the cooperative international framework on energy and eco-
nomic issues. Hermann would indicate that the Arab-Israeli dimension
(as well as concerns for Egypt and countries as far removed as Turkey,
Sudan, and even Morocco) is a vital factor in this overall picture.
—Our attitudes about the importance of some U.S. involvement
and the role of power (in its largest sense). The Middle East (as a whole)
will be central to our global strategy; our efforts are directed to inte-
grating our policy into an overall strategic conception with our friends.
—We will want to work closely with Saudi Arabia—in ways that
make sense to it. We recognize the dangers of stop-and-go policies and
approaches, or of trying to impose forms and methods that do not ac-
cord with Saudi Arabia’s own conception of regional problems. We
must pursue our interests and relationships; but we want to take into
account the interests of our friends.
—There are a number of areas in which we would like to continue
an active dialogue: some directly U.S. military (recent Murray mission;
fleet deployments, Rapid Deployment force); some indirect support
(FMS, role of particular countries in military supply support for re-
gional nations—e.g. Sudan, Yemen, Morocco); a political framework
for thinking about the region; possibilities (if any) for regional security
cooperation (where of course Saudi Arabia’s views will be the most sig-
nificant); economic cooperation (both within the region and in terms of
the Gulf States’ involvement/responsibility for the international eco-
nomic system).6
6 For documentation related to U.S.-Saudi bilateral military relations, the Carter ad-
ministration’s efforts to construct a Persian Gulf security framework, and other bilateral
and multilateral political and military issues in U.S. relations with Saudi Arabia and the
countries of the Arabian Peninsula, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle
East Region; Arabian Peninsula.
