1955  215
167.	 Telegram 687 from Geneva1
Geneva, September 6, 1955, 7 p.m.
687. From Johnson.
1. Wang opened 13th meeting today with statement that 12 
­Americans who we had said were being detained would be free to 
leave. He said on basis reviews completed following seven Americans 
could leave any time: Emma A. Barry, Ralph S. Boyd, Juanita B. Huang, 
­Robert H. Parker, Mr. and Mrs. Howard L. Ricks and Eva Stella Dugay. 
Two Romanoffs who had recently applied exit permits could also leave. 
Charles Miner, now in process clearing up debts incurred by firms in 
his charge, was being given every assistance by local authorities and 
should be able to complete procedures in two or three months, at which 
time he also free to leave. James Edward Walsh had not applied for exit 
permit, but since not known to be involved in any unsettled cases, he 
also free to leave. Mrs. Huizer not on list of Americans in China and 
claimed by Dutch reps as Dutch citizen, however, she free to leave also 
and he said later her husband making arrangements wind up affairs 
so he too would be able depart. He added that cases of remaining 
American citizens who have committed crimes are different from these 
twelve. When agreement reached, their cases will be reviewed and in 
light circumstances of each and lenient attitude his govt reviews will be 
quickly conducted and we will be informed upon completion.
2. I said I appreciated the information he had given re Americans 
now free to depart. I then asked if I was correct in understanding that 
Chinese Communists had completed reviews some cases civilians 
accused of committing crimes and that he would inform me their names 
at time when agreement reached on agreed announcement.
3. Wang agreed.
4. I asked if those Americans whose cases had been reviewed 
would then be able to leave promptly.
5. He agreed.
6. I then said this brought us to what he had termed the “old ques­
tion” of time it will require for his government to complete review of 
remainder cases. This central question I had raised in second meeting 
and we had been discussing it ever since. I could see no compelling rea­
son why his govt could not if it wished release these persons immedi­
ately. Nevertheless I was willing accept simple statement of reasonable 
length of time during which release could be completed. But he had only 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–655. Confidential.
