846 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI 335. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)1 Washington, undated SUBJECT The Future of the London Suppliers Group I am very concerned at the evolution of the proposal to expand the London Suppliers Group to include “threshold” states, from the status of a suggestion we were willing to study in order to make progress in the German-Brazilian talks, to a proposal whose implementation we are now apparently studying.2 In my view, there are several compelling reasons for not expanding the London Group, to wit: —The London Suppliers Group has been a powerful and effective instrument for achieving concerted supplier policies. It is the only such instrument available. —Brazil may have two reasons for wanting entrance: status and the ability to disrupt the suppliers club through an expanding membership of recipients (if Brazil is admitted, many other nations will demand equal treatment). Thus their motive might be not only to become one of the big guys, but perhaps to destroy the only really effective anti-proliferation forum in the process. —We clearly have to deal with the growing antagonism among the non-supplier LDCs toward the ability of the suppliers to set policy both in the London Group and in the IAEA. However my understanding was that this was precisely the function we were envisaging for the Fuel Cycle Evaluation Program which would be open to any nation which wished to join. —However, if both the London Group and the Fuel Cycle Evaluation are open to recipients, we are left with no forum in which the suppliers can agree on tough anti-proliferation policies. —Expanding the Suppliers Group would be an enormous price to pay for . . . what? We have no indication so far that Brazilians would give up the sensitive parts of the FRG deal as the quid pro quo for admittance. Even if they were to accept this condition, however, this plan 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 32, London Suppliers Group: 3–6/77. Secret. At the top of the memorandum, an unknown hand wrote “[illegible] Sent 4/1/77 [illegible].” 2 Not found.
