502  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
recent ACDA report) or exaggerate them (as is probably the case in the 
work of T.K. Jones). (C)
One approach to stimulating progress on this front might be to task 
Harold Brown with an assessment of strategic analysis in DOD and 
elsewhere in the light of the above critique. He is getting strong mes-
sages of this sort from within DOD, however, especially from Andy 
Marshall. I am personally known to be a critic of most official analy-
sis.13 A formal initiative from the NSC would risk provoking an uncon-
structive, defensive reaction from much of the analytical community in 
Defense.14 For now I believe the best course is to maintain low-­keyed15 
pressure on the system. We should examine the next version of the 
DOD Consolidated Guidance and the results of some new efforts in 
the JCS for signs of progress. If they are dissatisfying, we can take more 
formal steps early next year. (U)
In Summary (U)
—Periodic net assessments of US and Soviet C3 are in progress.
—Policy guidance on strategic C3 should result from review of the 
targeting and SRF studies.
—As we move toward shifts in doctrine and upgrading of the role 
of C3I, organizing the C3I business better in peace and war will become 
an issue we may be obliged to task DOD to study.
—The quality of military exchange analysis needs improvement; 
but a low-­keyed campaign of steady pressure is the best approach for 
now.
—I am going to organize a strategy planning group, on the model 
of the East-West Planning Group, to gain better visibility into the rele-
vant DOD processes that must be shaped and to provide a standing but 
informal mechanism for airing problems.16 (C)
13 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this portion of the para-
graph and wrote: “OK.”
14 Brzezinski underlined the word “unconstructive” and wrote “I wonder?” above it.
15 Brzezinski underlined the phrase “low-­keyed.”
16 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this point and wrote a 
checkmark.
