Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  417
64.	
Information Memorandum From the Head of the Delegation 
to the Nuclear and Space Talks (Burt) to Secretary of State 
Baker1
Washington, December 18, 1989
SUBJECT
From Malta to Moscow: START and the Shevardnadze Ministerial
Geneva round has ended. Want to give you my personal thoughts 
on where we go from here, especially your next meeting with 
Shevardnadze.
 Malta was clearly a big success for START. Can we finish treaty 
by 1990? Based on last round experience, my answer is yes:
— The problem will not be in Geneva—­two delegations have 
developed good working relationships and my counterpart, 
Nazarkin, is pragmatic, ready-­to-­deal and is increasingly well-­wired 
back home.
— Problem should also not be in Washington: Interagency players 
seem to have got the “Malta message” on START and while some die-­
hards are still dragging their feet, I expect that Reg Bartholomew and 
Arnie Kantor will drive the process. Perhaps a bigger problem is that 
State and other agencies are not devoting sufficient manpower to work-
ing through hundreds of unresolved issues.
— A still bigger potential problem: Moscow’s attitude. It became 
clear during last round that Soviets think they have made all the import-
ant moves in START and that, in particular, we haven’t responded to 
their Jackson Hole initiatives.
— Doesn’t mean that they are losing interest in START. It’s 
as important as ever for them. But Nazarkin tells me that with 
Gorbachev under fire from hardliners on other issues (for seeing the 
Pope, etc.), that it will be harder for him to unilaterally move START 
forward.
— Thus, if you come to Moscow ready to take the initiative on a 
range of START issues, this could actually stimulate Soviet concessions 
in the longer run.
 Thus, you should consider a “Malta strategy” for Moscow: Begin 
your arms control presentation with a list of START initiatives—­both to 
show Shevardnadze that you mean business and to focus discussion on 
your agenda. Reg tells me he shares this view.
1 Source: Department of State, STARS, Document Number 198929259-0. Secret. Sent 
through Bartholomew, who did not initial the memorandum.
