342 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III could help settle the foreign exchange markets and give Wall Street a positive boost.3 3 In a February 22 memorandum to Brzezinski on “the continuing spate of reports about quarrelling with the West Germans,” Hunter suggested the “need for a re-think of some basic attitudes.” Specifically, he questioned whether the United States should continue to pressure West Germany by linking the success of its efforts at economic expansion to the timing of the next G–7 Summit, proposing that Brzezinski reconsider this tactic with Carter, Vance, Owen, Blumenthal, and Strauss. At the top of Hunter’s memorandum, Aaron wrote: “I tend to agree.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside the System File, Box 49, Chron: 2/78) 114. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, March 9, 1978, 8:26–8:34 a.m. SUBJECT Summary of the President’s Telephone Call to FRG Chancellor Helmut Schmidt PARTICIPANTS President Jimmy Carter FRG Chancellor Helmut Schmidt The President and the Chancellor exchanged greetings. The President said that he had called to say he had read with care— and deeply appreciated—the Chancellor’s recent speech in Hamburg.2 It reflected the President’s sentiments exactly, and would show that reports of disagreement between them are false. He just wanted the Chancellor to know that he cherishes the deep friendship between them and between our peoples. 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 1, Germany, Federal Republic of, 9/77–1/80. Secret; Sensitive. Carter spoke to Schmidt from the Oval Office. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “ok. J.” 2 On March 8, Brzezinski sent Carter a copy of Schmidt’s remarks on U.S.–FRG relations during a March 3 speech in Hamburg. In his cover memorandum, Brzezinski noted that Schmidt, although recognizing that the United States and West Germany were bound to disagree sometimes, had emphasized the importance and overall strength of the relationship. Brzezinski also provided talking points for Carter’s telephone call to Schmidt. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 24, German Federal Republic: 4/77–3/78) In a March 8 memorandum to Carter, Owen suggested that Carter urge Schmidt to agree to a proposed U.S.–FRG statement on measures to support the dollar that would “create a strong public impression of the two countries’ determination to act forcefully.” (Ibid.)
