Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980 733 that region. Any quick examination of a map will convince you of the truth of that statement. That is the historic role to which Afghanistan must be restored. Soviet success in their invasion of Afghanistan, even at the high cost in blood and the high cost in respectability which Moscow is now paying, could turn Afghanistan from a roadblock against aggression into a launching pad for future incursions. This would threaten Pakistan and Iran, but not just those nations alone. Soviet aggression in Afghanistan, unless checked, confronts all the world with the most serious, long-term strategic challenge since the cold war began. To underestimate the magnitude of that challenge would constitute an historic error, an error with probably historic consequences. America’s position is clear. It is consistent, as well, with the interests and with the commitment of our allies, whose well-being, along with our own, is intimately tied to the security and the independence of this strategically vital region. We must therefore work together in meeting the challenge which we face in common. Our goal is the withdrawal of Soviet occupying troops, the neutrality or non-alignment of Afghanistan as a nation, and the encouragement of the formation there of a government acceptable to the Afghan people. Those goals and commitments are clear, they are simple, they’re extremely important, and they are shared with almost every other people on Earth. Within this region itself the nations must also realize that our desires match theirs—to cooperate in the preservation of the region’s independence, stability, and peace. Fifth, this administration has been and remains committed to arms control, especially to strategic arms limitations, and to maintain a firm and balanced relationship with the Soviet Union. Our resolve to pursue this goal remains as strong as ever. Early this morning I had breakfast with the new Secretary of State, Ed Muskie, and with my other close foreign affairs and defense advisers.9 We expect later on this coming week that Ed Muskie will meet with the Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union.10 They will be discussing these issues, again, in a clear, consistent, forceful, proper, balanced way. One statement that we will make very clearly is that arms control and strategic arms limitation is of crucial importance to the United States, to the people of the Soviet Union, and to all other people on Earth. 9 The President took part in a breakfast meeting that morning from 7:33 to 9:05 a.m. Attendees included Muskie, Brown, Christopher, Jordan, Donovan, Cutler, and Brzezinski. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) 10 See footnote 7, Document 145.
