International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
683
throughout the negotiations, and is unanimously agreed on the course
recommended above. In addition, Tony has consulted periodically
with Senate Banking Committee members Proxmire, Stevenson and
Heinz, Senator Javits, and Chairman Reuss and others on the House
Banking Committee. They are very supportive of both the broad prin-
ciple and the specific U.S. negotiating objectives.4
4 On April 24, Finance Ministers in Hamburg for a meeting of the IMF Interim Com-
mittee announced that work on a substitution account would be suspended. (Paul Lewis,
“Dollar Plan For I.M.F. Is Shelved,” The New York Times, April 25, 1980, p. D1) In the offi-
cial IMF history, Boughton offers three explanations for the abandonment of the substitu-
tion account. The first two, Solomon’s March 1980 resignation (Boughton notes that Sol-
omon was the initiative’s strongest advocate in the administration) and Volcker’s
anti-inflationary monetary policy (which “eased fears of a continuing glut of dollars”),
decreased the urgency with which the project was pursued. The third reason (which was
“more fundamental,” according to Boughton) “was the dissatisfaction with the stalemate
over how to cover exchange risk. Without a consensus on the use of the Fund’s gold as
part of an overall burden-sharing plan, the proposal had no hope for success.”
(Boughton, Silent Revolution, p. 943)
234.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance, Secretary of
Commerce Klutznick, and the United States Trade
Representative (Askew) to President Carter1
Washington, March 8, 1980
SUBJECT
Steel Policy
We are facing a potential crisis in U.S.–EC relations. The question
before us arises from the decision of U.S. Steel to file anti-dumping
cases against steel imports from France and Germany on Monday.2 We
need to decide how to prevent this filing from disrupting trade and po-
litical relations with Europe. Secretary Miller is sending you a memo on
the situation.
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
File, Box 174, 3/10/80 [2]. Confidential. Hormats initialed on behalf of Klutznick and
Askew. This memorandum is attached as Tab A to a March 9 memorandum from Owen
to Carter entitled “Steel TPM.”
2 March 10. Ultimately, U.S. Steel did not file an anti-dumping case.
