September 1953–December 1954
901
tacking Mossadeq, they, in turn, would support Baghai. Baghai did not
accept this proposal and told the Mossadeq supporters that Mossadeq
is the cause of all Iran’s present misfortunes.
b. Khalil Maleki, leader of the Third Force, has cooperated with the
supporters of Mossadeq and has urged Baghai not to attack Mossadeq.
c. Mullah Kashani has shown himself to be weak.
d. Baghai never realized that Prime Minister Zahedi would be so
corrupt and unfaithful. The antipathy of the Iranian people to the estab-
lishment of diplomatic relations with the United Kingdom must be ex-
ploited in every possible way.
357.
Letter From the Ambassador to Iran (Henderson) to the
Special Assistant for Intelligence, Department of State
(Armstrong)1
Tehran, January 7, 1954.
Dear Mr. Armstrong:
With reference to your letter of November 27, 1953,2 the Embassy,
CAS, and the Service Attache´s have studied National Intelligence Esti-
mate 102, entitled “Probable Developments in Iran through 1954,3 and
find themselves in general agreement with the approach and conclu-
sions reflected in this document. We might, however, comment on cer-
tain points:
There are, of course, several paragraphs throughout the document
which have now been out-dated by developments in Iran since they
were written. For example, with regard to paragraph 11, the decision to
hold early elections has already been taken by the Shah and Zahedi,
and there is no present reason to believe that the elections will not be
held with reasonable orderliness and a new Majlis and Senate consti-
tuted in the very near future. In connection with paragraph 19, diplo-
matic relations between the UK and Iran have been resumed prior to
any tangible progress toward an oil settlement. Also, with regard to
paragraph 25, the first stage of the Mosadeq trial has been completed,
with his conviction and a three-year sentence which has now been ap-
pealed to a higher court. In this connection, I should point out that the
1 Source: National Archives, RG 84, Tehran Embassy Files, 1953–1955, classified
general files, Box 10. Secret. Drafted by Melbourne.
2 Not found.
3 Document 347.
