248
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
should stress that President Carter would like to see a Golan solution in
order to relieve the great burdens on Syria and to permit the develop-
ment of a close US-Syrian relationship. The best way to cause Assad to
ponder the situation calmly is to assure him of President Carter’s deep
interest in solving both the Palestinian problem and the problems of
Syria. The Secretary said he could do that.
Fahd said it is extremely important to assure Assad that President
Carter wants to solve the total Palestinian problem. The Secretary
noted the President had said that publicly the other night.10 Fahd said
that it bears repeating face to face by the Secretary. He said the Secre-
tary should urge Assad to calm the Palestinians down and to give us a
chance. He should appeal to Assad to urge the Palestinians to avoid vi-
olence and not to mar the Arab image while President Carter is trying
so hard for the Arabs.
The Secretary thanked Fahd for his advice. In closing Fahd ex-
pressed his delight that the Secretary would be going to Syria.
10 Reference is to Carter’s televised speech of September 18. See footnote 14, Docu-
ment 64.
66.
Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department
of State1
Secretary’s Aircraft, September 24, 1978, 1740Z
Secto 10071. Subject: Meeting With Assad September 24, 1978. Pass
White House for the President and Dr. Brzezinski from the Secretary.
Department for Christopher and Saunders.
1. We have just come from a marathon four and one-half hour
meeting with President Assad. There was discussion of Lebanon2 for
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-
ject File, Box 88, Syria: 4/78–5/79. Secret; Flash; Nodis. Printed from a copy that indicates
the original was received in the White House Situation Room. Vance arrived in Syria
from Saudi Arabia on September 24 and departed the same day. Seelye sent an assess-
ment of this meeting in telegram 5677 from Damascus, September 26. (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850061–2033)
2 During the portion of the meeting which addressed the situation in Lebanon,
Assad charged that in contrast to his government’s position of urging that Lebanon’s
“central, legal authority must effectively exercise its jurisdiction over the country,” the
United States had “unwittingly seemed to encourage outside assistance” in the country.
Assad further stated that Ambassador Parker “seems to be coordinating resistance activ-
