Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
7
danger to humanity. We should refuse to sell nuclear powerplants and
fuels to nations who do not sign the nuclear nonproliferation treaty4
or who will not agree to adhere to strict provisions regarding inter-
national control of atomic wastes. The establishment of additional
nuclear-free zones in the world must also be encouraged.
In addition, however, the United States and the Soviet Union have
an obligation to deal with the excessive nuclear armaments which we
possess. Our ultimate goal should be the reduction of nuclear weapons
in all nations to zero. In the meantime, simple, careful, and firm public
proposals to implement these reductions should be pursued as a prime
national purpose in all our negotiations with nuclear powers—both
present and potential. The Vladivostok Agreement5 obviously permits
the continued atomic arms race.
We must play a constructive role in the resolution of local conflicts
which may lead to major power confrontations. Peace in the Middle
East is of vital interest to us all. While peace is the basic responsibility of
the nations in the area, the United States must help secure this peace by
maintaining the trust of all sides. We must strive to maintain good rela-
tions with the Arab countries as well as Israel, and to recognize Arab
needs and aspirations as long as they recognize that the major element
of a settlement is the guaranteed right of Israel to exist as a viable and
peaceful nation. The rights of the Palestinians must also be recognized
as part of any final solution.
It is essential that the flow of oil to Japan and Western Europe
never be shut off. The United States should not consider unilateral ac-
tion in the Middle East to assure our own nation’s access to Mideast oil.
Open or veiled threats of armed intervention do not contribute toward
a peaceful settlement of the problems of this tortured region.
The peoples of the developing nations need the aid, technology,
and knowledge of the developed nations. We need the developed na-
4 Reference is to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
opened for signature in Washington, London, and Moscow in July 1968. On July 1, 1968,
during a ceremony in the East Room of the White House, President Johnson made a state-
ment endorsing the treaty; Dean Rusk and William C. Foster signed the treaty on behalf
of the United States. Johnson transmitted the treaty to the Senate on July 9, and the Senate
gave its consent to the agreement on March 13, 1969. Following ratification by the United
States, United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, and 40 other states, the treaty entered into
force on March 5, 1970. For additional information, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol.
XI, Arms Control and Disarmament, Document 250.
5 In late November 1974, General Secretary Brezhnev and President Ford held a
series of meetings in the Siberian port city of Vladivostok. At the conclusion of the
summit, the leaders reached an understanding regarding the need to place overall limits
on ICBMs, SLBMs, and long-range bombers for both the United States and the Soviet
Union. The text of the Vladivostok Agreement is printed in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976,
vol. XXXIII, SALT II, 1972–1980, Document 91. For the memoranda of conversation, see
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XVI, Soviet Union, August 1974–December 1976, Docu-
ments 90–93.
