Yugoslavia
983
as unacceptable to us as it is to our allies, to the Islamic Conference
and to most genuinely nonaligned countries. Chancellor Schmidt and
President Giscard have told us that the Soviets have been equally
inflexible on Afghanistan in dealing with them.
We continue to believe it is possible that the combination of contin-
ued international pressure and strong Afghan resistance may lead the
Soviets to conclude that a peaceful settlement based on complete with-
drawal is in their interest.
Yugoslavia has, quite understandably, taken a deep interest in the
issue of the deployment of long-range theater nuclear forces. I do not
need to recount the history of this issue, but I do want to inform you
of the latest developments in our efforts to initiate discussions on long-
range theater nuclear forces with the Soviet Union. Until recently,
the Soviets had refused to engage even in preliminary exchanges and
instead insisted that NATO should first revoke or suspend its TNF
modernization decision taken last December. However, on July 10,
the Soviets indicated to us that they had dropped this unacceptable
precondition, and we are now preparing to engage in serious prelimi-
nary discussions. While it is premature to conclude that the apparent
new Soviet willingness to discuss the issue indicates a genuine interest
in arms control measures involving TNF and based on the principle of
equality, we welcome the opportunity to sit down and discuss the issue.
Mr. President, the United States attaches great significance to the
preservation of the independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Yugoslavia. We want to see a politically stable and economically pros-
perous Yugoslavia—one that will continue to play an important role
internationally and within the Nonaligned Movement—and, as I
stressed during our meetings in June, we stand ready to do what we
can to help Yugoslavia achieve this goal. I discussed the Yugoslav
balance of payments situation with Secretary Miller shortly after my
return from Europe, and he and the Vice President subsequently met
with Federal Secretary Kostic in Washington.2 We hope that our efforts
2 At Mondale’s request, no memorandum of conversation was prepared for the
meeting with Kostic. In telegram 188947 to Belgrade, July 18, the Department reported
that Larrabee described the meeting as mostly symbolic and that Mondale assured Kostic
of U.S. Government willingness to help where possible. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D800345–0666) Miller’s July 15 conversation with Kostic was
reported to the Embassy in Belgrade on July 22. The discussion focused on the tactics
that the Yugoslav Government might employ to reconcile its desire for a series of bilateral
agreements with Western governments with the suggestion of Chase Manhattan Bank
that they proceed with a worldwide syndication loan. Miller stressed that he did not
have any authority to direct private banks to do anything, and recommended that the
Yugoslav Government proceed with bilateral agreements in those countries that are
willing to do so and accept a worldwide syndication for the rest. (Telegram 192951 to
Belgrade, July 22; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800350–1032)
See also footnotes 4 and 5, Document 288, and footnote 6, Document 292.
