320  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
targeting policy in order to negate Soviet future civil defense improve-
ments as necessary.
2. Insurance: This policy is based on the assumption that the gov-
ernment’s statutory responsibility to protect its population and enhance 
national recovery, coupled with the chance that a large number of ini-
tial survivors might live long lives thereafter, is adequate justification 
for making the modest investment in a workable program to increase 
the number of initial survivors among the US population. In the same 
light, it is argued that, because initial survival of federal leadership 
and related continuity of government functions will likely enhance 
population survival in the longer term, a small investment to enhance 
leadership survival is also prudent. This policy of “insurance against 
the failure of deterrence” assumes that civil defense will have neither 
a positive nor negative effect on deterrence nor a significant impact on 
crisis management. It also assumes that there is no need to relate US 
civil defense policy and programs to those of the Soviets. Instead, deci-
sions on the scope and character of the US program should be made, 
like decisions on insurance generally, on the basis of: (1) the type and 
severity of the damage that could occur; (2) the probability of the dam-
age occurring; and (3) the costs of the insurance. Different judgments 
on each of these factors can lead to different conclusions as to what 
insurance is desirable. The insurance rationale was used to support 
both the FY 1962 Kennedy program ($550 million in FY 1979 dollars) 
and as well as the modest Nixon program of FY 1974 ($115 million in 
FY 1979 dollars).
3. Equivalent Survivability. Equivalent survivability exists if the pro-
portions of the leadership, population, and economy of the USSR sur-
viving a nuclear exchange are roughly equal to the proportions of the 
leadership, population, and economy of the US surviving the exchange. 
This policy starts from the finding that at the present time US policies 
and programs do not provide for equivalent survivability. Such a goal 
is, however, in US national interests and is a necessary corollary of 
US strategic forces policy. Achievement of that goal requires new civil 
defense measures.
Current US strategic policy is directed towards the maintenance 
of essential equivalence. A marked asymmetry in the vulnerability of 
strategic forces would be incompatible with this goal. So also is marked 
asymmetry in the vulnerability of leadership and population, which 
would make it difficult or impossible for the US to achieve an outcome 
of a nuclear exchange “on the most favorable terms possible” or one 
likely to maximize US postwar power relative to the enemy. Marked 
asymmetries in survivability could also undermine the credibility of 
the US nuclear deterrent with our NATO and Japanese allies. Inasmuch 
as the Soviets believe that effective defenses are essential to deterrence,
