822 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II World Hunger (PCWH). The Executive Order permitted Presidential appointment of 20 Americans from “public and private life” to the Commission and allowed the President of the Senate and Speaker of the House of Representatives to appoint 2 members from each house. It also outlined the Commission’s charge: “The Commission shall develop factual data as to the causes of world hunger and malnutrition. It shall review existing authorities and programs, public and private, national and international, which seek to address the problems of hunger and malnutrition; and, shall assess to the extent to which those programs are meeting their objectives, and why.” It continued: “The Commission shall develop recommendations designed to significantly reduce world hunger and malnutrition; and, shall develop various options for harnessing available resources to carry out those recommendations, including policy options for improving the capacity of the United States to reduce the problems of world hunger and malnutrition.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book II, pages 1498–1499) The White House announced the appointment of 14 members to the Commission on September 12. The public members of the Commission included John Denver, Harry Chapin, Sol Linowitz, Dr. Norman Borlaug, D.W. Brooks, Dr. Walter Falcon, Dr. Jean Mayer, Dr. Steven Muller, Bess Myerson, Dr. Howard Schneider, Dr. Adele Smith Simmons, Raymond Singletary, Dr. Eugene Stockwell, and Dr. Clifton Wharton. Linowitz was designated Chairman, and Mayer and Muller Vice Chairmen. (Ibid., page 1511) The President subsequently appointed Thomas Wyman and former Secretary of Agriculture Orville Freeman to the Commission on November 22, 1978, and February 1, 1979, respectively. (Ibid., page 2069 and ibid., 1979, Book I, page 213) Senators Robert Dole (Republican–Kansas) and Patrick Leahy (Democrat–Vermont), and Representatives Benjamin Gilman (Republican–New York) and Richard Nolan (Democratic-Farmer-Labor– Minnesota) served as the congressional members of the Commission. In a September 12 letter to Linowitz, Commission members Denver, Chapin, Leahy, Gilman, and Nolan described what they believed should be the Commission’s guiding principles: “The first principle is morality. It is the most fundamental right of every man, woman and child, to live free from hunger and the fear of hunger. This most basic right must be guaranteed if other human rights are to have any meaning. The Congressional Right to Food Resolution reinforces this concept. Thus all hunger, regardless of cause, must be considered immoral. There is a practical application to this principle: the old adage, that when one is in doubt, one should always do the moral thing, is the appropriate way to resolve the potential uncertainties in our deliberations.
