822
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
World Hunger (PCWH). The Executive Order permitted Presidential
appointment of 20 Americans from “public and private life” to the
Commission and allowed the President of the Senate and Speaker of
the House of Representatives to appoint 2 members from each house. It
also outlined the Commission’s charge: “The Commission shall de-
velop factual data as to the causes of world hunger and malnutrition. It
shall review existing authorities and programs, public and private, na-
tional and international, which seek to address the problems of hunger
and malnutrition; and, shall assess to the extent to which those pro-
grams are meeting their objectives, and why.”
It continued: “The Commission shall develop recommendations
designed to significantly reduce world hunger and malnutrition; and,
shall develop various options for harnessing available resources to
carry out those recommendations, including policy options for im-
proving the capacity of the United States to reduce the problems of
world hunger and malnutrition.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book II,
pages 1498–1499)
The White House announced the appointment of 14 members to
the Commission on September 12. The public members of the Commis-
sion included John Denver, Harry Chapin, Sol Linowitz, Dr. Norman
Borlaug, D.W. Brooks, Dr. Walter Falcon, Dr. Jean Mayer, Dr. Steven
Muller, Bess Myerson, Dr. Howard Schneider, Dr. Adele Smith
Simmons, Raymond Singletary, Dr. Eugene Stockwell, and Dr. Clifton
Wharton. Linowitz was designated Chairman, and Mayer and Muller
Vice Chairmen. (Ibid., page 1511) The President subsequently ap-
pointed Thomas Wyman and former Secretary of Agriculture Orville
Freeman to the Commission on November 22, 1978, and February 1,
1979, respectively. (Ibid., page 2069 and ibid., 1979, Book I, page 213)
Senators Robert Dole (Republican–Kansas) and Patrick Leahy (Demo-
crat–Vermont),
and
Representatives
Benjamin
Gilman
(Republi-
can–New
York)
and
Richard
Nolan
(Democratic-Farmer-Labor–
Minnesota) served as the congressional members of the Commission.
In a September 12 letter to Linowitz, Commission members
Denver, Chapin, Leahy, Gilman, and Nolan described what they be-
lieved should be the Commission’s guiding principles:
“The first principle is morality. It is the most fundamental right of
every man, woman and child, to live free from hunger and the fear of
hunger. This most basic right must be guaranteed if other human rights
are to have any meaning. The Congressional Right to Food Resolution
reinforces this concept. Thus all hunger, regardless of cause, must be
considered immoral. There is a practical application to this principle:
the old adage, that when one is in doubt, one should always do the
moral thing, is the appropriate way to resolve the potential uncer-
tainties in our deliberations.
