March 27–December 31, 1979 1057 The President noted that both sides are accommodating to one another. Minister Weizman said that with Minister Ali he has no problems. He called Gamasay in New York, and will see Ghorbal while he is here. The President said that this weekend or Monday5 he will telephone Sadat and Begin,6 for end of the year greetings. He will compliment them on their heroic progress towards peace. He will have a word on expectations for Aswan, and encourage them to move forward. If Minister Weizman has any thoughts about what should be said in these phone calls, would he pass them to Eppy for Zbig. This applies to both phone calls. Minister Weizman said he saw Sol Linowitz for lunch yesterday, and will see him again. He thanks the President for seeing him. He knows he is busy with Afghanistan and Tehran. He came here to try to influence, convince the President, share his thoughts, on what interests have changed from a few months ago. He does not like trips to ask for an increase in aid. The President said he knew. Minister Weizman said he prefers to say what he can do to help, and would like to be able to help with Tehran, etc. This would give him more than the greatest pleasure. Their feeling is that they are giving up a lot, especially on oil. The President said he understood. Minister Weizman said he has a photo which he will send, in color, taken by some Israelis in Sinai, of a sign saying “we did not withdraw, we handed back this land for peace.” The President asked him to send the photo through Eppy. Minister Weizman said an Army unit did this. Israel is now doing what it should have done two years ago: it is taking the bull by the horns, and making difficult economic decisions. The President will understand this, too. The new Israeli Finance Minister7 is tough. He is the first to speak neither English nor Yiddish, but only proper Hebrew! (The President laughed). The new economic laws and measures8 are good. It most likely picks on the defense budget. In the last two and a half years, he (Weizman) has reduced the budget by 10%. Part of this is 5 December 31. 6 See footnote 4, Document 324. 7 Yigal Hurvitz. 8 In order to address a growing balance of payments deficit and an annual inflation rate estimated at nearly 100%, the Israeli Cabinet approved the budget policy outline submitted by Hurwitz for FY 1980/81 calling for a 4% cut in real expenditure by the Israeli Government on November 18. (Telegram 24568 from Tel Aviv, November 19; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790537–0896)
