1978 347 77. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter1 Washington, August 16, 1978 SUBJECT Defense Authorization Bill I have given further thought to the question whether the defense authorization bill should be signed or vetoed. In terms of its effect on our defense posture, directly and through the reductions it forces in funds for procurement, readiness, sustainability, and research and development, the bill has a debilitating effect on our defense posture as compared with the budget that you submitted for Fiscal Year 1979. In particular, addition of a nuclear carrier in the bill has two very serious effects. First, it caused the Appropriations Committees, in order to stay within the Congressionally approved budget limits for defense, to displace a number of more important and urgent needs mentioned above. Second, it continues the trend toward larger and more expensive ships—­which inevitably means fewer ships—­in the Navy; this is true both of the CVN itself and of the (nuclear) escorts for it that the Congress will presumably feel impelled to insert into future budgets. Thus, on substance, a veto is in order. If we are to sustain the coherence of the defense program in support of the Administration’s priorities and the defense needs of our country, the Congress must be encouraged to produce a better final outcome than now looms in its defense authorization and appropriation. A veto offers some chance of that, depending on how well we are able to articulate our objections. It does not offer a certainty, and there is a real possibility that the result will be worse. There is also the likelihood of inflaming our relations with the Congress; one must set against this the need to restrain the Congress from even more erosion of defense needs to meet their own more immediate political pressures. There is also the question of how confident we are that a veto can be sustained. Major adverse consequences to our ability to manage the defense program will follow if a veto is overridden. A serious concern is that a veto could be seen as an Administration move toward a weaker defense posture. Our public statements, and 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, Box 5, Defense Department: 7–8/78. Confidential; Personal. Additional talking points on the veto are in Carter Library, Donated Material, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, Department of Defense—Subject File, Box 37, Department of Defense—Defense Authorization Veto [1].
