650 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Ministers’ Comments on Working Group Reports The Secretary said he was disappointed to hear this negative assessment of the Open Skies discussions. He had hoped to give impetus to this effort so that we could increase the chances of making substantial progress at Budapest. He wanted to offer some final words on START. The Secretary said the START working group report had not touched on ALCMs and SLCMs. We knew there was a lot of work left to be done in these two major areas. But there was also a lot of work to be done on other START issues. He called the Soviet side’s attention to the list of 32 unresolved issues to be resolved by the next ministerial. It was important that we make every effort to resolve issues in Geneva now that the summit was scheduled for May 30. The fact that we agreed on the priorities should help move our bureaucracies. Shevardnadze said he would like to endorse the Secretary’s comments and the wishes he had expressed. He also believed the sides were entering a very difficult and serious stage in START. All these issues were related one way or another to the summit. This included ALCMs and SLCMs, as well as chemical weapons. In this respect, time was growing short. Regarding Open Skies, Shevardnadze noted that the Ministers had agreed in Ottawa to meet again in Budapest to prepare an Open Skies agreement. The working group’s report suggested that the state of readiness was very low. On CFE, Shevardnadze said that a major political event was on the horizon, namely the all-European summit. If there were no CFE agreement, this would put that meeting in question. All participants were in favor of completing a CFE agreement by the summit; therefore we were entering a momentous phase. Shevardnadze said he had the impression that our delegations in Geneva and Vienna would need to step up their work so as not to undermine these major upcoming events—­events which would be of world significance. He believed a lot would depend on how promptly our governments reacted to their delegations request. Prompt answers would be needed, as well as further contacts between the two sides. Shevardnadze noted that Ambassador Burt had said that he and Nazarkin had spent much of their time at luncheons. He was prepared to look at the question of controlling Soviet expense accounts. This was the most rational suggestion he had heard. Nevertheless, despite all the difficulties, he retained a sense of healthy optimism. We should meet again in a state of good readiness for these upcoming events. We had no alternatives since we were operating under the direct orders of our leaders. Shevardnadze then thanked his friend the Secretary and members of the Secretary’s delegation. As for more specific critical comments, he would make these in Moscow. The Secretary thanked Shevardnadze for his comments. As the two of them had learned, Ambassador Burt was an expert on lunches. He agreed
