472 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI agenda. The Soviets could not say with certainty how the negotiations would go. Karpov said that he wanted to dot the i’s on this question. The Soviet position was that the two sides should have a common understanding regarding compliance with the ABM Treaty. They also believed that there should be clear limits that would not be crossed so that neither side would be charged with violating the ABM Treaty. This was why they had suggested defining a clear line between permitted and prohibited activities. The second point, Karpov continued, was that compliance with the ABM Treaty was the sine qua non for implementation of a START treaty. Only in conditions of compliance with the ABM Treaty could the START reductions be implemented. Third, the Soviet position was that the two sides already now should record a common understanding that if either violated the ABM Treaty, the other could view this as a threat to its supreme national interest and withdraw per Article XVI. If, by the time the treaty were concluded, no common understanding were reached, then the Soviets wanted the U.S. side to be aware of this position: namely, that the Soviets would see a U.S. violation of the ABM Treaty as contrary to Soviet supreme national interests and, in such circumstances, they would act under Article XVI. The Secretary said that a common understanding stating that a violation would be a grounds for termination of the treaty was not something to which we could agree. The Soviets were free to make whatever determination they wished. They could withdraw from START because the sun did not come up the next day; that was the Soviets’ business. But if the Soviets were asking us to agree that what might be, in the Soviets’ opinion, a U.S. violation of the ABM Treaty would represent specific cause for withdrawal, this we could not do. The Soviets had the same latitude and freedom to place whatever interpretation they wished on the supreme interests clause. But a specific common understanding was not acceptable. The U.S. had to retain the right to interpret the ABM Treaty in the way it believed it should be interpreted. This did not prejudice the Soviet position. In any event, the Secretary said, failure to agree on an interpretation of the ABM Treaty was not, as he understood the Soviet position, something that would prevent signature of START. The only point we were hung up on was the Soviet preference for a common understanding that an ABM violation would trigger the supreme interests clause. The Secretary repeated that this was the Soviets’ business. We would not agree, but the Soviets had the right to withdraw on this basis. He urged that the Soviets not make this a requirement for a START treaty. Burt said that what he had just heard Karpov say suggested that we may no longer have a problem. The Secretary commented that he
