1450 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement unwilling to give private tutoring, there are one or two other Chinese in Geneva who could do so. While I do not have the final answers on the situation in Zurich, my feeling is that probably Dr. Peng would be able to give Dexter the necessary practice, although I doubt very much that his professional qualifications and capabilities in teaching interpreting approach those of Mrs. Chu in Geneva. I hope that during this week you will receive a telegraphic report from Zurich as to Dr. Peng’s capabilities and interest in doing the job. As it looks now, from the standpoint of maintaining and increasing his language and interpreting proficiency, Dexter should be assigned to Geneva. As you are aware, Bern has not turned up any potential instructors. I feel that it is a mistake to assign Dexter to an already existing slot either at Geneva or Zurich, and the officers in charge of these posts are of like mind. The reasoning of the Consuls General is quite simple and, to my mind, understandable. Their offices do not suffer from an excess of slots to cover the work that has to be done. Thus they are not eager to accept an officer for one of these slots who is from the outset going to devote at best only 3/4 of his time to the job. In my own case, I can tell you frankly, that the Minister and others here are not at all happy about the amount of time I am away from my job at the Embassy. In effect, the Geneva assignment takes about 1/4 of my time, and of course recently the Delhi conference has taken me away for a much longer period. In my case the Geneva assignment is at least related to the work I do here, although, as I am sure CA is aware, I am supposed to be covering the work here of 5 or 6 other geographic offices in the Department as well as that of CA. In the case of Dexter, if he were to be assigned to Zurich, for example, which is purely a consular post, his work would be entirely unconnected with the Geneva meetings and the time spent on them and on language training would be a dead loss to the Consulate. An assign­ ment like this would not be fair to the Consulate or to Dexter himself. As for the Geneva assignment, I think it would be very unfortu­ nate to put Dexter in a general service officer’s slot. The only reason for Dexter’s assignment and for his continued language training is that at Geneva we are maintaining some sort of tenuous diplomatic contact with the Chinese Communists. The history of the past 4–5 years has demonstrated that the Peiping regime has to be dealt with, at least at this minimum level, and I see no reason to believe that developments in the future will make it any more possible to refrain from having some dealings with the authorities who control some 1/2 billion of the world’s population. Certainly our operation in Geneva is impor­ tant enough to stand on its own feet, at least to the extent of providing the salary and perquisites of one full-time officer. I feel that develop­ ing Dexter and, I hope, several other language officers as first-class
