1058  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
a tremendous political uproar over the budget but the Government 
would nevertheless push through a balanced budget before the end of 
the month. Then it would take up the petroleum price increases. There 
would be a similar uproar, probably with strikes and demonstrations, 
but the price increases would nevertheless be granted.
I said I had been disturbed by Prime Minister Gallo Porras’ state-
ment to me yesterday that Congress would not approve the legislation 
and that the increases should be enacted by decree after Congress had 
adjourned, subject to approval next July.2 The Company had repeat-
edly been promised some such action without results and believed that 
legislation was necessary. Without specifically stating that it would be 
done by legislation, although he said there would be another extraor-
dinary session of Congress in January, the President reiterated that the 
price increases would be put through as soon as the budget had been 
passed, no matter what the uproar might be.
2 The memorandum of conversation between Prime Minister Porras and 
Ambassador Achilles, December 10, was transmitted to the Department of State with this 
memorandum of conversation.
PE–20.	
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for 
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Deputy Under 
Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Murphy)1

Washington, December 18, 1958.
SUBJECT 
Deteriorating Situation in Peru
This is to call your attention to the deteriorating situation in Peru, 
where the vacillating government of President Prado faces growing 
unrest. It has exerted no real leadership and has lost all of the prestige 
which it originally enjoyed for giving Peru a democratic administration 
after eight years of military dictatorship.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 723.00/12–1858. Confidential. Drafted 
by Pringle. The source text bears the following note of December 19 from Murphy to 
Rubottom: “As Achilles is coming up for the holidays, let us have a discussion with him 
about this.” No record of the projected discussion was found in Department of State files.
