3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–June 1979 529 time, with the Yemen conflict raging, such statements might be interpreted as Saudi encouragement in Moscow. 4. For Moscow: Above points provided as background. You may draw on them if the occasion should arise but you need not approach Soviets on this specifically. 5. Addressees will be provided septel5 factual up-date of Soviet assistance to PDRY, with emphasis on post-June ’78 coup arms deliveries and review of current political and military situation in YAR. Vance 5 Not found. 180. Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev1 Washington, March 7, 1979 Dear Mr. President: I believe you will agree that we are on the threshold of completing a SALT II Agreement that will enhance US/Soviet relations and contribute to world stability and peace. I am writing to you directly concerning an issue, telemetry encryption, which is critical to a SALT II Agreement that will serve these important purposes. There have been long discussions between us on how to resolve this important matter. My own personal belief is that any encryption of telemetry from the testing of strategic missiles is unnecessary and ill advised. Nonetheless, we had considered this issue acceptably resolved on the basis of the Common Understanding tabled by Ambassador Earle on January 31, 1979, and the statement he placed on the record in connection with this.2 This arrangement confirmed the understanding 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Geographic File, Box 19, U.S.S.R.—(Vienna Summit Briefing Book, 6/79) (1). No classification marking. 2 The statement made on January 31 on the amendment of the common understanding, was transmitted in telegram 1614 from Geneva, January 31. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790047–0595) The common agreement stated that both sides agreed to the use of telemetry, except in instances where the denial of telemetric information impeded the verification of compliance with the treaty.
