804 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 example, could be given whatever may be their due on the basis of existing regulations with regard to pension and terminal pay. Persons proved to be leaders of the communist conspiracy, however, should be recognized as dangerous, virtually incurable criminals, and should be treated as such within the framework of law. The number in this latter category may not be found to be too numerous and, the example of treatment to them, coupled with stern treatment to Tudeh smallfry who may be arrested for selling newspapers or creating street disturbances, would act as a very strong deterrent to any spread of the Tudeh organization. 334. Memorandum From the Deputy Chief of the Near East and Africa Division, Directorate of Plans ([name not declassified]) to the Deputy Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner)1 Washington, October 20, 1953. SUBJECT Termination of the [less than 1 line not declassified] phase of TPAJAX I have discussed this matter with Mr. Roosevelt. He feels it should be discussed as casually as possible and at the operating level. He suggests I be designated to take it up with [name not declassified] here and does not believe it advisable to call in either RS of the British Embassy or any State Department official. He proposes I take the following line with [name not declassified]. Raising the subject of the [less than 1 line not declassified] I should state that we do feel that the period of [less than 1 line not declassified] operation has come to an end and we don’t want the [name not declassified], or for that matter any other agent, to speak on our behalf. As [name not declassified] is well aware, Mr. Roosevelt so informed both the Shah and Gen. Zahedi. We should therefore now revert to the type of relationship which existed prior to the initiation of TPAJAX with this one change however; to wit that so long as the British have no official representation in Tehran we will continue to pass on to 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 80–01701R, Box 3, Folder 10, TPAJAX. Secret; Security Information.
