248 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI justified if we are satisfied with the potential Soviet production facilities included on the SSI list. Option 1. Retain the existing position for PPM only at facilities that are producing an ICBM or SLBM stage and are also producing any type of motor that exceeds the size of the smallest mobile accountable stage. (favored by the DCI and JCS) Option 2. Retain the existing position for PPM, but do not seek to engage the Soviets on the issue. If the Soviets press, inform them that the issue is under review in Washington. (favored by State, Ambassador Rowny and ACDA) Option 3. Inform the Soviets that we are withdrawing our PPM proposal pending a review of our position. (favored by OSD) NSC staff note that our PPM position will require study in the months ahead as we flesh out the details. The existing position was the subject of much study in the Reagan Administration, but it is possible that a review will conclude that additional facilities, such as missile final assembly plants, should be included. The potential changes are relatively minor and can be introduced at a later time without withdrawing our position. NSC Staff Recommendation That you approve Option 2.14 4. Mandatory SSI. The issue is whether to change the U.S. position on what types of facilities must be subjected to short-notice, mandatory inspections. Discussion The existing U.S. proposal would permit mandatory short-­notice SSI at facilities on an agreed list, for the purpose of resolving compliance concerns regarding ballistic missile-­related activities. This list would focus chiefly on solid rocket motor production facilities. However, no specific proposal has been made to the Soviets, or agreed to in the USG. SSI at all other locations would be subject to a right of refusal by the inspected party, although the refusing party is required to make a “good faith” effort to resolve the concern by other means. Many believe the agreed list should comprise only solid rocket motor production plants where PPM is not in place. They note that the issue of how to balance the U.S. interest in a comprehensive SSI regime to deter Soviet cheating, with our need to protect sensitive U.S. facilities was the subject of extensive study in the Reagan Administration. 14 Scowcroft initialed his approval
