Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 123 William Luers from State said that we should be careful in formulating our policy to the OAS and more generally to the hemisphere, lest our new policy be perceived as a massive rejection of Latin America.6 Cultural and Educational Exchanges Todman said that the value of individual contacts is very important to increase mutual understanding. Christopher asked whether we should return to a more enlightened and generous policy with respect to cultural and educational exchanges with Latin America. Todman nodded yes. Technical Assistance Christopher asked whether we should put more money into technical assistance to Latin America. Weil from Commerce said that question brought the discussion back to the beginning: What are our interests? If they are not special, then we should not give special assistance. Summary and Miscellaneous Christopher noted that Todman will be meeting with the Cubans in New York,7 that the Canal Treaty negotiations will be continuing, and that we should be increasingly sensitive to Brazil. Any overall statement needs to take into account our concern for special problems. He noted that the discussion was a little more philosophical than usual, but that we were probing for a relationship which adapted to the new realities. The next step is the speech at the Organization of American States. 6 Earlier that day, Luers had testified before the House International Relations Committee Subcommittee on Inter-American Affairs concerning the strengthening of hemispheric cooperation. He asserted that the United States faced an “opportunity and obligation to cooperate constructively with this new hemisphere. We must do so without sentimentality but with a sense of strong tradition, without paternalism but with respect for the sovereignty, independence, and dignity of each nation to find its own future.” The complete text of Luers’s statement is printed in Department of State Bulletin, April 11, 1977, pp. 347–350. 7 Todman met with Cuban Deputy Foreign Minister Pelegrin Torras in New York March 24–29 to discuss an agreement to regulate fishing. See Graham Hovey, “U.S. Negotiators and Cuba Open Talks on Fishing,” The New York Times, March 25, 1977, p. 48. For the text of the joint communique´ issued on March 29, see Department of State Bulletin, April 25, 1977, p. 421.
