168 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI June 19. It will also be the bureaucracy’s last opportunity to engage on possible new initiatives. Mobile ICBMs The papers on mobile ICBMs and mobile verification reiterate agency positions on old issues and a discussion of these papers would repeat the pattern at Wednesday’s DC meeting.2 For that reason, and because of the large number of items to cover in one hour, we recommend that you not march through these papers in the meeting in detail, but seek consensus at the outset that they fairly represent agency views and options.3 At that point, attempt to get the Deputies to focus on the tradeoffs underlying all the issues in these two papers: how should the U.S. evaluate competing U.S. objectives and concerns in the areas of stability, verification, intrusiveness, budgetary expense, and U.S. ICBM program uncertainty.4 The PCC Papers in brief: — Mobile ICBMs. This paper reviews agency positions (although specific agencies are not identified) on four issues: whether to alter our formal position banning such missiles; whether to consider banning MIRVed mobile ICBMs while allowing single-RV mobile ICBMs; if mobiles are to be allowed, what numerical constraints to seek on them; and whether, and if so, how to address accountability and inspection provisions for “movable” ICBMs (e.g., fixed area, multiple shelter ICBM basing). — Mobile ICBM Verification. Similar to the Mobile ICBM paper above, this paper reviews options on specific issues that an agency requested be revisited before resumption of negotiations in Geneva. The approaches assume that mobiles will be permitted. If (as seems unlikely) the DC believes we will not soon drop our ban on mobiles, a discussion of how to verify mobiles probably could be deferred. There are six issues in this paper: whether to modify the restrictions on road-­mobile ICBMs; whether to modify our position on rail-­mobiles to restrict missiles to a specified Deployment Area; whether our approach to continuous monitoring of production is sufficiently broad based; whether to withdraw our position on Mandatory SSI pending further study; whether to withdraw our position on Right-­of-Refusal SSI pending further study; and whether to allow SSI at facilities subject to continuous monitoring if such monitoring is not actually in place. 2 See Document 28. 3 Gates underlined “seek consensus at the outset that they fairly represent agency views and options.” 4 Gates drew a short vertical line in the left-­hand margin beside this sentence, and wrote: “adequate vehicles for discussion/agency position,” beside this and the previous sentence.
