Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
543
Our firm commitment to Israel’s survival and security is rooted in
our deepest convictions and in our knowledge of the strategic impor-
tance to our own Nation of a stable Middle East. To promote peace and
reconciliation in the region, we must retain the trust and the confidence
both of Israel and also of the Arab nations that are sincerely searching
for peace.
I am determined, as President, to use the full, beneficial influence
of our country so that the precious opportunity for lasting peace be-
tween Israel and Egypt will not be lost.
The new foundation of international cooperation that we seek ex-
cludes no nation. Cooperation with the Soviet Union serves the cause of
peace, for in this nuclear age, world peace must include peace between
the super powers—and it must mean the control of nuclear arms.
Ten years ago, the United States and the Soviet Union made the
historic decision to open the strategic arms limitations talks, or SALT.
The purpose of SALT, then as now, is not to gain a unilateral advantage
for either nation, but to protect the security of both nations, to reverse
the costly and dangerous momentum of the nuclear arms race, to pre-
serve a stable balance of nuclear forces, and to demonstrate to a con-
cerned world that we are determined to help preserve the peace.
The first SALT agreement was concluded in 1972. And since then,
during 6 years of negotiation by both Republican and Democratic
leaders, nearly all issues of SALT II have been resolved. If the Soviet
Union continues to negotiate in good faith, a responsible SALT agree-
ment will be reached.
It’s important that the American people understand the nature of
the SALT process.
SALT II is not based on sentiment; it’s based on self-interest—of
the United States and of the Soviet Union. Both nations share a pow-
erful common interest in reducing the threat of a nuclear war. I will
sign no agreement which does not enhance our national security.
SALT II does not rely on trust; it will be verifiable. We have very
sophisticated, proven means, including our satellites, to determine for
ourselves whether or not the Soviet Union is meeting its treaty obliga-
tions. I will sign no agreement which cannot be verified.
The American nuclear deterrent will remain strong after SALT II.
For example, just one of our relatively invulnerable Poseidon subma-
rines—comprising less than 2 percent of our total nuclear force of sub-
marines, aircraft, and land-based missiles—carries enough warheads to
destroy every large- and medium-sized city in the Soviet Union. Our
deterrent is overwhelming, and I will sign no agreement unless our de-
terrent force will remain overwhelming.
A SALT agreement, of course, cannot substitute for wise diplo-
macy or a strong defense, nor will it end the danger of nuclear war. But
