752 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement In the form now proposed by the U.S. it might be understood to imply a tacit de facto recognition of the Chinese Communist regime. It would be construed by the free peoples in Asia and elsewhere as a further retreat of the U.S. position and would consequently weaken their deter­ mination of resisting Communist inducement . . . “It has been the consistent view of the Chinese Government that the Geneva talks, once permitted to go beyond the practical question of civilian repatriation, would inevitably degenerate into a favor­ able platform for Communist propaganda and provide opportunities for neutralist countries to further exert pressure on the U.S. toward appeasement. This view has unfortunately been borne out by recent events. “It is the considered opinion of the Chinese Government that, in the interests of the U.S. and the Republic of China as well as the free world as a whole, the Geneva talks on the renunciation of the use of force should be brought to an end as soon as possible.” The point of view stated in this aide memoire was also expressed by several Taipei newspaper editorials and articles as reported in ­January Weekas from Taiwan. Japan Quoted from Tokyo’s telegram of January 31, 1956. “. . . In spite of all which has been said publicly by the Secretary and others, there is still a large body of opinion in Japan which believes that American policy towards Red China is changing and there is con­ siderable concern lest an abrupt change be made without Japan know­ ing in advance so that she can adjust her own policy accordingly. “I assured Mr. Kishi that I had seen no evidence of any coming change in our policy toward Red China and while obviously no one could say what would be the situation after passage of several years, nevertheless I could assure him that our policy in fact was the same that it has been stated to be time after time by our public leaders. I empha­ sized that the Ambassadorial level talks in Geneva were purely for the purpose of obtaining release of Americans imprisoned in Red China and for the purpose of obtaining if at all possible a commitment on the part of Red China not to use force in the Formosa area but that these talks in no way implied any recognition of Red China or any intention to recognize Red China in the future.” Viet Nam Newspaper editorial comment in Viet Nam has consistently criti­ cized the Geneva talks and has recently stepped up demands for break­ ing off the negotiations. (Saigon’s telegram of February 4, 1956.)
