1956 1215 consistent with the position on renunciation of force I have taken here, the statements of the French and British have certainly not given too much support to the “universally accepted” nature of the principle. 11. I was very interested in your account of the Chinese Communist initiative in the publications field. Do our Treasury regulations oper­ ate so as to prevent any such shipments? (I have subsequently seen the CA notice which I am glad to note is encouraging the licensing for non-technical publications.) 12. I had been deploring publicity under my previous instructions but had also tried to make it clear we did not fear it. I entirely agree with Walter’s views and will act accordingly in the future. 13. The guidance for tomorrow has just come in. It is very com­ plete and I certainly agree we are on a strong wicket in the disgraceful McCarthy affair. I just can’t understand why they have done it. Thursday 14. Back from the meeting and have just sent off my summary to you. I do not think there can longer be much doubt as to the course of action they have laid out for themselves. The only question now is the timing—that is will they carry out their move at the next meeting just before the elections and the UNGA or will they wait until the follow­ ing meeting just after the elections and the UNGA. In any event, there will in all probability be a public statement following the next meeting, which will make the threat to break, with the break carried out at the following meeting. One can never dismiss the possibility of a bland reversal but I just do not think it is likely as they have now gone almost out to the end of this limb. I hope that the Secretary will have time care­ fully to consider the situation and that my guidance will be as explicit as possible. 15. I deliberately did not try further today to develop the threat implicit in the last sentence of his prepared statement, leaving that for next time when I will want to make a very carefully considered and comprehensive statement in reply to his of today. I would hope that my guidance will also cover whether it is desired I try to steer things in the direction of an indefinite recess or a clean break, if the next meeting goes in that direction. 16. I should think it would be nice to get out our statement on implementation before the next meeting. I think it would place us in a much better position to meet their next move. (Incidentally, I hope you will get it to us here well before release time so that we know what has been said and I can get a copy over to Wang at approximately its release time.) I should also think that at our next meeting I should be prepared to say something on the missing POWs without getting into any details.
