1392  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Use of any aircraft,
Use of aircraft over national territories and 
Acceptance of non-­political wording.
4) Recognition and acceptance of “inspection” in seismic 
conclusions.
5) Lengthy, informal discussion of inspection in connection with 
proper place in the agenda has committed them farther than we 
believed they were prepared to go.
6) While there is pressure to complete work, there has been no 
recent reference to three or four weeks—or any other time limit.
7) General tone of meetings has been better; no further political 
hassles re communiques, etc.
8) In every important case they have accepted the major elements 
of our position, moving appreciably from their original position.
9) Their participation, whereas generally emphasizing theory 
rather than experimental data, has been on a high scientific plane.
We have reported earlier evidence of their concern re 4th power 
problem. Observations above may be interpreted as related primarily to 
this problem, but we believe they may have much deeper implications. 
On the assumption that my estimate is correct and that we do reach satis­
factory understandings here with the USSR, the pressures will be intense 
to make the political decisions on what the next steps will be. I suggest 
that this issue be carefully thought out in Washington so that the US can 
take the initiative shortly after conclusion of this conference, which may 
be only ten days or so away. Soviet propaganda will no doubt make 
immediate capital out of the fact that Soviet and Western scientists have 
reached agreement on detection and identification of tests.
The true political implications of this development are not for me 
to evaluate. It seems clear that there have been important revisions 
in Fedorov’s instructions during the course of the meeting and he is 
accepting points which I did not believe at the outset he would accept.
I have discussed these observations with Sir William Penney, who 
has similar views which he has communicated to the Foreign Office.
Villard
