(3) The only difference of any importance between the Japanese and Chinese proposals is thus reduced to the question as to whether British and French radio interests, besides Japanese and American, shall be invited to participate in the new loan agreement in which the existing contracts of the Mitsui and of the Federal are to be merged. The Japanese Government hold to the belief that it is highly desirable, for the promotion of international good understanding, no less than for the development of China’s own radio enterprise, to enlist the friendly co-operation of British and French interests. The fairness of the claim of these two nations to participate in the proposed arrangement must be admitted, while their support is certainly required in order to secure the satisfactory working of Chinese radio enterprise in its relation with Europe. It need hardly be pointed out that the co-operation of the four-Power radio interests on the lines indicated can not, in any sense, be taken as a measure implying any degree of international control, or international administration, of wireless telegraphy in China, which is as strongly deprecated by the Japanese Government as by the Chinese Government. (4) Should the foregoing observations meet the approval of China, the Japanese Government, on their part, will be happy to do whatever lies in their power, in co-operation with the Chinese Government, to expedite a solution of the long pending difficulty. Being satisfied that it is not so much a question of principle as of detail which separates the Japanese and Chinese proposals under review, the Japanese Government are encouraged in the hope that a fair and speedy adjustment could be arrived at, if the same basic principle now found acceptable to both Governments will commend itself equally to a favourable reception on the part of the American Government. 31 Handed to the Secretary by the Japanese Ambassador, Oct. 9, 1925. This paper bears the annotation: “English translation of the reply of the Japanese Government to the Memorandum of the Wai-Chiao-Pu dated Aug. 28, 1925.” 32 See telegrams Nos. 360 and 361, Aug. 29, from the Minister in China, pp. 919 [Pg. 919 is part of Doc. 760] and 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 761].
