1036 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 317. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter1 Washington, December 10, 1979 SUBJECT US Access to Facilities in Egypt (U) (TS) By your note on the report of the 30 November meeting between Ambassador Atherton and Egyptian Vice President Mubarak,2 and separately in a telephone conversation with me, you asked for a report on how the US could, and whether we should, help develop naval and air base facilities for Egypt on the Red Sea, usable by the US in future emergencies. This memorandum contains a preliminary analysis. (TS) Recent events reinforce my conviction that an expanded US military presence in the Middle East/Persian Gulf/Indian Ocean region is a strategic necessity. In the long term, the appropriate level of such presence will require access to a small number of selected air base and port facilities in the area. I will shortly submit my proposals on these broader measures to enhance our flexibility for rapid deployment and sustained operations in the area. (TS) In the shorter term, as you know, we are in the process of obtaining a very modest foothold in Egypt by virtue of the limited access to Wadi Kena Air Base extended by the Egyptian Government. We have proceeded quietly to insert a base warm-up team and necessary equipment to support operations by two E–3A AWACS aircraft. We will soon withdraw the personnel but leave behind under Egyptian Air Force caretaker status, the modest support infrastructure items now in place at this Egyptian field. Thus, we will be able to introduce E–3As into Wadi Kena with supporting personnel with little notice and be able to conduct operations shortly after arrival. (TS) During our consultations with Vice President Mubarak regarding Wadi Kena, he repeated President Sadat’s earlier suggestion of the desirability of having the US upgrade the Red Sea port/airfield complex at Ras Banas (Berenice). Preliminary information (see attachments)3 indicates that this complex is very austere and would require a substantial effort to develop a permanent base. Both the port and airfield lack a potable water source and a reliable fuel supply system. The 1 Source: Washington National Records Center, Old Files, FRC 330–82–0270, Box 1, Egypt 1979. Top Secret; Sensitive. Sent via Alpha Channel. A copy of the memorandum was sent to Vance. 2 A record of this meeting was not found. 3 Attached but not printed.
