Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  339
Burt, moving on to mobile ICBM verification, said he wanted to 
elaborate on a paper provided to the Soviet side earlier which contained 
proposals by the U.S. for additional elements of common ground on 
mobile verification. The first element was that rail garrisons be lim-
ited in size. Such a limitation would ensure that rail launchers could 
not move long distances without prior notification. The U.S. side was 
prepared to discuss various ways of recording the size limit if a limit 
expressed in square kilometers was a problem. The second element was 
that, upon returning to garrison from a dispersal, rail-­mobile forces be 
subject to enhanced NTM, as were road-­mobile ICBMs. The third was 
that, following dispersals, the other side should have a right both to 
enhanced NTM and to OSI. The current Soviet position permitted only 
one or the other. The fourth element was that the number of restricted 
areas for road mobiles be unlimited. The limit of five restricted areas 
proposed by the Soviet side did not provide sufficient flexibility. Fifth, 
the U.S. side was prepared to agree that the number of road-­mobile 
launchers and missiles in a restricted area should not exceed 10. Sixth, 
the U.S. side suggested combining the Soviet-­proposed NTM enhance-
ment measure of displaying road-­mobile launchers next to their fixed 
structures following dispersals with the previously agreed measure of 
opening roofs of fixed structures for mobile launchers. The U.S. side 
did not believe that the display of launchers next to their structures 
would be effective without the roofs of those structures being open. If 
agreement could be reached on these additional elements of common 
ground, the delegations could be instructed to incorporate them into 
the Joint Working Paper next round.
Burt continued that the U.S. saw positive elements in the Soviet 
four-­part categorization of movements of mobile systems, but believed 
that routine movements and relocations should be subject to detailed 
post-­notification as well as pre-­notification. If the Soviet side could agree 
to such post-­notification, the delegations could be directed to work out 
the content of these notifications as well as the specific categories of 
movement. However, final agreement would depend on resolution of 
the definition of “deployed” and on the detailed content of the noti-
fications. Moreover, the U.S. was still reviewing the Soviet approach 
of defining a deployed mobile ICBM and launcher as one where the 
missile is contained in its launcher. This issue would be addressed in 
Geneva. Finally, the U.S. side would be prepared to discuss the Soviet 
proposal that spare mobile launchers and non-­deployed mobile ICBMs 
be prohibited in restricted areas and rail garrisons. Agreement on this 
would also depend on the definition of “deployed.” Burt then handed 
Nazarkin a copy of his talking points on mobile ICBM verification.3
3 Not found.
