92  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
party representation. That was best way lay ground for discussion next 
agenda item.
Referring to Wang’s draft agreement I said it went considerably 
beyond scope of suggestion I had told him being considered by my gov­
ernment. I reminded him my suggestion was that if any Chinese civilian 
in US felt he being prevented from leaving he could communicate with 
Indian Embassy which would take appropriate action. I stressed this 
would apply to any Chinese civilian in US and that there would be no 
hindrance whatsoever in their communicating with Embassy any way 
they wished. We would expect any American civilian in China would 
have same right with respect to British Embassy there. If this done it 
seemed entirely unnecessary provide for action at request individual’s 
government. Only each individual himself knew whether in fact he 
desired return and whether he felt he being prevented from doing so 
by government his country of residence. I believe formulation which I 
said my government considering fully and adequately met situation. 
Therefore I unable accept his draft agreement in present form.
I continued that during talk each of us had talked about meas­
ures which our governments had been considering or willing to take, 
including question third party representation. It seemed almost all 
these things involved internal matters each country. US had already 
taken action regarding some these matters as I had said. Said Wang 
had informed me certain actions his government has taken or will­
ing take. What I was leading up to was form of any understanding 
we might reach. Seemed to me might be most practicable each make 
public statement of action we had taken including action on third party 
representation question. Each could take note in such public statement 
of statements made by other. While we would agree to making of state­
ments and they would appear together this method would not involve 
us in same problems as trying to reach agreement on any one text. 
We would exchange texts of statements each proposed to make, the 
two texts to embody understanding reached here. They would appear 
together but would not be in form agreement.
I said what I have in mind was a statement that Ambassador 
Wang had informed me his government had taken such and such steps 
regarding Americans in China and making such and such arrangements 
regarding third party representation. I would make similar statement 
that US Government had taken such and such steps regarding Chinese 
nationals US and making such and such arrangements regarding third 
party representation. My statement regarding Chinese in US would 
repeat assurances which I had given him here, that no Chinese desiring 
to leave US being prevented and I would expect him to make similar 
statement regarding Americans in China. I concluded that this only my
