44 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I I regret that a senior official of the Ford Administration, an Assistant Secretary of the Treasury, last week told Congress that efforts should not be made to address this basic issue of human rights.3 Moreover, according to a recent House subcommittee report, the Department of Commerce has shut its eyes to the boycott by failing to collect information on alleged offenses, and failing to carry out a firm policy against the boycott.4 Enforce Anti-Boycott Laws If I become President, all laws concerning these boycotts will be vigorously enforced. We also regret our government’s continuing failure to oppose the denial of human freedom in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. The Republican Administration with the Sonnenfeldt statement,5 has shown a lack of sensitivity to the craving of the Eastern European people for greater independence. That is unacceptable. Only 13 months ago, President Ford and Henry Kissinger traveled to Helsinki to sign the treaty of comprehensive security and cooperation in Europe.6 It was supposed to lead to greater personal freedom for the peoples of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, including greater freedom to travel, to marry, and to emigrate. But since that elaborate 3 Presumable reference to Assistant Secretary of the Treasury Gerald Parsky. On August 31 Parsky appeared before a Senate-House conference committee negotiating the pending tax revision bill and expressed the administration’s opposition to a Senate provision to the bill that denied favorable tax benefits to American companies complying with the Arab boycott of Israel. (Edwin L. Dale Jr., “Boycott Penalty Opposed by Ford: Use of Tax Laws to Punish Concerns for Acts Against Israel Still Unresolved,” The New York Times, September 1, 1976, p. 17) 4 Reference is to a Congressional report examining the impact of the Arab boycott. Representative Scheuer, a drafter of the report, asserted that investigations had revealed that for 10 years, the Department of Commerce had advised American businessmen that they “need not comply” with U.S. Government requests to file information about boycott demands. (David Binder, “Commerce Department Accused of Collusion in Arabs’ Boycott,” The New York Times, September 4, 1976, pp. 1, 5) 5 Reference is to off-the-record remarks Sonnenfeldt made at the December 1975 European Chiefs of Mission conference, held in London. He had posited that the United States should pursue an evolution of the Soviet role in Eastern Europe. The Department transmitted a summary of his remarks in telegram 24976 to all European diplomatic posts, February 1, 1976; see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXVIII, Part 1, Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1973–1976, Document 68. Syndicated columnists Evans and Novak referenced Sonnenfeldt’s remarks in their March 22 column. (“A Soviet-East Europe ‘Organic Union’,” The Washington Post, March 22, 1976, p. A–19) Sonnenfeldt, addressing a Pentagon audience in late March, noted that the original and press reports of the Chiefs of Mission conference had distorted his remarks: “The press focused on the use of the word organic, and added the term union, which together, imply U.S. acceptance of Soviet domination of Eastern Europe. This assertion is incorrect.” (Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXVIII, Part 1, Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1973–1976, Document 73) 6 See footnote 7, Document 4.
