National Security Policy  943
Turning to 16–­c, we have another important split. There is agree­
ment on the minimum posture of MATS to be maintained. The split 
occurs because Defense, JCS, OCDM and State would have MATS “pro­
ductively utilize during peacetime the capability so maintained”. The 
JCS have made a comment on this, which reads as follows:
If the MATS operation and capability is adjusted toward meeting 
its wartime “hard-­core” mission considerable airlift no doubt will be 
transferred to commercial air carriers. The peacetime airlift capability 
of MATS generated during peacetime should be fully utilized by the 
Services. It is considered unsound and uneconomical to procure airlift 
from commercial sources and at the same time not utilize that airlift 
capability generated in realistic training of the military air transport 
forces.
I believe those opposing this provision fear that it would authorize 
MATS to continue to carry considerable non-­hard-­core cargo which 
would otherwise be transferred to civil carriers under 16–­a and b.
CALL ON  SECRETARY GATES
GENERAL TWINING
MR. QUESADA
MR. STANS
(other?)
On paragraph 16–­c–­(2), the JCS want to add the following lan­
guage: “Assure, by appropriate contracts and agreements backed 
by necessary legislation, that the civil aircraft” etc. Although I don’t 
believe that there would be any objection to the additional language, 
the Planning Board proposed that this paragraph be given to Defense 
for coordination and assumed that Defense would do whatever it felt 
necessary to implement it.
Paragraph 17, an agreed paragraph, was put in because there is 
a strong difference of view within the Executive Branch as to whether 
the Government does now have immediate availability of the civil air 
cargo fleet to meet military and mobilization requirements and as to 
whether present arrangements under which the Civil Reserve Air Fleet 
is on call are adequate. The JCS suggest a language change that would 
make the paragraph applicable to the entire fleet, passenger as well as 
cargo. Even though this is a paper on cargo air lift, I don’t believe there 
will be any objection to this change.
Paragraph 18 is also an agreed paragraph. As I stated before, this 
paper does not attempt to recommend a decision on purchase loan 
guarantee/legislation. This paragraph simply says that, if such legis­
lation is proposed, it should contain provisions to ensure the imme­
diate availability of the cargo aircraft involved. The JCS suggest some
