Afghanistan
297
106.
Article in the President’s Daily Brief1
Washington, December 28, 1979
AFGHANISTAN-USSR: Situation report
The Soviets have replaced President Amin with a rival Marxist
leader, Babrak Karmal, and appear to be in control of Kabul today.2
Some Soviet troops were engaged in fighting yesterday, but major
Afghan units stationed outside of Kabul appeared to have stayed out
of fighting in the city.
The new government has announced that Amin has been tried and
executed, and it has invited additional Soviet assistance.3
The new government is somewhat broader based than Amin’s, but
all cabinet members and most ruling council members announced so
far were ministers in the government formed after the Marxists seized
power in April 1978. In addition to serving as Prime Minister, Babrak
will head the ruling party and the Revolutionary Council; President
Sultan Ali Kishtmand—who like Babrak is a member of the Parchamist
faction of the party—will probably be largely a figurehead.
Included in both the cabinet and the Council are two leftist military
officers, Abdul Qader—who was jailed by former President Taraki and
Amin in August 1978—and Mohammed Aslam Watanjar—who has
been in hiding since Amin overthrew Taraki in September. Both are
more nationalist and less doctrinaire than Babrak.
There is little prospect that the government as now constituted can
win significant popular support. Even if the new rulers are able to
convince the people that Amin and not the party was responsible for
the most unpopular Marxist policies, they will still be regarded as
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81),
Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—December 1979, PDBs. Top Secret; For the President Only.
The full version of this President’s Daily Brief was not filed with this collection. The
article printed here was found in this form.
2 An annex to the December 28 President’s Daily Brief, attached but not printed,
noted: “there is no reason to doubt that the coup was engineered by Moscow” following
a Soviet military buildup that Amin believed “was aimed at bolstering his regime.” The
annex further noted that Soviet dissatisfaction with Amin became apparent following
the coup against Taraki, and that Amin “launched his coup because of Soviet maneuvers
to replace him.” According to the annex, the Soviet Union had long favored Parcham
rule in Afghanistan: [text not declassified].
3 The announcement was reported in telegram 8632 from Kabul, December 28.
According to the report, the announcement was made over Soviet-controlled Radio
Afghanistan at 0300, December 28. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D800003–0425)
