Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 555 211. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, March 18, 1980 SUBJECT NSC Meeting If I understood your approval correctly, the NSC meeting today— in addition to deciding several specific policy issues—is meant to accomplish a larger purpose: to infuse a renewed sense of direction and discipline into our foreign policy. (C) You must have sensed, as I have, that in recent weeks there has been a loss of momentum and increasing uncertainty in our foreign policy. In large measure this is due to the mixed signals which you criticized in your notes to Cy and me.2 I hope you will use the meeting again to establish in our foreign policy a more assertive tone and to insist on closer coordination. (S) Insofar as the agenda itself is concerned, I would suggest that you use the meeting to accomplish the following: 1. Iran. Explore more systematically whether our negotiating strategy has a real chance of success and whether the time has not come for perhaps a more risky course, involving direct action; [Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.] NSC ISSUES The following key issues and alternative actions need to be considered to give shape to our current foreign policy effort. (U) IRAN Two fundamental policy questions need to be addressed: 1. Short Term. Should we continue to pursue the negotiating track with Bani-Sadr as our sole strategy, consciously minimizing any words or actions which might disrupt that effort; or should we turn up the pressure of words and actions to build a fire under both the Iranians and the Allies to increase the tempo of their efforts? (S) 2. Longer Term. Should we step up our efforts to encourage alternative leadership and pro-Western presence to counter a growing Soviet effort to build a leftist infrastructure? (S) 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Box 2. Secret; Sensitive. Carter initialed “C” in upper right corner. 2 Not found.
