418  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
military capabilities, the trends were adverse to the U.S. in three critical 
areas: the strategic balance, the NATO-Warsaw Pact balance, and power 
projection. Developments in the past year in these balances reflect the 
different emphases which the Administration has given them in imple-
menting PD–18 strategy.
During the past year, the Administration has given top priority 
to the needs of NATO and, as a result, it is now possible to project a 
mixed trend in the European military balance. Continued improvement 
in this balance depends upon the full and expeditious implementation 
of the Long-Term Defense Program by the Allies. This, in turn, depends 
upon the willingness of governments and parliaments to increase real 
defense spending at roughly 3 percent per year into the mid-1980s. In 
this connection, it must be noted that while the Administration pro-
posed a roughly three percent increase in military expenditures for 
FY 1979, it also proposed roughly a two percent increase in new obli-
gational authority. If the three percent spending commitment is to be 
maintained in the coming years, increases in obligational authority will 
also have to approach that level. Failure of the U.S. to maintain this level 
would probably produce a comparable falling off in European efforts 
and could seriously undermine the Long-Term Defense Program.
Despite the emphasis in PD–18 on the need to enhance U.S. stra-
tegic mobility and to develop a quick reaction force, the unfavorable 
trend in power projection continues. To halt that trend will require, 
among other things, rapid and coordinated implementation of the 
PD–18 directive in this area.
PD–18 committed the U.S. to the maintenance of essential equiv-
alence in strategic forces with the Soviet Union. During the past year, 
however, the unfavorable trend in the strategic balance has intensified. 
The slowdown and/or reversal of this trend depends upon:
1. prompt actions to reduce the vulnerability of the U.S. C3 and 
Minuteman missiles during the early 1980s;
2. early affirmative decisions to develop the M–X, M–X (MCM), 
Trident II, or comparable weapons systems; and
3. revision of U.S. nuclear war doctrines to emphasize the impor-
tance of C3, limited nuclear options, and sustained nuclear engagements.
In the absence of these actions, U.S. strategic forces are likely 
to become, in appearance and in fact, inferior to those of the Soviet 
Union, and essential equivalence in nuclear forces will no longer be 
maintained.
B. The Role of the PRC. The new role of the PRC has benefits for 
the U.S. but also could close off certain U.S. options. So long as the 
U.S. maintained a roughly comparable posture with respect to both the 
PRC and the USSR, it was in a position in which it could (and did)
