Chapter 2, January–June 1989 61 any actual progress recently because of the break in the negotiations and we needed to have an exchange on that issue. The Secretary asked whether he had in mind the question of when to resume the negotiations. Shevardnadze replied that he actually had in mind the state of the discussions in the negotiations themselves on nuclear and space arms, chemical weapons, etc. Shevardnadze asked how much longer the Secretary had for discussion this evening. The Secretary replied that he had to go on an inspection tour of the new office building. He would have to make a decision on this soon and therefore would have to break off the talks at 6:40. They could then resume discussion of arms control in their morning session on May 11. Overall Arms Control Approach The Secretary said he wanted to begin by outlining the principles underlying the Administration’s arms control approach. Our goal was stability, not reductions for their own sake. We wanted to pursue stability through several means: reductions, force restructuring, confidence-­ building measures; and other steps to create greater openness. We saw arms control as serving a number of goals: reducing the risk of war, promoting greater stability and predictability, and constraining or eliminating specific threats. We believed that fundamental improvements in this area would take time and patience. The Secretary recalled that he had spoken of the U.S. desire to give greater emphasis to regional problems. This did not lessen our desire to move forward on arms control. We were ready and anxious to reengage. We had completed our policy reviews except for our actual negotiating positions. He was therefore prepared to give dates for resuming negotiations even though some specific issues were still under review. START/Defense and Space Generally speaking, the Secretary said, the Soviets could expect a considerable degree of continuity in the U.S. position even though, like any new Administration, we had to reserve the right to make some changes and to introduce new ideas. Indeed, this was an ongoing right for both sides. When the START negotiations resumed, we would be prepared to proceed using the Joint Draft Text as the basis for further discussion, reserving the right to make changes and advance new ideas. As for dates, the Secretary said we were prepared to resume START and Defense and Space the weeks of June 12, 19 or 26—­it was the Soviets’ option. We would expect the first NST round to last long enough for the sides to get reestablished, i.e. about six weeks. They could then recess for further analysis and resume in mid-September.
