National Security Policy  503
177. Soviet military leaders almost certainly feel that the lines of 
communication through Poland to their 22 divisions in East Germany 
are insecure. Politically, Moscow must also be concerned over the dan­
gerous influence of the Polish experiment on the remainder of the Bloc. 
It has attempted to offset this by insisting on doctrinal conformity in the 
other Satellites. It has also sought to minimize Poland’s unique status 
by granting paper concessions to the orthodox Satellites—­such as sta­
tus of forces agreements—­which parallel some of the actual privileges 
obtained by Poland. Nevertheless, the continuation of the Gomulka 
regime will at a minimum prove embarrassing to Moscow and will 
probably aggravate the USSR’s problems in the other Satellites.
178. Current Soviet policy toward Poland thus represents a calcu­
lated risk. The Soviet leaders still do not view the risk as sufficiently 
dangerous to justify military action. Moreover, Moscow probably hopes 
that the risk will diminish with time and that Poland will gradually 
prove more susceptible to Soviet pressures.
179. The ability of the Soviet Union successfully to handle the 
increasingly complex issues associated with its presence in Eastern 
Europe—­at a time when its own internal policies and its relations with 
Communist China are also changing—­is by no means certain. Popular 
dissatisfaction, party factionalism, intellectual ferment, and chronic 
economic difficulties in the Satellites all appear to be long-­range prob­
lems and probably are now causing great concern in Moscow. Varying 
Chinese, Polish, and Yugoslav “roads to socialism,” Soviet vacillations 
and purges, growing contacts with the West—­all combined with the 
very real popular pressures from within—­will probably continue to 
stimulate at least the desire for reform and change.
180. The current Soviet effort to minimize ferment, while simul­
taneously attempting to control the general movement for change 
through limited concessions, will probably prevent further explosions 
and national Communist “coups” but it does not appear to offer a 
lasting solution. Should essential Soviet control over the Satellites not 
be seriously threatened and should Poland remain in a state of semi-­
orthodoxy and dependence on the USSR, Moscow might in time be 
willing to allow a greater development toward autonomy in other 
Satellites. It might consider that evolution toward a grouping of semi-­
independent Eastern European states (still closely allied to Moscow) 
would quiet Satellite unrest and thus serve long-­term Soviet aims.
181. On the other hand, should essential Soviet control over the area 
appear to be seriously threatened, and should Poland move notably 
farther away from orthodoxy, pressures in Moscow for a reversion to a 
harsher policy would probably grow. In the event of another Satellite
