Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII Saunders: We should remember that there was a large exercise earlier this year to respond to Pakistani concern.3 Since then they did not want to continue along this line with us. We have very little exchange with them now in terms of discussions of military matters. Muskie: If we assume the most probable scenario as set forth by CIA, should we not now be considering a shift to a more overt program of assistance to Pakistan and the Afghan insurgents? Claytor: One possibility will be to earmark a regional contingency fund in FY 1982 to take care of Pakistani requirements should they arrive. Christopher: We would still however have to get a waiver to the Symington Amendment. Aaron: Why don’t we try to get some IMET money for Pakistan and then use that as a vehicle to seek a waiver of the Symington Amendment. Perhaps we would get more support on the Hill for that approach. Muskie: It is not only a question of what the Congress wants. We would also have to consider how a more open supply program would affect our relations with the Soviets. We are now in a dialogue with them on a number of matters; open assistance to the insurgents and the Pakistanis would have some effect on that. Turner: We can avoid being seen as giving open help to the insurgents. The controlling factor there is Pakistan; they are unwilling to take greater risks by being a conduit for equipment. Muskie: Should we therefore give up the idea of a more open involvement? Turner: The issue is, if Pakistan is put under more pressure by the Soviets are they likely to respond by retrenching their efforts or by going open in their support of the insurgents? Christopher: Let us ask what the action forcing events might be that would cause us to increase our aid to Pakistan, and how we can be ready in that case. I see the critical event as a threat to the independence and integrity of Pakistan. We need to define perhaps more exactly what that would involve. If there is a possibility of such a threat, what steps should we then take and how can we plan for them? Saunders: Also, what steps should we take if we see danger looming on the horizon but not quite imminent? Aaron: I don’t agree with the CIA estimate. I think that the Soviets will continue their program internally until they have subdued the insurgents and then they will lean hard on Pakistan. The best way to 3 See Document 151.
