1978  273
—Our studies prior to PD–18 revealed severe deficiencies on 
NATO’s central front, while finding that the flanks could be defended, 
but with some loss of territory. The strategic value of France and Ger-
many also imply a higher priority to the central front than the flanks. 
Though the need for some priority on the central front is established, 
the CG recognizes that it does not provide an analytical basis for judg-
ments on the relative priority accorded the flanks and the central front 
and promises further work.
—To meet the PD–18 directive to maintain a force for global contin-
gencies in Korea, the Middle East, and the Persian Gulf, the CG asserts 
as tentative guidance that a corps-­sized force (one Marine and 2 Army 
divisions) with support for 60 days would be needed.5 Given the fact 
that we have not analyzed the requirements for such contingencies, I 
do not believe you should go beyond the general guidance of PD–18. 
Several difficult questions are apparent—­what political circumstances 
might cause us to employ military forces outside of NATO, what deter-
rent forces would be necessary to inhibit warfighting, and what are the 
political ramifications of seriously thinking about such contingencies? 
Cy and I need to work with Harold on these problems in the coming 
year so as to provide us a better basis for future force planning.
While I believe you can safely endorse Harold’s programs as use-
ful planning targets and as appropriate reflections of your defense pol-
icy, you should probably avoid blanket endorsements of the degree 
to which Harold has implemented these priorities: all three impact 
directly on the missions and required force levels of the Navy.
On theater nuclear forces Secretary Brown is directing the Air Force 
to plan on European GLCM deployments in the early 80s—­specifically 
the Tomahawk, which is capable of 2500 km though this range could be 
shortened. He also directs the Air Force to develop a plan for a new 2000 
km MRBM—­which would probably be available in the late 80s. This is 
a crucial issue that could shape the nature of our relations with Europe 
for a decade. However, this guidance heavily prejudices any future 
decisions on NATO long-­range strike capability. First, it establishes a 
requirement for long range capability, which you have not yet decided 
is needed. Second, it tilts the decision toward GLCM because (1) the 
new MRBM should not be available until well after GLCM, and (2) the 
range of the MRBM is shorter than GLCM. Nonetheless, MRBMs could 
have a number of military advantages compared to GLCM (speed of 
flight, penetration) and political advantages (fewer arms control prob-
lems, more direct response to SS–20 and therefore more difficult to pro-
pagandize against).
5 Carter underlined “Korea” and “Middle East” in this sentence, and wrote “PRC” 
below.
