70
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
of discussing concerns which he expressed was through discussions
with the Pakistanis.
7. Comment: Amin is continuing to use us to convey Afghanistan’s
tough line to Pakistan while his govt apparently avoids any direct
confrontation with Pakistani officials at Kabul or Islamabad. Perhaps
this is to establish Afghanistan’s case with us, should Kabul eventually
elect to undertake some countermeasures. In spite of everything the
Pakistani Govt might be trying to do, anti-DRA operations are probably
still being supported through the traditionally porous frontier. Such
activities as exist may well be undertaken by Afghan dissident elements
who might, from time to time, seek sanctuary in Pakistani territory.
The Afghans presumably want to hold Islamabad accountable and
force the Pakistanis to increase their control efforts.
Dubs
29.
Memorandum From Thomas Thornton of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, September 11, 1978
SUBJECT
Afghanistan
As you are probably aware, things in Afghanistan are deteriorating
rapidly: the regime is devouring its children with amazing speed; its
base of support is narrowing; Soviet influence is probably growing;
and there appears to be quite a bit of spontaneous opposition outside
of Kabul (not enough, presumably, to topple the regime). We don’t
know what kind of coup plotting is going on; previous attempts ended
in disaster, but certainly some Afghans must be giving thought to it.
There is a serious possibility of Soviet intervention in case things
unravel too badly. Toon’s view, reflected in the recent INR assessment,
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Office File,
Country Chron File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 1978. Secret. Sent for action. Initialed by Blackwill
in the upper right corner. At the top of the first page, an unknown hand, likely Thornton’s,
wrote: “No meeting necessary per DA.” The reference is to David Aaron.
