1102 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI to suggest that the sides undertake an obligation to refrain from acts which would defeat the object and the purpose of the treaty after signature but before ratification. End Summary. 5. Subject summary. Organizational issues; Bear D exhibitions; reentry vehicle inspections; MOU issues; PPCM issues; relationship between INF and START; acts defeating the object and purpose. End Subject Summary. Organizational Issues 6. Brooks reviewed the events of the just-concluded July 11-14 Washington ministerial and provided a copy of the elements of common ground from that ministerial. Brooks said that the U.S. side would be tabling implementing language as soon as possible. Nazarkin said the Soviet side had received neither instructions nor a debrief from the ministerial. Nazarkin did not expect Obukhov or Koltunov until at least the coming weekend. Brooks stressed that treaty drafting could not be held up awaiting Koltunov’s return. Nazarkin agreed. 7. Nazarkin made a number of suggestions to help organize and expedite the final two weeks of negotiations. He proposed dropping large meetings and, where possible, simply exchanging documents by courier. Nazarkin noted that the Soviet side had asked for more translators, but was currently understaffed. 8. Nazarkin proposed expanded two-on-two meetings focusing on the various treaty documents. Nazarkin suggested starting with the inspection protocol (IP) the following day. Nazarkin also proposed creation of two ad hoc sub-groups. The first, consisting of Shemyakin, Polyakov, Dowdy and Brown, would deal with Annexes 1–7 and Annex 13 of the inspection protocol. The second, consisting of Lebedev, Perlovsky and Haver, would deal with Annexes 8–12. These groups could meet following the initial two-on-two. Brooks and Nazarkin could subsequently meet to confirm their work. Brooks said he would discuss the subject with his delegation and be in touch shortly. 9. Nazarkin suggested a detailed review, in a similar two-on-two format, of the notifications protocol. Brooks proposed this be done the next Saturday.2 Nazarkin agreed. 10. Nazarkin said that he was aware that the U.S. delegation did not like working with Mr. Zaytsev. In turn, the Soviet delegation had doubts about finishing the treaty if Dr. O’Fallon continued to lead the IP effort. It would be necessary, Nazarkin continued, to deal with this situation. Brooks said that the U.S. side regarded O’Fallon highly and that he could not agree to any approach which detached her from her inspection protocol responsibilities. 2 July 20.
