32
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
require no permit for public gatherings. Justice will review the regula-
tions. Summary expulsion is prohibited by due process. However,
Justice will examine possible legislation to expedite handling of such
cases. Justice will prepare an examination of steps available to the
President.3 (C)
2. Clark Mission/PLO. Ramsey Clark has been in touch with an
Islamic figure in Tehran who may accompany the PLO delegation to
Qom.4 Clark believes that he may be able to work something out
and requested that we forego any official approach to the UN for the
moment. The SCC agreed that we would limit our activities today
to the consultations in New York being undertaken by Ambassador
McHenry.5 The Clark mission will remain in Istanbul for the time being.
Clark is authorized to undertake contacts with the PLO and will serve
as the principal channel for any such contacts. (S)
3. Statement. It was agreed that a draft statement by Vance6 would
be used today, primarily to reassure the public. It will indicate that the
U.S. Government recognizes its obligation to protect innocent American
citizens and will do all it can to fulfill that responsibility. (U)
4. The Shah. We have had signals from high-level Iranians that the
Shah should at least be removed from the United States as a gesture.7
There are indications that the Shah may in fact wish to leave. However,
his doctors have thus far advised against moving him. David Newsom
is in New York to talk to those close to the Shah to see what his position
is.8 All agreed that flying him out when he is in very bad condition
would be a mistake. Dr. Brzezinski observed that sending the Shah
3 Department of Justice Status Report on Iran-Related Actions, November 8; and
memorandum from Civiletti to Carter, November 8. (Carter Library, Records of the
White House Office of Counsel to the President, Lloyd Cutler, Box 34)
4 Conversations with Ramsey Clark and Tehran, November 10, is in Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 97, Meetings File,
11/10/79: SCC re Iran.
5 Sick and Saunders agreed that the United States should encourage Waldheim to
nominate his own personal representative to go to Iran following “closed door consulta-
tions” with members of the UN Security Council. Brzezinski approved the recommenda-
tion and wrote “notified GS [Sick] by phone 11/8/79.” (Memorandum from Sick to
Brzezinski, November 8; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle
East File, Box 30, Subject File, Iran 11/1/79–11/10/79)
6 Not printed. Vance’s November 8 statement is in Department of State Bulletin,
December 1979, p. 49.
7 See Document 12.
8 The Shah stated that he felt “terrible about the situation that his presence in the
United States is creating in Iran,” and would “leave the United States today” if possible.
His physicians remained “adamant” that he could not be moved. (Memorandum for
the Record by Suddarth, November 8, and Statement From the Shah’s Entourage, Novem-
ber 8; Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for
Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Briefing Book: The Shah, Oct–Nov
1979, Vol. III)
