1136 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement which his Dec 1 draft indicated had been reached between us. As he knew, my draft April 19 retained not only form but also every single word of his Dec 1 draft. 5. I continued in contrast to efforts I made to preserve area of agreement between us, his efforts since May 11 been devoted elim­ inating basis for progress towards meaningful declaration. He had done this by reverting to position of last October. He had attempted establish first one precondition and then another for issuance of dec­ laration. I continue hope his govt will reconsider its present position and change its attitude so we could issue really meaningful declara­ tion renunciation force as first and fundamental step to settlement disputes between us. 6. I said had agreed to inclusion in our discussion of what he termed trade embargo. I had no intention of going back on this agreement. My attitude toward discussion this not based on narrow procedural consideration but rather on fundamental substantive relationship of this matter to renunciation force. As I told him on November 3 and again at last meeting I entirely willing hear any views he might desire put forward with respect trade. When he did so I hoped he would amplify exactly what aspects this matter he had in mind. Last Nov 3 I had asked specific questions this regard to which he had still made no replies. I did not believe it would serve any useful purpose to make as he had in past, vague and unfounded charges against my govt in exercising its unquestioned sovereign right to control and regulate trade in whatever manner it deems in best interest of US. Let me say again very bluntly as I had at last meeting, my country did not consider there could be any advantage to it in trade where goods received in that trade could be used sup­ port use force against it. It would thus be obvious if discussion trade matters between us to be fruitful it must be clear that such use would not be made of goods received in that trade. I had stated our posi­ tion on this very bluntly and very frankly not with intent of giving any offense or of engaging in fruitless argument, but rather so that he would clearly understand our position this regard and thereby contribute to constructive results our discussion. I therefore hoped he would carefully consider matter of both renunciation and trade in this light. 7. Wang agreed question issuance renunciation force declaration at heart disputes between two sides. Their patience in discussion this topic attested by ten months in which they joined with us in this discus­ sion. His side had thus forwarded three successive drafts for making such declaration. Thus clear their sincerity in reaching such agreement couldn’t be questioned. This morning I had stated I didn’t abandon, or give up subject renunciation force. But I failed put forward any views which could eliminate obstacles in way of discussion this subject. He
