626  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
side would agree that only nuclear SLCMs would be covered by the 
declaration.
Baker: Let me again summarize what I think the differences are 
between us on this and I am not saying they are equal but I think there 
are outstanding differences in six areas.
First, there is a difference on the issue of a legally-­binding limit. 
Second, there’s still a difference on verification. Third, there is a differ-
ence on range. Fourth, there’s a difference on do you declare nuclear 
and conventional or only nuclear. Fifth, do you declare an overall limit 
and also declare a number for each type of vessel? And, sixth, is there 
going to be a ban on MIRVed SLCMs? So, what I see is that there are 
five ALCM issues and there are six SLCM issues. That suggests there 
are eleven outstanding issues on the two.
Now, when we left Moscow, relying upon the elements of common 
ground and the joint communique, we thought that there were three 
outstanding issues. We thought there was one for ALCMs—­that was 
range. And we thought there were two for SLCMs—­that was range and 
the nuclear versus conventional.
Now I think we’re going to have to decide how to approach this 
problem. First, let me address the issue of a legally and binding limit 
on SLCMs. The reason we are so adamant on having only a politically-­
binding declaration outside the treaty is because if we put it in a treaty, 
if we make it legally binding, then we’re going to need ratification on 
this issue. And because there is no effective means to verify SLCMs, 
we will create an insuperable ratification problem for us. We can’t send 
up something to the Hill and at the same time say we can’t verify it. 
However, under our system of government, if we make a public decla-
ration that says we’re not going to exceed a certain number of SLCMs, 
there is zero chance that the Congress will fund the construction of 
SLCMs in excess of that number. This is a major bar. If we can’t conclude 
this, this is going to be a major bar to a successful START agreement. 
That’s the reason we worked so hard to craft a form of declaration that 
we reviewed with your people on Moscow.
Shevardnadze: I know why you are worried. There is a Congressional 
factor and there is the problem of verification. But we in the Soviet 
Union now have the same problem. If we accept all of your conditions 
and report to the Supreme Soviet, then they’re not going to ratify this 
agreement. They will say there are two very bad elements in it. One, 
they will say there is no upper limit on the number of SLCMs, and two, 
they’ll say there is no verification, and that’s even more important to 
them. The question that we agreed on in the December 1987 summit 
here in Washington included a reference to on-­site inspection. And it 
said we would look to practical solutions to this problem. We’re trying
