866 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI “Mindful of their obligations under the ABM Treaty.” They have also proposed an agreed statement linking START and the ABM Treaty and unhelpful language on follow-­on negotiations. Recently the Soviets agreed to drop all three positions (although they would issue a unilateral statement on START-ABM Treaty linkage) if we could accept an explicit reference to Article XI of the ABM Treaty. Article XI states: The parties undertake to continue active negotiations for limitations on strategic offensive arms. In Moscow last week, we stated that the U.S. is unwilling to accept any explicit reference to the ABM Treaty, but could agree to incorporate the substance of Article XI, as follows, “Taking into account the undertakings of the Parties to continue active negotiations for limitations on strategic offensive arms.” The Soviets referred the issue to Geneva. Options. In weighing options, the balance to be struck is between removing several irritating Soviet positions by accepting a reference to an innocuous article in the ABM Treaty, versus seeming to acquiesce to START-ABM Treaty linkage. The appearance of such acquiescence would be used by some to argue against START ratification. Moreover, citation of Article XI could be regarded as reaffirmation of the essence of the 1972 deal: forgo defenses in order to make offensive limitations possible. Today; our position in NST is that offensive force reductions and measured deployment of defenses can be compatible. Thus, the preamble language could be seen to contradict one of our central positions. Data Denial In Moscow last week we presented a position on data denial in START that strikes a balance between permitting limited telemetry encryption for SDI tests and prohibiting encryption that is most important to monitor START limits. The Soviets have not yet responded to our proposal. We may have to return to the issue if the Soviets press, either for a more comprehensive ban on data denial, or for greater freedom to encrypt data on flight-­tests. Space Launch Vehicles The U.S. has proposed to permit the conversion of ICBM and SLBM stages into space launch vehicles to launch payloads into the upper atmosphere or orbit. The Soviets have revived their old proposed ban on “space strike arms” by proposing to ban the use of these converted ballistic missiles for, “the purpose of placing into orbit weapons intended to strike targets on earth, in the atmosphere or space.” In Geneva the Soviets have said this provision is intended to prevent the use of converted ballistic missiles to deploy a SDI system, such as Brilliant Pebbles, into orbit. Their proposal would, however, appear to apply to tests in orbit as well.
