1955  467
with specific official functions. I expect that he will not be restricted by 
these regulations in performance of his official functions under agreed 
announcement.
D. As I have informed you at our previous meetings, Indian 
Embassy was fully authorized to undertake its functions in US imme­
diately following issuance of agreed announcement. Of course we, 
too, have regulations governing visits by families to prisoners. How­
ever, my govt has authorized me to inform you that no restrictions are 
imposed on Indian Ambassador in carrying out his functions under 
agreed announcement.
E. Important fact, of course, in all this discussion of the details of 
implementation is that in our agreed announcement on September 10 
we stated that all those who wanted to return were free to do so and 
that appropriate measures could be taken to enable them to do so 
expeditiously.
2. Wang replied that he had been telling me for long time his govt 
would be faithful in implementing agreed announcement and that 
third state would be able to carry out functions.
3. I continued with extemporaneous statement on renunciation of 
force. I acknowledged receipt of revised English version and stated we 
were continuing study of his draft agreed announcement.
4. I said renunciation of force was subject on which it was import­
ant there be full understanding between us. It was not an area in which 
problems could be resolved by unclear or cloudy language that may 
mean one thing to one side, another thing to the other side.
5. I said we both recognized that we faced practical situation in 
Taiwan area. My govt is determined insofar as it lies within its powers 
that there be no hostilities. If his govt has same determination, question 
of possibility of hostilities arising in area can be resolved.
6. I said in considering his draft agreed announcement, I would 
like to be able to inform my govt exactly to what degree it meets points 
raised in statement I made at time of raising this subject. In that state­
ment I had said to use force to achieve national objectives does not 
accord with accepted standards of conduct under international law. I 
had cited instances and examples in which this principle was enun­
ciated. I had said US has in past and is willing again to enunciate this 
principle.
7. I said question I would like to be able to answer to my govt is 
whether or not draft is intended incorporate this principle.
8. I said I had also noted in draft announcement inclusion of 
agreement on meeting of Foreign Ministers of our two countries. This 
appeared to link question of declaration that force not be used to settle 
disputes with a particular form of negotiations. These two things are 
quite different from one another. If principle non-­recourse to force is
