International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
475
now than six months ago. All my contacts on the Hill and in the private
sector say it has virtually no chance this year or next.
However, even if the energy bill is passed and even if the domestic
price of oil is brought to the world price level by 1980 as the President
promised at the Bonn Summit, the impact on consumption and produc-
tion will be slow and insufficient. Our oil imports will remain immense
unless we quickly institute additional measures. There are many steps
we could take over and beyond those currently contemplated to stimu-
late domestic production, encourage the shift to other sources of en-
ergy, and to bring about greater conservation.
I think the President should appoint a high-level public task force
and assign the members the job of preparing specific recommendations
on means to this end. The task force should examine the extent to which
incentives and disincentives other than price would be required to re-
duce steadily our oil imports. Here are examples of questions the task
force should consider:
—Are additional incentives necessary to bring about greater
shifting from oil to coal?
—How could public transportation of all types be made cheaper,
more reliable, more pleasant? Should subsidies be used?
—What additional incentives and disincentives would be needed
to reduce the use of private vehicles to and from work?
—Should taxes be increased on luxury and leisure vehicles, boats,
airplanes?
—How much energy would be saved if night-time advertising
were cut in half?
—Should trains, which use electricity, be subsidized further?
—Should research on renewable forms of energy be subsidized by
a substantially greater amount?
Reducing Foreign Trade Barriers
Our bilateral and multilateral negotiations have not produced
much in the way of tangible benefits.
Following intense pressure, the Japanese agreed to take a series of
measures to encourage and facilitate imports. But the results cannot yet
be seen in the trade figures. Nor does the Japanese performance in the
Geneva multilateral trade negotiations suggest that they are serious
about opening their market. The Japanese negotiators have been hag-
gling over every half of one percent decrease in tariffs on items of spe-
cial interest to us. I regret to say that the time probably has come to con-
sider mounting another campaign. This might entail some political
costs but how else can we get the Japanese to move?
The European Community negotiators are more sophisticated and
smoother. But their opposition to big reductions of trade barriers is just
as adament as the Japanese. In Geneva this last week, agreement was
