“By reason of that call, on the one hand, and in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 11 of Article LXXXIV of the Lisbon Regulations on the other hand, the International Bureau has the honor to beg you jointly with the French Service, kindly to forward to it, up to and not later than November 15, next, the additions or modifications that your office would like to introduce in the International Service Regulations (Revised at Lisbon) and the tariffs now in force. (Underscoring added)3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . “With a view to preventing any misunderstanding we lay stress on the fact that the propositions to be brought before the Conference, through the International Bureau, shall not, as stated in the circular above mentioned, No. 744, rest on documents already mailed to the Offices dealing with the drafts worked out by the Preliminary Conference at Washington.”4 In a note dated January 15, 1925, addressed to Mr. Hughes,5 Mr. Jusserand referred to the fact that at the last conference of the Telegraphic Union held in Lisbon in 1908 it was decided that the next Telegraph Conference would meet in Paris, and that at the last conference of the parties to the International Radiotelegraph Convention, held in London in 1912, it was agreed that the next International Radiotelegraph Conference would be held at Washington. Mr. Jusserand then referred to the proposal that one conference should be held to deal with all the problems concerning electrical communications and stated that the French Government had caused the Governments to be approached as to the expediency of calling as soon as possible a universal conference on electrical communications in Paris but that, although the proposition was generally well received, unanimous consent to it could not be obtained. Mr. Jusserand stated that the French Government therefore believed that it was advisable to adhere to the decisions of the conference at Lisbon in 1908 and of the Conference at London in 1912 and had instructed him to inform Mr. Hughes that France would be glad if the United States would take part in the Conference of the Telegraphic Union which was scheduled to meet in Paris in the spring of 1925. In the circumstances this Government took the necessary steps with a view to holding the International Radiotelegraph Conference at Washington and, on February 16, 1925, Mr. Hughes instructed the American Ambassador at Paris6 to inquire whether some time in the autumn would be agreeable to your Government for holding the Radiotelegraph Conference at Washington in accordance with the decision reached at London in 1912. On February 26, 1925, Mr. Herrick conferred with a representative of the Foreign Office regarding arrangements for the Radiotelegraphic Conference and he was then informed that the Telegraph Conference had been postponed until September and that, as it was understood that the purpose of the conference at Washington was the establishment of a much broader convention, information was desired regarding the exact program of this Government so that it could be studied. The Foreign Office expressed the opinion that,
