number of those countries requiring separate arrangements with
regard to special tariffs.
[In reviewing] the history of Japanese recovery of tariff autonomy,
I brought out the fact that the revised treaties of 1894 between
Japan and [the] Powers did not come into effect until after 5 years
from the date of signature and remained in force for the following
12 years. We believe this precedent deserves our attention; China
may well take a similar course.
In his speech at the opening session, Doctor C. T. Wang indicated
the determination of the Chinese Government to effect the abolition
of likin and to bring about the enforcement of a Chinese national
tariff law within 3 years. China within such a [preparatory] period
may conclude with other Power[s] treaties along the lines of [the]
first plan, which will become operative simultaneously with the
enforcement of the Chinese national tariff law. The new treaties
will supersede the existing treaties between China and other
Powers and will remove unilateral restrictions imposed upon China
with respect to customs tariff. In case the first alternative is
approved by the present conference, it is the intention of the
Japanese delegation to suggest that during such period, prior to the
enforcement of the Chinese statutory tariff, an interim surtax be
levied in accordance with the provisions of article 3 of the
Washington treaty.
The second plan suggested by us proposes the establishment of a
tariff regime [which] would be, in a general manner, consistent
with the stipulations of the treaties of 1902 and 1903 between
China and the other Powers. In [case] this plan should be adopted,
we would propose the inauguration of a graduated tariff since a
uniform tariff at the rate provided for by these treaties is
unreasonable and unscientific [and] works to the detriment of trade
between China and foreign countries.
When we compare these two alternative plans, it appears to us that
the first plan is to be preferred to the second. The latter plan is
based on the treaties between China and other powers conclude[d]
more than 20 years ago. Their stipulations seem difficult in more
[some] cases of being put into practice and not exactly in harmony
with the present economic conditions. For instance, these treaties
provide for not only the maintenance, but for an increase in the
rate, of the existing export duty, [which] is entirely incompatible
