646 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 out within 3–5 days. If we should storm the Embassy and kill a dozen or more persons, the results could be tragic and have serious consequences for the hostages in Tehran. Dr. Brzezinski said it would be worse if a siege should develop here supported by threats from Iran to kill or harm the hostages if the siege is not lifted. Secretary Vance said he supported the Attorney General. The President asked what would be the best time to take action. The Attorney General said evening would be best. Immediate surveillance of the diplomats would be established, with full escort and the Embassy would be ringed. In effect we would take custody of them, although they would be free to move within a very restricted zone. We would stay with them. Mr. Aaron pointed out that this would not constitute an arrest. They would have the 24–36 hour period to get out of the country. The Attorney General said that they would arrest them if they violated the terms of their restrictions or failed to depart. Dr. Brzezinski asked what would happen to the Embassy. The Attorney General said it would be sealed, and no one would be allowed to enter. We would hope that a third power would be appointed as Protecting Power, and then we would permit some of them to enter as necessary. We have reports that anywhere from 15 to 60 non-diplomats either reside in the Embassy or move through it frequently. Some of them are armed. The President wondered if this was the case only in Washington. The Attorney General said it was also true of the Consulate General in Houston. Mr. Aaron wondered in the event of resistance whether we could seize the Embassy. The Attorney General said that would not be legal until the order to depart had expired. Mr. Aaron wondered if we should not break relations. Would that give us more latitude? Dr. Brzezinski noted they could barricade themselves in the Embassy and refuse to leave. The Attorney General said that was the worst case. It was considered unlikely so far as the diplomats themselves were concerned, but we do not know about the others. Dr. Brzezinski wondered if tear gas could not be used to rout them out. The Attorney General said he thought so. The President asked what short of a declaration of war would give us the necessary authority to move into the Embassy.
