830 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement bore no relationship to facts with regard to free return of Chinese to his country. 69. Wang said I had made comparison between number of ­Americans who departed China and number of Chinese who departed U.S. and had stated that during period since our announcement made on September 10 that 102 Chinese had left U.S. Although this number of Chinese had come out from U.S. even this number very unsatisfactory to them. If we made calculation of proportion of people released he could show me that of Americans in category of criminals alone 27 of 41 been released. Number of released comprises two-­thirds of number of people who were in prison and in addition this number criminal offenders released, there are Americans in other categories who have left China. These are 16 in number. And it can be seen that almost over­ whelming majority of American criminal offenders have been released. If we take Chinese students alone, putting aside question other ­Chinese nationals in U.S., we may take figure of 5,000 for these Chinese stu­ dents. What would number of 102 students who have come out of U.S. compare with total of 5,000—what ratio would it make? From this pro­ portion it is quite clear as to whether more Americans left China or more Chinese left U.S. Is not this clear indeed? 70. I said proportion proper to talk about is that of those desiring to return. There was still not slightest evidence any Chinese desiring return was being prevented from doing so. Now, almost six months since September 10 announcement, both know there are 13 desiring return who are still being prevented from doing so although it was said that they could do so expeditiously. 71. Wang said I had talked of proportion of people who desired return. The 37 whose cases he had raised with me in these meetings were exactly people who desired return. They have not as yet gotten any reply from me concerning those who desire return but are in prison in U.S. He still awaiting my answer concerning situation Chinese imprisoned U.S. 72. I said I had told him again and again any Chinese in U.S. who feels obstructed was entirely free communicate Indian Embassy. 73. Wang said this was only one aspect of question, the other was U.S. obligation give accounting these Chinese in prison. 74. I said U.S. Government has obligation faithfully and fully carry out provisions agreed announcement. This U.S. has done and will con­ tinue do. 75. Wang said if those people who desire return still prevented doing so and unable return, he could not consider U.S. Government carrying out fully obligation under announcement.
