extreme limits of concession in order to make the convention
acceptable to us. A refusal would be difficult, and agreement
would make it appear that we accepted a favor conferred upon us.
(3) Refuse the proposal in (2) above and fight for a general
convention which would be acceptable to us. This course, in our
opinion, is not to be considered. Most of the other delegations
favor the use of League machinery to a greater or lesser extent,
and most of them wish to apply supervisory measures among
themselves. The best possible pretext to accuse us of rendering
disarmament measures impossible would be afforded them if we
oppose this course.
It should be kept in mind that the prospect of success for the Conference is
problematical at best and that, if we do meet the situation handsomely, we
shall leave to others the shouldering of their share of responsibility for the
failure. Should we advance this proposal, the clearest indication will have
been given that we are not fighting them politically, though we may not
agree with them on technical matters.
Another consideration is that some indecision is evident among the French
regarding their reply to our last naval invitation.34 Should we remove, in a
conspicuously friendly way, what they consider to be the chief present
obstacle in the way of their extreme League program, this may help in
convincing them that, though on technical questions we have opposed them,
no hostility to France was involved and we are anxious to treat with them in
a friendly and generous way. Although this is pure conjecture, their decision
regarding naval matters might be affected thereby.
Nolan35 approves as accurate the statement that we do not intend a material
increase of our land forces, but this I do not deem of any consequence in
comparison with the main point developed by me. If you prefer, therefore,
this sentence could be omitted without the value of the statement being
affected.
A general statement has been made by each delegation, except those of
Argentina and Colombia. Owing to the special position of the United States
respecting the League, it is felt that, until our views become known, no
