1582 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement We have discussed the Nuclear Tests Conference, surprise attack and disarmament in general. On the Nuclear Test Conference it has been made very clear to the Russians that if they maintain their veto proposals in their present form, there will be no agreement. Mr. Khru­ shchev in return has made it clear that he is not interested in an agree­ ment under which only nuclear tests conducted in the atmosphere would be prohibited. On the cut-­off, Khrushchev has been pressed hard to express some willingness to agree to discuss it. At first he showed extreme reluctance saying that without prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons it would be unacceptable. Later on he went a bit further saying that the matter could be looked into; he would like to exchange views on it and hear more about it, for it was an interesting problem. On surprise attack, our exchanges have revealed no change in the Soviet position. They have argued pretty effectively against priority for a technical approach in this field. Khrushchev’s conclusion was that the positions of the two sides were far apart, and perhaps a start should be made somewhere else. At no time has he pressed for a resumption of the surprise attack conference. We had a long discussion on the best method of approaching gen­ eral disarmament talks. Somewhat contrary to our expectations, the Russians have not in any way pressed that such talks should be held, nor hinted that they have new general proposals to put forward. Khrushchev said he was sceptical of the utility of the 82-member U.N. Disarmament Committee or for that matter of any other commit­ tee that might be set up. He would be ready to agree to setting up a sub committee of that committee provided it was on a basis of parity. But be thought that to do so would be a waste of time and a fraud on public opinion. It would produce only a marathon in the field of the talks. He thought that the Heads of Governments must set the ball rolling by agreeing on the principles which the experts could then work out. Khrushchev has indulged in a lot of general and sweeping state­ ments about his readiness and even anxiety for total disarmament, remarking for instance that the Soviet Union was quite ready to give up armed forces altogether and have only a militia for internal security pro­ vided everyone else does likewise. Then everybody could control and inspect everybody else as much as they liked. He has described the objec­ tive to be sought as that of discovering “a mutual interest in some system of security which would be to the advantage of both sides.” In fact there has been no real give on the Russian side at all, but Khrushchev’s approach has been serious and, from his point of view, realistic. The use of outer space for peaceful purposes has not so far been mentioned.
