which have been in abeyance for three years and more mean nothing to the radical element whose opinions the Government is not in a position to ignore; and that to strengthen the position of the Government against them the powers in their replies to the Chinese Government’s notes of June 248 should at least hold out hopes of a new conference within a year to reconsider the revision of the whole treaty relationship between China and the powers. He was quite candid in making clear the view that this suggestion was designed merely to save the face of the Government and that he did not urge that the powers really go very far in making actual concessions; he seemed to feel that it was more important that the powers should make some sort of an avowal of respect for China’s dignity as a nation even though he acknowledged himself very little concerned with the material extent of any such concessions as might be made. 8. Such expressions of views dispose me to feel that in the present agitation for treaty changes the dominant motive is not a dissatisfaction with the treaties themselves so much as it is a manifestation of discontent with a sense of inferiority which the Chinese have come to feel is symbolized by the special provisions in the treaties. The more intelligent of the Chinese know that those provisions of the treaties arose out of conditions which have scarcely been appreciably modified since then, and that any radical change in them at the present time would seriously jeopardize foreign trade which is now more than ever necessary to their normal economic development, and would induce disputes and difficulties in China’s relations with the foreign powers. Even some of the more radical Chinese with whom I have talked have shown themselves aghast at the suggestion that tariff autonomy for which they clamor would put enormously increased revenues into the hands of whichever military faction might happen at the time to be in control of Central Government. The great bulk of the agitators doubtless do not know what it is that they are asking for in demanding abolition of unequal treaties. The treaty provisions are obnoxious to them not because of what those provisions actually mean but because they seem to represent a stigma of inferiority or afford a convenient political slogan. 9. I present these observations not with any idea of decrying what is genuine and to be respected in the aspirations of the Chinese people but to bring to the attention of the Department the unrealities of the present situation with respect to the Chinese political demands which must in my opinion be treated on a psychological basis rather than from the standpoint of strict logic or of systematic political concept. It is not easy in such a turmoil of nationalistic feeling to determine what is essential and what is incidental. Yet a substantially correct determination must be made if the concessions we are prepared to make are actually to serve the real needs of this people and of our own. 10. Repeated by mail to Tokyo. MACMURRAY
