Chapter 4, February–April 1990  555
Masterkov recalled that in previous discussions the U.S. side had 
cited the need for notifications when road-­mobile launchers left the RA. 
The U.S. side had offered the hypothetical example that if an inspector 
arrived at an RA and saw only six launchers, he would not know where 
the other four launchers are located unless notifications for the depar-
ture and return of launchers are provided. In view of this concern, the 
Soviet side was proposing that, in the conduct of an inspection, all road-­
mobile launchers attributed to that RA would have to return prior to 
the time allowed for that inspection. There were two exceptions to this 
rule—­launchers located at maintenance facilities or those in the process 
of a redeployment or relocation. Masterkov said he was not sure how the 
different procedure proposed by Brooks was better. Brooks responded 
that he was not sure his proposed procedure was better, that he was 
only attempting to explore what is and is not important to the Soviet 
side in an attempt to decide what type of verification regime might be 
best. Keeping a launcher in the field would be easier and would keep it 
more survivable. Counting launchers in the field could also be as easy 
as counting them in an RA. Brooks said he was only trying to see if the 
Soviet side attaches importance to counting launchers at a particular 
place or to counting those launchers assigned to a particular place no 
matter where they are located.
Khromov argued that the optimal solution would be to apply the 
same verification regime as applies to submarines—­that there is a 
good deal of similarity between mobiles and SSBNs. With regard to 
Brooks point, however, Khromov asserted that the maximum distance a 
launcher would have to travel to return to its RA would be on the order 
of 100–120 kilometers. Brooks rebutted Khromov’s analogy of mobiles to 
submarines noting that, because mobile launchers were much smaller, 
a side would not have the same confidence in the number produced. 
This was why the U.S. side was proposing a method for periodically 
counting launchers and why we were not taking the same verification 
approach to the two types of systems.
Khromov retorted that the Soviet side was proposing not just one 
verification measure in the JDT but rather a set of measures that were 
more than sufficient to ensure confidence in mobile launcher verifica-
tion. He asserted that on the eve of the signing of the INF Treaty the 
U.S. had, only through NTM, complete information on the number 
of deployed SS–20 launchers. Koltunov added that although SSBNs 
are larger than mobile launchers, such launchers are not “flying 
Dutchmen.” They require fixed structures, maintenance facilities etc. 
that would allow the sides to define the exact number of mobile launch-
ers in an RA and in the aggregate. Even if hypothetically the sides had 
some hidden launchers (e.g. 1–2 launchers) their contribution to the 
overall balance of forces would not be considerable. It would not be 
possible to conceal a great number of such launchers.
