Arms Control and Disarmament  1571
withdrawal, because this an inherent right in any agreement in event 
of its violation. Secretary said State Department legal experts would 
study whether Article One, as now agreed in Geneva does not cover 
point adequately, obviating need for reference to withdrawal in any 
duration article.
In the end the British agreed that the object of our agreeing to break 
the link between testing and disarmament had been to focus on control; 
therefore we will now concentrate on that issue, deferring introduc­
tion of duration article until we see whether Soviets will move from 
their present position on controls and veto; meanwhile on standby 
basis reexamining between ourselves draft duration article. It was also 
agreed with the Prime Minister that if conference comes to breaking 
point on control issue we must find effective ways to dramatize the 
point, such as taking it to the United Nations or considering letters 
from Prime Minister and President Eisenhower to Khrushchev.
Regarding the “fall back position” the Secretary mentioned last 
night re reciprocal forebearance with continuing negotiations on con­
trol, it was also agreed that this matter will have the further urgent 
study that it needs.
Dulles
423.	 Record of Telephone Conversation Between Dulles and 
Greene1
February 11, 1959, 9:55 a.m.
The Secretary said on the phone re the nuclear suspension test 
talks in Geneva that it made no difference about the composition as 
long as they had the veto power. The Secretary said he was not sure 
but what we should call Wadsworth home and advertise the fact what 
he is coming home about, indicating it is not worthwhile to carry out 
talks any longer. The Secretary said if you call the talks off you have the 
question of having to make a counterproposal—one less farreaching 
in scope or maybe even unilateral. We propose to do this and we hope 
the Soviets do the same. That has been McCone’s idea and also more or 
1 Source: Possibility of breaking off nuclear testing suspension talks. No classifica­
tion marking. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations.
