March 1952–February 1953
319
develop a satisfactory project on the Karun involving storage of water,
generation of electric power, irrigation by pumps and by direct diver-
sion, and the possibility of navigation on the lower river and through
large canals to Bandarshapur. He appeared amazed and said he
thought 100 dams could be built for 200 million dollars. I said one could
not generalize about the cost for dams but that good engineering work
had to precede the design and construction of any such project to pro-
vide sound estimates. I said I knew costs in the United States, however,
and big dams cost big money anywhere.
Ayatollah Kashani again urged me to advocate “substantial work”
by the United States in Iran and suggested that I should go to the
United States immediately to present the case for such works. I told
him that I was in agreement as to the need for projects to develop and
utilize resources of Iran and that I had given a great deal of thought to
such projects. I said that Point 4 had directed a part of its work into
those areas and that I thought we might be able to bring forward spe-
cific designs and specifications of projects that could be adopted by the
International Bank or Export-Import Bank or some other agency that
might provide the necessary capital. I said it seemed to me that Iran
would need a stable flow of foreign exchange before such works could
be prosecuted which indicated the need for a settlement of the oil issue
and a resumption of oil sales.
I said that Point 4 would be very happy to work with the Iranian
Government agencies in attempting to prepare substantial programs
for internal improvements in Iran though I doubted that the present
program would be able to finance the large capital requirements of any
such improvements. I asked whether he or Mr. Ghanat-Abadi had sug-
gestions as to programs that might be taken up. I said that I thought re-
sponsible leaders of the government ought to assist in the development
of plans. No other suggestion than the two dams mentioned above
were made. Instead I was asked for some suggestions.
I mentioned the discovery of oil at Qum and the possibility of de-
veloping a project for low cost kerosene as a substitute fuel in the rural
areas. This seemed to interest and excite them. They said if I could not
go to the United States to present the requirements of Iran for substan-
tial development they hoped I would write. I said I had been reporting
the needs of the country and would try to continue to do so.
Throughout the conference reference to communist activities and
the threat of communism were made by Mr. Kashani and Mr. Ghanat-
Abadi. They always spoke of the communist activities as something
deleterious to the country and antagonistic to their positions.
At one point Ayatollah Kashani said the misery of the people alone
could turn them away from their faith and to communism. He said he
did not fear his ability to rally the people to patriotic action unless the
