534 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 14. Wang said paragraph 4 PRC draft provided for Foreign Minis­ ters’ conference. If US side sincerely desirous peaceful settlement dis­ putes particularly in Taiwan area, he failed to see how I could object to that paragraph on any grounds. 15. Wang said PRC draft embraced points of view acceptable both sides, and was by no means intended impose views one side on other. 16. Wang said paragraph two of US draft, concerning renuncia­ tion of force to achieve national objectives, was not consistent with UN Charter, which provided force should not be used settle disputes or prejudice territorial integrity or political independence any state. No clause in UN Charter permitting interference internal affairs any state; on contrary, specific provisions barring this. Such terms as “national objectives” obvious attempt include Chinese internal matters. 17. Wang said Chinese people unshakably determined liberate all territory of country. By whatever means this accomplished, it cannot be distorted as violation of principles and purposes Charter. Our wording that force not be used to achieve national objectives goes beyond scope of Sino-American talks and is tantamount calling upon PRC side sur­ render exercise sovereign rights over Taiwan, which is what PRC side absolutely cannot accept. 18. Wang said fourth paragraph US draft purports that peaceful policies either side will not be prejudiced. However, policy pursued by US in Taiwan area is encroachment China’s territory and interven­ tion Chinese internal affairs. UN Charter explicitly rules out prejudice to territorial integrity and political independence of any state by any means. PRC side would never agree that US side entitled pursue such policies by whatever means. 19. Wang said paragraph 6 US draft even claims right individual and collective right of self-defense in Taiwan area. UN Charter con­ tains no clause entitling state encroaching on territory and interfering internal affairs of another state to individual and collective self-defense on territory of state aggressed against. US presentation this principle evidently designed permit US prolonged occupation Taiwan and entire China through Chiang Kai-shek. 20. Wang said when US encroaches Chinese territory it is alleged this done for sake of self-defense. When China undertakes action in exercise of sovereign rights it assailed by US as aggression. He could not believe that I could be unaware that such a false argument was try­ ing to pass black for white. 21. Wang said US draft failed provide concrete arrangements set­ tle differences two sides. I had stated present talks constituted such arrangements. However, he had repeatedly asked whether I was will­ ing discuss question withdrawal US armed forces from Taiwan area
