Afghanistan 699 258. Memorandum From Marshall Brement of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, April 30, 1980 SUBJECT Assistance to the Afghan Rebels: A Vigorous Dissent At your suggestion, I have looked into the question of whether our aid to Muslim forces in Afghanistan is effective. I discovered that those involved in this effort seem to be enthusiastic, motivated, and convinced that everything reasonable and possible that can be done is being done. I sharply disagree. The reason that our “operators” in this area are relatively sanguine about their efforts is that they accept two basic restrictions—i.e., supply only weapons of Soviet manufacture and work exclusively through the Pakistanis—which I consider unnecessary and unwise. (TS) It is literally impossible to exaggerate the significance of the outcome of Soviet efforts to crush the Muslim resistance in Afghanistan. If the Soviets succeed, as seems likely, this action will become a powerful precedent within the bureaucracy which will inevitably ensure that we will be faced with other Afghanistans down the road in the 1980’s. Particularly sensitive will be Central America and the Caribbean. Could a United States government, for example, look the other way while a Soviet or a Cuban force of thousands landed in Nicaragua, Honduras, or perhaps even Venezuela, in order to save a self-described progressive government that was going down the drain? Chervonenko, in his recent speech in Paris, said in referring to Allende that the USSR could tolerate 1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Historical Material, Brzezinski Collection, Brzezinski’s Geographic Files, Box 17, Southwest Asia/Persian Gulf—Afghanistan, 1/5/80–10/ 1/80: Soviet Union. Top Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information. Copies were sent to Thornton, Odom, Ermarth, Welch, Gregg, and Owen. In the upper right corner, Brzezinski wrote: “DA—Hold a meeting on this, use Carlucci/Komer/Newsom. I tend to agree with MB. We should do more. ZB 5/2/80.” No record of a meeting per Brzezinski’s directive was found. A stamped notation on the memorandum indicates Aaron saw it. In a May 2 memorandum to Brzezinski (attached but not printed), Thornton characterized Brement’s position as valid but problematic. Arguing against a rapid increase of weapons transfers to the Afghan insurgents, Thornton cited geographic restrictions, increasing (and unwanted) U.S. visibility in the covert action, and the fact that U.S. goals with regard to the Afghan insurgency remained poorly defined. Thornton suggested that Brzezinski hold more meetings to determine the future course of U.S. policy in Afghanistan. Both Ermarth and Welch wrote memoranda to Brzezinski, May 2, supporting Brement’s position. Those memoranda are also attached but not printed.
