320
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Holloway, Chief of Naval Operations, General David Jones, Chief of
Staff of the Air Force, and General Louis Wilson, Commandant of the
Marine Corps—responsible men whose profession is the defense of this
Nation and the preservation of our security.
The treaties also have been overwhelmingly supported through-
out Latin America, but predictably, they are opposed abroad by some
who are unfriendly to the United States and who would like to see dis-
order in Panama and a disruption of our political, economic, and mili-
tary ties with our friends in Central and South America and in the
Caribbean.
I know that the treaties also have been opposed by many Amer-
icans. Much of that opposition is based on misunderstanding and mis-
information. I’ve found that when the full terms of the agreement are
known, most people are convinced that the national interests of our
country will be served best by ratifying the treaties.
Tonight, I want you to hear the facts. I want to answer the most se-
rious questions and tell you why I feel the Panama Canal treaties
should be approved.
The most important reason—the only reason—to ratify the treaties
is that they are in the highest national interest of the United States and
will strengthen our position in the world. Our security interests will be
stronger. Our trade opportunities will be improved. We will demon-
strate that as a large and powerful country, we are able to deal fairly
and honorably with a proud but smaller sovereign nation. We will
honor our commitment to those engaged in world commerce that the
Panama Canal will be open and available for use by their ships—at a
reasonable and competitive cost—both now and in the future.
Let me answer specifically the most common questions about the
treaties.
Will our Nation have the right to protect and defend the canal
against any armed attack or threat to the security of the canal or of ships
going through it?
The answer is yes, and is contained in both treaties and also in the
statement of understanding between the leaders of our two nations.6
The first treaty says, and I quote: “The United States of America
and the Republic of Panama commit themselves to protect and defend
6 A joint statement of understanding was issued on October 14 after a meeting be-
tween Presidents Carter and Torrijos; for the text, see Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book II,
p. 1793. For the texts of the Panama Canal treaties, see Department of State Bulletin, Oc-
tober 17, 1977, pp. 483–501.
