Chapter 2, January–June 1989 247 Option 3. Alter the existing position to adopt a large Deployment Area in addition to the small Garrisons. Movement within the Deployment Area is unrestricted, but changes in the net number of missiles/launchers in each Garrison must be pre-­ notified. The concept of exercise dispersals is eliminated. — Option 3A. Continue to allow operational dispersals without geographic limit, with post-­notification and a stated national security rationale. — Option 3B. Do not allow any dispersals beyond the Deployment Area. (favored by State, ACDA and the DCI) NSC staff believe that the analysis in the NSR-14 review was not sufficient to support any of the options. Further work needs to be done, and until then we should not change our position. NSC Staff Recommendation That you approve Option 1.13 3. Perimeter and Portal Monitoring (PPM). The issue here is whether to review our position and, if so, whether to withdraw it from the negotiating table in the meantime. Discussion The current U.S. approach would subject to PPM a subset of the facilities capable of producing rocket motors; namely, plants currently engaged in strategic rocket motor production which also produce a motor at least as large as a mobile first stage. It does not provide for PPM at all production plants which may have critical equipment in place to produce a mobile first stage motor or segment of a motor (these facilities would be subject to suspect site inspection). Some believe that the current approach is insufficient for effective monitoring and that we should PPM all facilities that have casting and curing pits/chambers of sufficient width and depth to produce an accountable motor or segment (additional 3 U.S. and 3–6 Soviet facilities). Others believe that the current approach captures the facilities where covert production would be easiest to carry out and that such production at other facilities would require a change in practices that the Soviets could not be confident of hiding from U.S. NTM and short-­ notice SSI. In this view, the cost of establishing additional PPM sites and the intrusiveness of additional Soviet PPM sites in the U.S. are not 13 Scowcroft initialed his approval and wrote: “same as for road mobile.”
