326  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
obstruct discussion and settlement of practical matters under agenda 
item two would not result in any good, but rather do harm. Peoples 
Republic of China was not going to be brought into submission by 
whatever threat we might make.
4. Agreement on item one had been reached and at that time he had 
provided specific information on Americans who would be permitted 
to leave and on law violators whose cases had been reviewed. Those 
Americans permitted to depart had personal affairs to attend to and 
they could leave at their discretion, as some had already left. All 10 who 
had violated laws and were to have been sent out of the country had 
left. Since beginning of talks 33 Americans had returned or were going 
to return as result action his side. Remaining handful Americans who 
had violated laws would have their cases reviewed in light of agree­
ment and within framework of Chinese juridical procedure. Results of 
review their cases would be given UK.
5. He continued that there was no justification for entangling talks 
over question Chinese implementation of agreement. On contrary our 
side should make active efforts implement agreement. During talks I 
had given him names 76 Chinese who had applied depart US but not 
permitted do so. 42 of these had not yet returned. Although our side 
had said all restrictions removed, nevertheless he knew of no one else 
who had left US to return to China except Tsien. I had said between 
July 11 and September 21, 380 Chinese left US, but I had failed sub­
mit list of names so PRC had no means making check. I had admitted 
Chinese students afraid apply INS for permission leave US because 
feared being rejected. Evidently many Chinese still do not have cour­
age apply to depart because of long period threats and intimidation. 
PRC had great number of nationals in US and whether they could exer­
cise right to return would be test whether US faithfully implementing 
agreement. Up to now PRC had not seen any actual outcome from all 
my statements.
6. He said I was still trying entangle talks on first item and ham­
per discussion of second item. Frankly, such an approach impaired 
improvement of Sino-American relations and was bound to have bad 
effect on lenient way PRC solving problem remaining Americans.
7. He said I had raised detailed questions last meeting on func­
tions of third powers under agreement. These functions were clearly 
set forth in agreed announcement, but if I wished put forward specific 
opinions on details of functions, and if opinions reasonable, he would 
consider them. He suggested that such specific opinions on implemen­
tation agreed announcement be reserved for meeting of assistants so 
as not to interfere with discussion second item in these talks. People in 
all countries in world unanimously called for discussion second item 
agenda immediately following agreement on first thereby contributing
