the provisions …52 of Agreements registered with the League of Nations and published
by the League up to the date of coming into force of the present Convention. In view of
the large number of agreements which have been so registered, the Department desires
you, before acquiescing in any such provision, to ascertain whether any of the Powers
parties to the proposed Convention have concluded and registered arrangements the
terms of which conflict with those of the proposed convention. In the event that such is
the case, the Department would wish you to consider the bearing of such arrangements
upon the effectiveness of the control proposed before consenting to the insertion of any
such provision as that quoted above.
ARTICLE 28
“The Council of the League of Nations shall cause to be published an annual
report on the operation on [of] the present Convention.
“This report shall be presented to the Assembly of the League of Nations.”
The Central International Office should publish the report quarterly rather than
annually. If the Council of the League also desires to make a report, it would of course
be entirely free to do so without any provision in the Convention to that effect.
ARTICLE 29
“The present Convention, of which the French and English texts shall both be
authentic, is subject to ratification. It shall bear today’s date and shall be open
for signature by the Powers until . . . . . . . . . . (date).
“Each Power shall address its ratification to the French Government, which
shall at once notify the deposit of ratification to each of the other signatory
Powers.
“The instruments of ratification shall then remain deposited in the archives of
the French Government.”
No comment.
 
ARTICLE 30
“The High Contracting Parties will use their best endeavors to secure the
accession to the present Convention of the other States, whether members of
the League or not. On and after . . . . . . . . . . (date) the present Convention
may be acceded to by any Power. Accession shall be effected by an
