174
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
was coordinated with Department of State on 3 August and sent to
the field. Under this Perspectives and an earlier one on Soviet Interfer-
ence in Other Countries Affairs, the following has been accomplished:
—145 major items have been placed in the media of 35 countries.
—Regular monthly briefings on Afghanistan are being provided
friendly liaisons.
—Briefings have been utilized by 23 agents of influence.
All portions of this document are SECRET.
60.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
Kabul, August 25, 1979, 0703Z
6398. Subj: The Future of the U.S. Embassy in Afghanistan: Some
Thoughts. Ref: Kabul 6396.2
1. (S—Entire text)
2. Summary. I think it very important that those directly concerned
with our policy towards Afghanistan read the cable under reference.
It is another chilling report about one of our FSNs being tortured. The
significance of the incidence however goes well beyond the discomfi-
ture experienced by our employee. It is to that aspect I address this
msg. End summary.
3. Our presence in Kabul is, in my view, faced with three perils.
The first is, of course, the insurgency and the related possibility of an
internal coup, either of which could bring physical harm to members
of the small American community.
4. The second danger relates to the brutal intimidation being experi-
enced by our FSNs. Nowhere else in the Foreign Service today, I ven-
ture, are our locals being subjected to such gross mistreatment by the
host govt. The DRA is obviously bent on penetrating this Mission,
regardless of human rights considerations, to develop hopefully
“proof” of USG subversive activities. In this they are undoubtedly
being assisted by the Soviets. The implications of this DRA policy are
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790388–0115.
Secret; Immediate; Exdis; Stadis.
2 Telegram 6369 from Kabul is dated August 25. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, [no film number])
