Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 651 Admiral Turner said that no embargo of food would likely have a substantial impact. Cutting off all Iranian commerce would, but otherwise they will be able to find suppliers. The President said the primary thing is not a mutual interest by five or seven nations, but rather to let Khomeini know he faces a problem not just with us but with others as well. Because of our actions, he is not convinced. In retrospect, he did not believe we had been firm enough. We had been too equivocal. He then turned to the question of a census of claims. Mr. Cutler said we should make it clear that we intend to satisfy claims especially of the hostages and their families out of the frozen assets and that legislation is being introduced to that end. The Attorney General said that suits and claims are pending now and could be satisfied by attachment except that the sovereign rights immunity prevents attachment. This could be removed by statute or it could be combined with extra rights and a claims proceeding which would recognize the right of claims for reparations. The Vice President said that the freezing of $8 billion in Iranian assets was the one thing we have done which really hurt them. We will need to be in a position to bargain with that money for the final release of the hostages. Once it has been attached, we lose control. Mr. Cutler said if we take ownership of the assets and establish a claims process, we are always in a position to settle on the remainder of the assets. But in the meantime we can pursue more vigorous steps. The President asked how much money was involved. Mr. Cutler said it was about $6–8 billion in the U.S. and $12 billion worldwide. We should only vest the assets held in this country, but that would be more than sufficient to cover any conceivable claims that might be made. The President asked how soon we could have legislation. The Attorney General said very quickly if we only wish to waive sovereign immunity. If we want to set up a claims process, that would be more complex, but there are ample precedents and it should be possible within a week to clearly define all the alternatives. The President said we cannot bargain away the rights of the hostages. Mr. Cutler said we never planned to give back all the frozen assets without first settling claims. Dr. Brzezinski said he thought that we could send a message to Iran by use of the language in Option A6 but it would not lock us into 6 See footnote 5, Document 244.
