396 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV —Is it necessary to wait until mid-79 to take additional actions to improve our C3I systems? Aren’t there actions beyond those you are currently taking, that we already know we’ll want to take? The most important thing Harold wants from this meeting is a policy statement from you that we are going to solve the MM vulnerability problem. Such a decision would be of great help in our efforts to widen support for SALT. Harold would like to announce this decision next week, and I would like to follow up on it in a policy speech I am scheduled to deliver the following week in Chicago. Harold would also like you to indicate whether or not you support specific elements of his long-­term plan. I believe that any such decisions would be premature and should be made in the budget review meetings that will be held between now and January. General Purpose Forces (GPF) Harold’s GPF paper (Tab C) contains no surprises. It continues the NATO-­emphasis improvements in reinforcement (POMCUS) and in strengthening the Army through a vigorous modernization and expansion program. The most important issue is likely to be the scope of the Army modernization program, particularly in light of the current DOD study of Army force structure that you directed in the Spring budget review. This study is examining an alternative defense doctrine based on a belt of fixed infantry-­manned emplacements, equipped with anti-­armor capability and backed up by mobile armored reserves. In the meantime, however, DOD proposes to modernize and expand the Army along the lines of the current “active defense” doctrine which raises the question: should the Army’s plans be held back to await the results of the study? Although the study may reveal some interesting new concepts, I do not recommend holding back on modernization now. For a number of reasons, we are likely to have the existing doctrine and force structure for some time to come, and failing to modernize as needed would harm near-­term capabilities. On the other hand, this is an important issue and an opportunity to re-­examine the premises behind our doctrine. DOD should not treat it lightly, as many there would like. To reinforce its importance, I suggest that you ask Harold how the study is coming and what effect it might have on future Army programs. Shipbuilding is also an important issue, particularly since the budget veto. The veto message said that the Navy has been moving toward larger, more costly ships, but fewer of them. However, the upcoming budget reduces the shipbuilding rate a little further and may make us vulnerable to criticism that although we may be giving more relative emphasis to smaller ships, we are still moving toward lower numbers.
