620  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
D. I said Wang statement this morning again raised question con­
cerning agreed announcement he had raised at previous meetings. 
These questions bear no relationship to carrying out of September 10 
agreement. Unlike questions I had raised which bear directly on agreed 
announcement, his questions are extraneous thereto. I had thoroughly 
covered this ground in last few meetings. In spite of Wang’s apparent 
desire lead us down side road in discussing these extraneous issues, 
I have no desire go over ground already covered. Particularly in last 
few meetings I had carefully and in detail gone into these questions. 
Statement appeared entirely ignore what I said previously. I had no 
intention pursue this subject this morning.
E. I said that as for other aspects Wang’s statement, I had tried 
point out relationship between carrying out agreed announcement and 
confidence that must be established in regard to our other subjects. 
I had said many times that my discussion this subject not motivated by 
desire delay talks but by desire expedite them.
F. I said in regard to question of embargo I had still not received 
answers to questions I asked many weeks ago.
G. I said in view of imminent Christmas and New Year holidays 
and common practice with respect international meeting during that 
period, I suggest that we hold our next meeting January 12. I would 
hope at that meeting it will be possible to renew our progress toward 
reaching agreement on joint statement with respect renunciation force. 
I would expect at that meeting to be in position make further comments 
in regard to your December 1 draft, as well as to make definite propos­
als concerning amendments thereto that we would consider desirable.
22. Wang replied that on Monday he had sent letter stating at 
today’s meeting we should give emphasis discussion on agreed 
announcement on renunciation of force. He regretted that in my state­
ment this morning I had again failed put forward concrete opinions 
concerning new draft of December 1 of PRC side. He could not consider 
this satisfactory.
23. Wang said this fact shed light on attitude of US, which aimed 
at dragging out talks. Purpose of present talks is try resolve conflicts of 
policy between two countries. Existing conflicts of policy as well as ten­
sion Taiwan area are posing serious threat international peace. That is 
why world public focussing attention on developments Sino-­American 
talks.
24. Wang said he had to point out that after forty days of discus­
sion of item one, we finally reached successful agreement that item. But 
100 days have passed since entering into discussion of more important 
questions, yet we still find ourselves no closer to progress. Cause for 
lack progress this respect entirely due to delaying attitude on part of 
US concerning item 2.
