766
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
a commission would provide a unique opportunity to mobilize the na-
tion to support efforts that can substantially improve the nutritional
well-being of citizens of the United States and the world.
Too often in the past, public interest in hunger and malnutrition
has been aroused spasmodically, largely in times of famine, and there
has been no attempt to build strong, sustained public interest in and
support for, comprehensive food and nutrition policy undertakings.
There is a wide and diverse constituency that will support thoughtful
governmental action on food and nutrition, and a commission on
hunger and malnutrition can help build that support.
I see such a commission undertaking two basic tasks. First, it
would be a vehicle for public involvement and education. Through
hearings across the country, people would have the opportunity to ask
questions about our food and nutrition policy and present their ideas
for improving it. In addition, the hearings would inform the public in a
continuing way about the problems of hunger and malnutrition, at
home and abroad.
Second, the commission would analyze general economic and ag-
ricultural trends in the developing world, particularly with respect to
changes that will take place because of the rise in energy prices, and de-
termine how our current policies will affect nutritional wellbeing in
this changing context. It is imperative that this two-fold evaluation be
done on a continuous basis if we are to avoid policies that do more
harm than good, and if we are to establish a clear recognition of the
connection between problems of food and nutrition in the United States
and such problems abroad.
There is always the question of whether commissions are really
useful. It has been my experience that the benefits of a commission are
in direct proportion to the strength of its mandate, the quality of its
membership, and the level of support it receives. May I also suggest
that Dr. Jean Mayer, President of Tufts University, who organized the
1969 White House Conference on Food, Nutrition and Health, could be
an excellent chairman.3
3 In May 1969, Nixon announced that his administration planned to devise solu-
tions to the problem of domestic hunger and retool Federal hunger programs. He subse-
quently appointed Mayer his special consultant and tasked him with organizing various
working groups and task forces in advance of the White House Conference on Food, Nu-
trition, and Health, held in Washington December 2–4, 1969. For additional information
concerning the conference’s goals and outcomes, see White House Conference on Food, Nu-
trition, and Health Final Report (Washington, D.C., Government Printing Office, 1969).
Carter later appointed Mayer to the Presidential Commission on World Hunger, where-
upon Mayer assumed responsibilities as one of two vice chairmen.
