National Security Policy 741 Your attention is invited to the statement in the enclosure that, because of the imminent consideration of the subject draft policy, there has only been opportunity for individual members of the National Aeronautics and Space Council to comment without the benefit of dis­ cussion at a NASC meeting. James S. Lay, Jr. Executive Secretary cc: The Secretary of the Treasury The Attorney General The Secretary of Commerce The Director, Bureau of the Budget The Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission The Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff The Director of Central Intelligence The Chairman, Council of Economic Advisers The Chairman, Council on Foreign Economic Policy Enclosure Memorandum From Phillips to Lay Washington, June 19, 1959 SUBJECT Paragraph 62 of Basic National Security Policy 5906 1. The subject draft paragraph supplied with your memoran­ dum of June 3, 1959, was forwarded to those members of the National Aeronautics and Space Council whose departments had not par­ ticipated in preparation of the draft. It is my understanding that the Department of State, Department of Defense, and National Aeronautics and Space Administration had participated in its drafting. Because of the imminent consideration of this policy by the NSC, there has only been opportunity for individual members to comment without the ben­ efit of discussion at a NASC meeting. 2. AEC Chairman McCone, NSF Director Waterman, and Messrs. Bronk, Burden, and Rettaliata have concurred in the paragraph with the following exceptions: a. Both Mr. Burden and Dr. Bronk objected to the bracketed phrase proposed by Budget and Treasury. Mr. Burden was the more eloquent: “I am strongly opposed to the insertion of the phrase, ‘in fields where such applications appear to offer advantages over other possible means for achieving required capabilities.’ I think that proposals in relation to the military space program should be judged on their merit and not
