Peru 1123 subdivision of large landholdings, since the land in these new regions does not belong to anyone. Mr. Dillon asked whether it would not be quicker and easier to break up some of the large landholdings so as to settle people in that immediate vicinity, since the opening of new regions required new roads, new communities, new everything. Sr. Beltran replied that, in his view, it would be easier to start on new lands since these are better and more productive lands. He said he is not opposed, however, to subdivision of large estates, particularly unworked or underworked landholdings. He recognized, additionally, the political and social need to deal with this aspect of the land problem. Turning to urban problems, Sr. Beltran referred to the new Savings and Loan Association which would encourage both savings and low-­ cost, private housing on a long term loan basis. With the help of the DLF loan to the Association a start can now be made in housing in the Lima area, but new home loan banks are needed in other departments. Other approaches must also be developed. With these programs, Sr. Beltran stated, he hoped to win over the vast majority of the common people from the appeal and influence of Communism. He emphasized the very real danger of Communist agitation amongst the masses, such as the recent riots in Tokyo2 and the terrible riots (“Bogotazo”) in Bogotá twelve years ago.3 He mentioned that Fidel Castro had been involved in those riots and alluded to the fact that, when an American plane evacuated wives and children of Cuban officials, Castro and another agitator made their escape as stowaways. Castro is now intensifying his agitation throughout Latin America. There is less and less outwardly Communist agitation and more and more Fidel, with his claims of being the standard-­bearer of economic independence, non-­intervention and the welfare of the masses. In fact, however, he is serving the purpose of Communism and it matters little whether or not he himself is an actual Communist. Che Guevara’s recent speech is additional evidence that the Cuban Government’s philosophy is Communist.4 The Communists are ready for new Bogotazos and we therefore must act fast. 2 Documentation on anti-U.S. demonstrations and the decision to cancel the projected visit of President Eisenhower to Japan in June 1960 is presented in Volume XV. 3 Reference is to the uprising after the assassination of Liberal Party leader Jorge E. Gaitan in Bogotá on April 9, 1948. For documentation, see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. IX, The Western Hemisphere. 4 Reference presumably is to a speech by Ernesto Che’ Guevara Serna, Chief of the Industrial Department, National Institute of Agrarian Reform and President of the National Bank of Cuba, before an assembly of workers in Habána, June 18, 1960; for an English translation of the text, see John Gerassi, ed., Venceremos! The Speeches and Writings of Ernesto Che Guevara (New York, 1968), p. 92.
