International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
261
poison the political atmosphere in other areas. This negotiation is likely
to be our only chance for quite a few years to put in place an improved
international framework for resolving conflicts arising from differences
in agricultural policy and in industrial policy. As a practical matter, we
cannot conclude an MTN without adequate solutions in these areas;
and a major political effort will have to be made to reduce U.S./EC
differences.
4. Protectionist Pressures.—The primary concern of the Europeans
is likely to focus on current pressures for trade restrictions. They
will be particularly anxious about problems relating to trade in steel
(Annex A).3 They will also be concerned about the protectionist mood
in the U.S. more generally. They will welcome a forceful expression of
U.S. intention to resist pressures for trade restrictions.
Talking Points
In Paris.—
1. We have been pleased by the progress that has been made in the
MTN trade talks in some key issues as a result of close cooperation be-
tween the EC Commission and U.S. negotiators.
2. We are anxious that similar progress be made in the near future
on non-tariff barriers affecting agricultural trade and subsidies.
3. We sincerely hope that the French government will support the
package of proposals, including the 40 percent tariff cutting goal,
which the EC Commission will present to the Council of Ministers on
January 17 as a basis for further negotiation.
4. We understand the sensitive political situation in France and the
need to find an acceptable political formulation for the negotiating
package, including a de-emphasis of the tariff goal and major stress on
improved trading rules, including those on safeguards.
5. If needed—We understand the need for more flexibility in the
use of safeguard measures, but we must avoid arrangements which
will open the door to protectionist forces and increase North/South
tensions.
In Brussels with the EC Commission.—
1. We are pleased by the momentum that has been achieved in the
MTN trade talks as a result of the close working relationship that has
been established between the EC Commission and U.S. trade negoti-
ators headed by Ambassador Robert S. Strauss. A substantial result
from these talks is crucial to the maintenance of the open trading
system.
3 Not attached.
