112
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
RECOMMENDATION:
That you sign attached memorandum (Tab 1).4
4 At Tab 1 is the undated, draft memorandum. A notation on the draft indicates
that Brzezinski signed it on March 20. In the memorandum, Brzezinski commented:
“The Soviet Union and Eastern Europe are our highest-priority targets for sustained
covert action impact. Money to permit continued expansion of this entire program during
FY 1980 should be found through reprogramming.” Turner responded on April 9, writing
that the Agency “will remain alert to the possibility of reprogramming to provide
additional funds” for the program. However, Turner cautioned that “Fiscal Year 1980
is a very austere budget and, at this point in time, we cannot identify funds available
for such reprogramming.” He added “Will keep looking—” to the memorandum. (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Horn/Special, Box 3, Chron File: 4/79)
33.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, March 16, 1979
SUBJECT
Determination to Assist Refugees from Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union
In the memorandum at Tab B,2 Cy Vance recommends you deter-
mine that it is important to the national interest that up to $1.13 million
from the U.S. Emergency Refugee Fund be made available to the volun-
tary agencies resettling refugees from Eastern Europe and the Soviet
Union who entered the United States before October 1, 1978. OMB
concurrence is at Tab C.3
Primarily because of the sharp increase in Soviet emigration during
1978, funds appropriated to the Department of State were insufficient
to provide the normal level of Federal assistance to voluntary agencies
resettling refugees accepted by the United States. Although the agencies
continued to process and resettle refugees at their own expense, the
debts incurred could curtail the ability of some agencies to continue
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 50, Presidential Determinations: 5/78–7/79. No classification marking. Sent for
action. Reginald Bartholomew initialed for Brzezinski.
2 Not attached. See Document 31.
3 Attached but not printed is a March 6 memorandum from Edward Sanders of
the Office of Management and Budget to Dodson.
