952 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 294. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel1 Washington, September 19, 1979, 0239Z 246210. For Ambassador Leonard from Saunders. Subject: Alternative Approach to Powers and Responsibilities. Ref: State 243600.2 1. (S) Entire text. 2. This telegram conveys to you the non-paper that we have been discussing with you and a message from Bob Strauss conveying it to you. The letter is self-explanatory, but I want to underscore for you Bob’s desire that we put this paper forward in as informal a way as possible so as to avoid getting ourselves locked permanently into its contents. Given Bob’s desire to approach this informally as described in the letter, we have therefore changed the lead-in to the document itself to establish in the text the informality of the paper. This message authorizes you to go ahead and give our non-paper to Burg Wednesday3 as we have discussed. If you feel the need to discuss it further, you could, of course, tell Burg that it will be arriving shortly and that you will have the paper Bob Strauss promised delivered to him as soon as it arrives, even though you may have departed for Egypt.4 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 4, Autonomy Talks: 9–11/79. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to Cairo. Printed from a copy that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room. Drafted by Saunders; cleared by Robert S. Steven (S/S–O) and in substance in S/SN; approved by Saunders. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850050–1989) 2 Sent September 16, telegram 243600 to Tel Aviv forwarded an earlier draft version of the Powers and Responsibilities “non-paper,” encompassing the draft outline recommendations received by the Powers and Responsibilities working group at its meeting in Alexandria at the end of July. (National Archives, RG 59 Central Foreign Policy File, P850050–1998) 3 Leonard gave Burg a copy of the non-paper during a September 19 meeting at the Knesset. At the meeting, Leonard also raised the recent decision taken by the Israeli Cabinet authorizing Israeli land purchases in the West Bank and Gaza. Describing the decision as “regrettable,” Leonard “explained that this, as well as other land issues, were things that should be discussed and settled in the autonomy negotiations. Burg disagreed and asserted that the Cabinet’s decision should not interfere with the negotiations. He explained that the Israeli idea of autonomy was coexistence with the Arabs within one political framework west of the Jordan; he saw nothing wrong with Arabs living in pre-’67 Israel and Israelis living on the West Bank and Gaza.” (Telegram 20187 from Tel Aviv, September 20; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840090–2476) 4 Leonard and Atherton met with Boutros Ghali to deliver the non-paper on September 22. Two days later, Leonard presented the document to Khalil. Khalil, Leonard reported, “reacted adversely to what he considered the ‘administrative’ focus of our paper, and was only slightly persuaded by my efforts to describe the potential in our suggested approach. Khalil expressed his strong preference for a U.S. paper highlighting the requirement for Israel to supply the documents necessary for a discussion of all powers and responsibilities currently exercised by the military government.” (Telegram 19590 from
