3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1978
435
forming a framework leading to a Geneva Conference. Gromyko said
that a preliminary accord between Egypt and Israel would not help
possibilities for a Geneva Conference. It wouldn’t even help if theoret-
ically Egypt and Israel became allies. There were too many Arab coun-
tries which opposed Israel and the Israeli occupation. He said the So-
viets would not assist in any partial deals which he felt would not
permit a settlement but rather sowed the seeds of future conflict.
8. Referring to the Secretary’s suggestion that the Soviets seek to
influence the Palestinians, Gromyko said that the Soviets had exerted
such influence in the past and continued to do so through Arafat. How-
ever, there were various factions in the Palestinian movement which
complicated things. Furthermore, what Israel and Egypt were doing
now limited Soviet possibilities. This did not mean the Soviets would
remain passive however. Indeed they could not, if only for reasons of
geography. Gromyko said that if the U.S. and the Soviets pursued a
common line, pointing to the Geneva Conference as the means for set-
tlement, peace could be assured. He complained about Israel’s defama-
tory statements against a Geneva Conference. He said, however, that
the USSR supported Israel’s right to existence no less fervently than the
United States did.
9. Gromyko alleged that the United States considered Israel to be
strong because of its arms deliveries. This course, however, was unreli-
able. Looking back over the past 20 to 25 years, he claimed that we were
now pleased that Sadat had come to us, but if the Soviets had given him
two or three times more arms, the situation would be different. Con-
cluding, Gromyko said the Soviets would hold to their position of prin-
ciple and would continue to oppose separate deals, conferences, and
meetings except for a Geneva Conference with full participation. How-
ever, he recognized that both the U.S. and USSR were interested in the
situation and hoped that it would be possible to continue exchanging
information from time to time in the future. In particular, if we saw fit,
he would appreciate information on the London meetings. He thought
that information exchanges should take place not only in formal
meetings but in working contacts as well.
10. The Secretary promised to keep the Soviets informed on the
London meetings. He agreed that security would arrive in the Middle
East only with a real peace. However, if the Declaration of Principles
could be agreed, it would set the framework for another Geneva Con-
ference. The Secretary noted he had said many times that only at such a
conference could all the pieces of the Middle East puzzle be fit together
so as to lead to lasting peace.
11. Gromyko asked what the Secretary felt chances were for
success in London. The Secretary replied perhaps 1 in 100. Gromyko
seemed rather relieved by this but the Secretary pointed out that even if
