786
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
in a more emotional state than I have yet seen him. He had obviously
had a report from Kamal Hassan Ali on talks with Weizman and with
Atherton and was visibly upset. He had trouble controlling his sense of
outrage as he spoke. He said flatly that “we cannot go back on what has
been agreed upon” and that he had earlier in the day sent the Secretary
a message through Ghorbal on the subject.6 (I have obtained a copy
from Boutros Ghali and will send English translation by septel.)
4. Specifically, Khalil said:
— (A) GOE will under no circumstances agree to a company-to-
company oil arrangement with Israel as the Israelis are demanding.7
The treaty annex which provides that Israel may bid on the interna-
tional market for Egyptian oil will not be implemented before Egypt
and Israel enter into negotiations on normalization. Furthermore,
Egypt will under no circumstances specifically agree to sell Alma oil to
Israel.8 It will only be in terms of surplus Egyptian oil.
— (B) In the meantime, Israel has USG guarantee to provide Israel
with its oil requirements. If USG wishes purchase oil from Amoco for
this purpose, this is USG business.
— (C) Moreover, he could not accept what he called the new Israeli
proposal not to withdraw from the Alma fields until seven months
after signing of the treaty.9 This is totally inconsistent with letter and
spirit of earlier sub-phasing agreement developed during Blair House
talks10 and, Khalil insisted, with what he had been told by President
Carter and the Secretary during President Carter’s visit.11 The same ap-
plies to the Al Arish withdrawal. When I pointed out our view that
three months Al Arish and seven months oil fields strikes us as a rea-
sonable compromise, Khalil hit the ceiling. He reiterated that this is not
consistent with what was said here during President Carter’s talks.12 I
noted that Atherton had told Kamal that he was confident that nothing
specific about a two month or four month date had been said in those
talks and I also knew of no such statement. Khalil responded that Ath-
erton was only part right. He claimed to have specifically asked Presi-
dent Carter about the sub-phasing dates and that the President had re-
plied he could not remember the dates, but that they would be those
6 Carter underlined this sentence.
7 Carter underlined this sentence.
8 Carter underlined this sentence.
9 Carter underlined this sentence.
10 Carter underlined, “totally inconsistent with letter and spirit of earlier sub-
phasing agreement developed during Blair House talks.” See Documents 84, 86–87, 90,
and 94.
11 See Documents 202 and 203.
12 Carter underlined this and the preceding two sentences.
