330 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 level, high-speed reconnaissance aircraft (such as the SR–71) which would be audible and reflect a U.S. presence to citizens of Tehran; or a fly-over of Iranian territory by a large number of naval aircraft to symbolize U.S. power. The display of force could imply an imminent U.S. intention to use force and thus jeopardize the safety of the hostages. It could also increase Khomeini’s intransigence. It could, however, bring home to the Revolutionary Council that the U.S. has enormous power and that U.S. patience is wearing thin, and thus reinforce the views of those in Iran who are urging Khomeini to find a quick facesaving way out. The display of power would be welcomed domestically but, if we did nothing more, it could actually add to an impression of impotence. II. Conditions for Release Out of a proper concern that we stand firm on principle and avoid making concessions that convey weakness, we have not been able to give the Iranians a very clear notion of what would happen if the hostages were released. Iran (primarily the students and Khomeini) has made three basic demands: the return of the Shah, the return of his assets, and a condemnation of the Shah and the United States for past “crimes” against Iran. Two other issues are also raised: U.S. intervention in the current affairs of Iran and whether U.S. policy after the hostages are released will be one of reconciliation or retribution. Except to say that the Shah will not be returned, the United States has not tried to answer these demands with any specificity. We have said that the courts are available to address the question of the Shah’s assets and that we will not stand in the way of an airing of Iran’s grievances, once the hostages are released. Our fundamental position remains that the hostages are the issue and their release must precede any discussions. We have avoided commenting on post-hostage policy, except by inference in our accepting language on restraint in both the UNSC and ICJ resolutions. Now is a good time to convey a fuller message. The Revolutionary Council seems to be moving towards a consensus on the need to resolve the crisis. Khomeini himself may have made encouraging noises to McBride.5 And if there is a gap between a Security Council vote and the time sanctions come into force, the Iranians should know our position as they ponder their course of action. 5 Sean McBride, former head of Amnesty International, met on December 23 with members of the Revolutionary Council. (Edward Cody, “Captors Set Festivities for Hostages,” Washington Post, December 24, 1979, p. A1)
