966 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement We will send you a report on the meeting of the representatives of the 16 countries which was held on May 9 with Bob Murphy on the Chinese Communist note. (See Circular 777 May 10) You will recall that we referred to this in our guidance telegram of May 9, No. 1967. Your letter No. 31 dated May 3 was received on May 8, 1956. I have asked Nagoski to check the unfortunate language of the Immigration people in reference to “applications for permission to depart”. He tells me that the Immigration Service confirms categori­ cally that Chinese do not need “permission” to return and do not have to inform the Immigration Service when they leave the United States. However, some foreigners (and this not confined to Chinese) in the U.S. apparently do not realize this. They may feel that it is necessary, or at least the polite thing, to touch base with U.S. I&N.S. before leaving. Also, some of the prospective Chinese repatriates are under the illusion that the US I&N.S. can help them with tickets and travel reservations. Perhaps some of the U.S. I&N.S. field officers have not always made sufficiently plain to the inquirers that a positive response does not imply that the inquiry was necessary in the first place or that a negative answer could have been given. The one case in which the inquiry was referred from one office to another appears to have been an instance of pure bureaucratic timidity. We have asked I.&N.S. to reexamine its ­circular instructions to the field offices on this subject to make sure that it is sufficiently emphasized that Chinese need have no dealings with the Immigration Offices in their arrangements for departure. I agree with your observation in your letter No. 30 about the defi­ ciency in the case histories attached to the Lindbeck report. I have shown Lindbeck your comments and he is working on the matter. We will have some information on this shortly. [text not declassified] I hope there are no unpleasant surprises in the meeting tomorrow. [text not declassified] Regards and every good wish, Sincerely, Walter P. McConaughy Enclosures: 1. Copy of Memorandum dated May 9. 2. Copy of Memo of Conversation with Indian Minister
