Chapter 6, June–December 1990 819 conference. If so, we could do it jointly, or we could do it here and we could do it in a separate room—­maybe we could decide that by the end of the day. Baker: Okay, let’s get into the schedule. I would like us as we come out of this meeting to say that we have discussed the possibility of a Bush-Gorbachev meeting, but that we haven’t locked into a definite date. There is no change in our view that it is desirable to have such a meeting and that it is important to have the meeting to push our common agenda. But I think President Bush is a little reluctant at this point to be committed to a December meeting, particularly, because our two leaders will meet at a CSCE Summit in late November. But even beyond that, there is the question and indeed the problem that any summit meeting that our two Presidents are going to have is going to have to include the successful conclusion of the START agreement. We’ll have to be in the position where they can sign it. So, I’d like to be able to tell the press that we’ve discussed the possibility of future meetings and that we will be considering such a summit in light of the progress that we’ve made on a number of outstanding issues. Anyway, that was in my thoughts and I would like to do that, if it’s okay with you. One other point that I’d like to just raise. Is there any possibility that the President is going to attend the Children’s Summit at the UN in late September? That, too, might be another possibility for an early meeting between our two Presidents. Shevardnadze: With regard to your question of President Gorbachev’s participation in the Children’s Summit in New York, that has not been something that we’ve decided yet, but I do think that it’s probably doubtful. Baker: Well, there’s some consideration for President Bush to be there in New York and he would probably go up there for a short visit. Shevardnadze: As you know, this is a very busy time for us and we have very many important problems to discuss in the Supreme Soviet, particularly with regard to our transition to a market economy. The government still has to decide its positions and also to find them. And there is also the very tricky question of putting together a new union treaty. Both are fundamental and critical questions, and they would require a good deal of time and attention by the President. I know he’d like to go to New York for that Children’s Summit, but it would be difficult, given these questions and these problems. I can say this that our agreement in Washington about having a next summit remains in effect. As for the date of it, that depends, of course, on the preparations for and specifically the readiness for a START Treaty for signature. Baker: Yes, that’s right. The agreement at Washington was that the next summit would be in Moscow, but that we did not fix a date. Shevardnadze: That’s right.
