International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1051 tions, clean water, elementary sanitation and measures to prevent blindness. There are no immediate reorganization implications which might create potential for conflict with your decision to create a new International Development Cooperation Administration6 and allied coordinating mechanisms. These initiatives will be developed in coordination with these mechanisms. The review itself has generated sufficient momentum that we should again emphasize the identification of this effort as your initiative. Your Lagos speech7 contributed to this momentum by putting African health initiatives in the context of a broader U.S. international health effort and indicating further cooperation on African health problems. We propose three actions: —Emphasis on Secretary Califano’s role as your personal representative to the World Health Assembly and your endorsement of Califano’s message spelling out the U.S. role. We will have his message by April 27 for final clearance.8 —Release of a Statement of Principles as the first step in a long-term effort over the next two years to establish a world health initiative. We recommend you announce this prior to Califano’s message on May 9. We have tentatively scheduled time for you in the press room.9 —Completion of the policy review, with an Administration strategy and detailed program initiatives by September 1, 1978, to support the development of the FY 1980 and subsequent budgets. A schedule is attached.10 6 See footnote 17, Document 245. 7 The President departed Washington on March 28 for Venezuela, Brazil, Nigeria, and Liberia, returning to Washington on April 3. He spoke at the National Arts Theatre in Lagos, Nigeria, on April 1, commenting: “We are giving new priority to cooperating in international efforts to improve health around the world. We would like to study with you how we can best work with Nigeria and other nations of Africa to deal with the killing and the crippling diseases that still afflict this continent.” (Department of State Bulletin, May 1978, p. 13) 8 The President wrote “ok” next to this point. 9 The President wrote “See statement first” next to this paragraph. The White House released a Presidential statement on May 2, announcing the U.S. international health program. Califano delivered prepared remarks at the 31st World Health Assembly in Geneva on May 9. See Document 313. 10 The President wrote “ok” next to this paragraph. The April 20 “World Health Strategy Workplan Timetable” is attached but not printed.
