738 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement said that General Partridge has command over the forces but cannot move them about and does not have control of the budget. The President noted that an additional $250 million is being pro­ posed for the SAGE system. He asked whether any other additions were being proposed. Mr. McElroy said there is a proposal to put $150 million additional into NIKE–ZEUS. This would be added to $300 mil­ lion now budgeted for research and development on NIKE–ZEUS and $250 million for “novel” defense means. Mr. McElroy said, in relation to NIKE–ZEUS, that he wants to do anything that makes sense as a defense against missiles. He said the NIKE–HERCULES would have some small capability against a missile similar to the Hound Dog. The President asked, in light of the foregoing, whether there was any need for any more squadrons of interceptors. General White thought this question should be deferred until the next programming period. The President then asked if what had been presented to him is the decision of the Defense Department. Mr. McElroy said that it is the best decision in his judgment. He had not been able to get unanimous agree­ ment on it, however. Nevertheless, it had been thoroughly discussed and he was satisfied with it for the present. The President recalled that the strength of the Soviet Air Forces was apparently greatly overestimated a couple of years ago. Now we are more certain of our estimates, and they are much lower. The bomber threat is therefore not so serious as had been thought. He understood that the Defense proposal involved pushing the NIKE–ZEUS and the SAGE harder, while cutting back in other areas. Mr. McElroy said that there is a change occurring in the balance between Soviet bombers and Soviet missiles and that this change may go either faster or slower than we estimate. Accordingly, it will be necessary to review the situation frequently. The President said he thought that funds in this whole area ought to be made available in a lump sum so that the Secretary of Defense could shift funds as revised estimates are developed. He noted that our program has changed materially between last January and the present. He had the impression that the change in our estimate of Soviet strength has been relatively slight. Mr. Stans then said he hoped it would remain possible to raise ques­ tions regarding the budgetary coverage of these programs for FY–61. Mr. McElroy agreed but said there is one point to be made concerning BOMARC. An alternative considered was to cancel it now. He felt if we do less than is now proposed we should cancel it. The President said he felt that the program should not be expressed in specific sums for specific years. The total program should be expressed instead in terms of trends. Mr. McElroy pointed out that Defense thinking is for
