1306
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
2. Summary: Following for the record and your information is re-
port of meetings which lead to July 2 decision to resume autonomy
talks.
3. Ambassador Linowitz met alone with Burg evening of July 1
and breakfasted alone with Ali July 2. Burg was bristly about Egyptian
inconstancy and said Israeli Government and public increasingly
doubtful of Egyptian intentions. He was particularly upset about
media report he said he had heard to effect that Egyptian Parliament
had passed resolution stating that Jerusalem was to be capital of future
Palestinian state. However, he said he and his team ready to do
business of course, without preconditions, and could work here on
Sunday2 if necessary. Ali reviewed for Linowitz the expected litany of
Egyptian
concerns—Jerusalem,
settlements,
conditions
on
West
Bank—but did not reveal in breakfast meeting that he was not author-
ized to agree to resumption.
4. Wednesday3 morning trilateral meeting (for about three hours)
consumed for most part by both Burg and Ali airing their grievances.
Ali was unaware of report out of Cairo (above) which was agitating
Burg so that issue was laid aside. Ali pressed Burg on Cohen Bill4 and
Burg, helpfully, replied with some heat that he had not wanted the bill
to move to full Knesset at this time, and that he felt almost betrayed by
David Glass whose future in NRP would be dark if he, Burg, had any-
thing to say about it. While neither was convinced by the other, Burg
and Ali had an articulate and intelligent exchange on the settlements
question. Ali did not raise with Burg question of movement of Begin’s
office to East Jerusalem5 (though Linowitz had in private meeting with
Burg) but did review again the need for Israel to undertake confidence-
building measures among Palestinians of West Bank and Gaza.
5. After air was to some degree cleared by these exchanges, Lino-
witz pressed hard for need to agree on first day to language on agree-
ment to resume negotiations and gave them draft text to this effect. Ali
said he would have to consult Cairo overnight and that text “could be
discussed” on July 3. Linowitz said the three of them should discuss it
2 July 13.
3 July 9.
4 See Document 371.
5 On June 25, Lewis met with Begin to discuss a series of press reports indicating
that planning had begun to transfer the Israeli Prime Minister’s office to East Jerusalem.
Lewis emphasized the negative impact a move would have on the course of the au-
tonomy talks, the attitudes of U.S. leaders “from President Carter down,” and “Israel’s
already battered image in the United States and Europe,” as well as the “increased diplo-
matic isolation inevitable when cabinet-level visitors or Ambassadors from friendly
countries were unable to call upon Begin in his East Jerusalem offices.” (Telegram 11739
from Tel Aviv, June 25; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P880143–1807)
