World Hunger and Food Policy
823
“The second principle is the inherent value of the truth. Accurate
knowledge is the first step towards the solution of any problem.
Without the willingness to face the full dimensions of world hunger,
the Commission will be unable to carry out its mandate. Truth has an
unusually long life expectancy. Just as plants and water can crack or
wear down the hardest stone, so the principle of truth can help us over-
come the problem of world hunger. We should not let short-run expe-
diencies distort our vision of what actually is, and what needs to be
done.
“The third principle for the Commission is effectiveness. Our goal
is to end world hunger, not to create more programs. We must establish
criteria to evaluate past and present programs, and those that are inef-
fective should be discarded. Currently successful ones should be con-
stantly re-evaluated; new programs should be tested against such effec-
tiveness criteria.
“The fourth principle is direct, personal contact with the problem.
The Commission should not be an ivory tower body, deliberating in
Washington, D.C. and talking in purely technical terms about abject
human misery. All the Commission members together should have
first-hand experience of the realities of world hunger. Therefore, we
recommend that there be in-the-field hearings both domestically and
internationally.” (Carter Library, RG 220, Presidential Commission on
World Hunger, Linowitz’s Subject Files, Box 41, Meetings)
Carter agreed to attend the initial meeting of the PCWH scheduled
for October 5, 1978. National Security Council Staff member Henry
Owen, the White House point of contact for the Commission following
President’s Special Assistant for Health Issues Peter Bourne’s resigna-
tion in July, provided Carter with talking points, the draft version of a
formal press statement, and a list of Commission members. Owen high-
lighted the need for Carter’s attendance at the meeting, noting, “Media
coverage has been minimal to date. Your participation in this opening
session should draw greater attention to the Commission (which Sol
very much wants) and underscore your personal interest in its activ-
ities.” (Memorandum from Owen to Carter, October 2; Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File,
Subject Chron File, Box 93, Food: 1978)
Following his meeting with the Commission, Carter issued a gen-
eral statement on October 5, asserting that the United States bore re-
sponsibility for solving the hunger problems “not only because of our
humanitarian concerns but for other reasons as well. We cannot have a
peaceful and prosperous world if a large part of the world’s people are
at or near the edge of hunger. So long as food shortages exist in devel-
oping countries, the possibility remains of another world food crisis
like that of 1973–74. Such a crisis could trigger another ruinous cycle in
