between China and the United States. In its consideration of this matter, the
Legation has reference, of course, to the conduct of enterprises in which
there is a substantial American interest and not to those concerns from
which protection might properly be withheld by reason of their failure to
possess other than a slight or nominal American interest.
On the premises outlined above, the Legation assumes that American
owned vessels of the character specified will, unless obstacles to a
profitable operation become too formidable, continue to ply on the Upper
Yangtse and that the American Consular and Naval officers in that part of
China will continue to be faced with perplexing questions severely testing
their intelligence and soundness of judgment. In this connection, the
Legation desires to commend the ably reasoned report of the Commanding
Officer of the U. S. S. Monocacy to the Commander of the Yangtse Patrol,
dated October 1, 1926, a copy of which is attached to the despatch from the
Consulate at Chungking of October 22, 1926, above mentioned.
In view of the chaotic conditions now prevalent on the Upper Yangtse, the
Legation has come to the conclusion that, not only the employment of
armed guards on American owned vessels, but also the unvarying use of
naval force to prevent the transportation of Chinese soldiers and other
unneutral services, may at any time be the cause of incidents of a character
prejudicial to the good relations between China and the United States. In
using the expression “unvarying use of naval force”, the Legation has in
mind a policy by which American naval vessels are, whenever necessary, to
use force to prevent unneutral services regardless whether such action may
bring on possibly serious conflict with Chinese military or naval forces. The
Legation sees no reason why American vessels should not, as discretion
may dictate, endeavor to prevent unneutral services when such action may
be taken without the likelihood of involving serious results. As indicated in
its telegram of November 24 to Mr. Adams, the Legation agrees with the
Consul’s view that the only practicable method of protecting the American
flag on the Upper Yangtse under existing conditions is the temporary
suspension of sailings during disturbed periods. This recommendation
would not be made if it seemed possible under present circumstances to
afford adequate naval protection to American owned vessels in the exercise
of their treaty rights. But the lesson of the Wanhsien incident of September
