893.74/597: Telegram [Document 757] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State PEKING, August 25, 1925—11 a.m. [Received August 25—10:53 a.m.] 349. My telegram number 345, August 22, 4 p.m. 1. Chief Executive yesterday gave me the assurance that Federal contract was recognized as valid and that effect would be given to it. … 2. I am frankly doubtful however whether any positive result was achieved as I am unable to get him to give any definite assurance as to the time and manner of giving effect to the contract. He confined himself to saying that he would instruct Ministries of Communications and Foreign Affairs to seek a solution satisfactory to all interested nationalities and remarked that this was a matter in which the Japanese had an interest that entitled them to be heard. 3. I concluded the conversation by saying that while I did not expect of him an immediate answer as to the intentions of his administration I intended shortly to address to the Ministry for Foreign Affairs a request for an early and definite statement on the subject and had consulted him in order that the reply might represent his considerations. 4. In order not to lose what impetus has been given to the matter my proposed note to the Minister of Foreign Affairs should be in his hands in time for consideration at the Cabinet meeting Saturday morning. Considerable weight would be added to it if I could quote you directly as instructing me to make such a request for information as to the intentions of the present regime here; but if it is not possible to receive your authorization by Friday morning I shall send a note in the sense indicated below on my own responsibility and omitting the reference to instructions from you. 5. The Department [proposed?] note, after recalling the conversations I have had with the Minister for Foreign Affairs and with the Chief Executive and reciting that the desire and readiness of the American interests concerned with the contract have been thus far defeated by the action of the Chinese Government, would go on as follows.
