310 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 At that time, the Tudeh Party offered a strong threat to the stability of the Government. Now, if economic chaos forces the failure of the Mossadeq Government and the position of the Shah, the Tudeh Party will in all probability be the only organized faction which will be in a position to “coup d’e´tat” into power. Whether the Tudeh Party could maintain a consistent hold on the political ruling hand of Iran and whether they might possibly split into factions as a result of the Nationalism versus Communism conflict, is as yet undeterminable. The above represents a gist of opinions by the project case officer based on his knowledge gained from field and Department of State reports. [2 paragraphs (27 lines) not declassified] [Omitted here are operational details.] 112. Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of State1 Tehran, August 3, 1952. 514. Estimate Iranian situation follows (Deptel 255 Jul 29):2 (1) Natl Front As result Natl Front victory thru return Mosadeq to power, past opponents of Front, such as landowners, Royal Court, moderate clergy and moderate intellectuals, currently unable to resist any policies coalition may propose. Prestige leaders such as Mosadeq and Kashani higher than ever before. Kashani and extremist faction he represents will probably have greater influence in future on Front policy. On basis unquestioned control of Majlis, Govt can secure needed emergency fin and econ powers which will permit it to find funds needed by state admin for number mos to come. Natl Front succeeded in overcoming Qavam because among reasons: A) Qavam had no organization with which to oppose on streets well-organized and disciplined groups of Tudeh and Natl Front, which were terrorizing city, except police and Army, and Shah wld not per-mit these law enforcement agencies to go all out to maintain order. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 84, Tehran Embassy Files, 1950–1952, classified general records, Box 29, Iran—July through December 1952. Secret; Security Information. Drafted by Melbourne and Henderson. Repeated to London. The telegram is the Embassy copy as approved and has no time of transmission. 2 Document 103.
