500 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement employ guided missiles and nuclear weapons for both offensive and defensive purposes, and increasing naval air reconnaissance and attack capabilities. Soviet naval forces will remain capable of lifting balanced forces of considerable strength, but the landing of heavy supporting elements of such forces will be contingent upon the seizure of adequate port facilities. V. TRENDS IN SOVIET RELATIONS WITH OTHER COMMUNIST STATES 166. The trend toward redefinition of intra-Bloc relationships con­ sequent upon the death of Stalin has continued; it eventuated in the Polish crisis and the Hungarian revolt of late 1956. The special posi­ tion of Yugoslavia, the emergence of a semi-­independent Communist regime in Poland, and Communist China’s growing power and doc­ trinal influence have, in effect, broken Moscow’s onetime monopoly of Communist thought and power. The USSR’s reluctant acceptance of these developments may signify a belief that greater toleration of local variations is the best way to preserve and strengthen the Bloc. However, alarmed by developments in Poland and Hungary, the USSR has moved to preserve the status quo in the orthodox Satellites and, in its repression of the Hungarian uprising, has demonstrated that it is determined to retain its hegemony in Eastern Europe. 167. The strong identity of interest among various Bloc regimes, their dependence upon Soviet aid and support, and the USSR’s over-­ whelming military power will tend to maintain the essential solidarity of the Bloc over at least the next five years. But the underlying forces of change released by developments since Stalin’s death will continue to operate, creating further instability in the states of Eastern Europe and in their relations with the USSR. The growth of Chinese Communist power and influence will also create problems as well as benefits for Moscow. Thus, additional changes in the pattern of intra-Bloc relation­ ships are likely in the period ahead. Soviet Policy Toward the Satellites 168. The Soviet leaders are still confronted in Eastern Europe with a problem partly of their own creation. Moscow appears to have decided that the best way to encourage the long-­run development of a sounder Soviet-Satellite relationship was to move away from the rigidity of Stalinist policy and, in its stead, to give limited play to national senti­ ments and local peculiarities within the various Satellites. But this pol­ icy set in motion forces which tended to defeat the basic objective, the strengthening of the Bloc. The over-­all liberalization of policy, together with the rapprochement with Tito and the Soviet XXth Party Congress, led to rising Satellite unrest, which threatened Soviet control.
