Chile 283 what portion of the Chilean budget was devoted to defense? President Alessandri replied that it was 14% and went on to say that he would suggest to the department conference that the definition of military expense be unified since many other countries currently hid military items in their budgets so as to disguise their expenditures. Chile had not only done this, but he had put an end to this practice when he was Minister of Finance several years ago. President Eisenhower replied that exclusive of pensions and payments to veterans, the United States spends 56% of its budget on national defense. The President hastened to add that he did not say this in a bragging way but merely to indicate how very sympathetic he was to President Alessandri’s objectives. President Alessandri suggested that the problem of armaments be viewed as a problem of protesting the rear guard of the United States. He also expressed the thought that funds saved from armaments could be used for economic development and that this would help to combat Communism. President Eisenhower said that he fully agreed and asked what effect the success of the disarmament conference would have on Chile’s intention to purchase more naval vessels. President Alessandri replied that Chile’s desire to acquire additional vessels was a result of recent purchases by the Peruvians. President Eisenhower repeated his question about the effect of a successful disarmament conference on Chile’s desire to purchase naval vessels, and President Alessandri replied that it would have a direct effect. President Alessandri went on to say that when he came to power he was under great pressure to acquire additional armaments because of incidents with Argentina in disputed areas. President Eisenhower said he would like to take that opportunity to comment on his meetings with the Presidents of Brazil and Argentina. The President said that while they had been less emphatic than Alessandri, he was convinced that both were sincere in their desire for disarmament. Both had stressed their devotion to inter-American friendship, and Frondizi had specifically expressed the hope that the boundary disputes with Chile would soon be settled. While it was true that Frondizi had wanted more modern arms, his purpose in so doing was to reduce his defense expenses in half by having smaller, more efficient forces. President Eisenhower then said he would like to come to the second of his two questions. He asked President Alessandri whether the latter believed that each nation had a right to decide its own level of defense for internal and basic defensive purposes. President Alessandri replied that each nation did indeed have the right to decide on its basic defensive requirements, but he saw this as no bar to mutual agreements for the limitation of armaments. He stressed that Chile was exceptionally
