the United States. They have no right to do so, and it should not be
permitted. I am not yet able to reconcile myself to idea of playing into their
hands by making an advance finding, based on disputable issues of fact, to
effect that reasonably fair plebiscite is absolutely impossible. Outcome of
this proceeding will be either decision by plebiscite that can be sustained or
clear conclusion that plebiscite has been frustrated by Chile. It is difficult to
see how case for frustration can be deemed complete and closed until
attempt, at least, to carry through registration phase has been made.
In the second of your recommendations where you refer to Peru’s rejection
of tender of good offices, you say that if the reason is simply that she
prefers plebiscite, we are then warranted in going ahead. That is what has
happened. Peru has rejected offer, has indicated that she prefers plebiscite,
and is actually sending into the territory her candidates for registration. She
is not saying anything more about withdrawing.
With both parties insisting on the plebiscite, we have no choice in matter,
and dominant consideration from now on must be to conduct proceedings
with all care to protect Arbitrator and ultimately to place blame for failure
where it belongs. I can see no way clear to accomplish this aim save by
taking both parties at their word and by going on with plebiscite, which
they have said they want, until Plebiscitary Commission is in fact blocked
by either or both of them. If at this juncture the Commission should take
initiative in calling off plebiscite in face of avowed desire of both
contestants to carry on, Commission’s action would plainly provide them
with opportunity they are looking for to put responsibility for failure upon
Commission and the Arbitrator. As matters now stand, Peru has assumed
responsibility of rejecting tender of good offices made to her while Chile
accepted tender; and if, eventually, Chile frustrates a fair plebiscite, we have
only to lay facts before world opinion.
 
We can no longer run risk of being blamed for any disorders that may take
place. Plebiscitary Commission and Arbitrator are not in position of having
pushed proceedings relentlessly toward such crisis. Chile and Peru
themselves are doing this. Peru has been given her chance to avoid
disastrous complications of this character and has rejected it, deliberately
