482 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement varying with the missile guidance system employed, their accuracy would depend on the ability of the launching or guidance submarine to fix its own position. 113. Other Missile Categories: For improving the effectiveness of its interceptors, the USSR could now have available short-­range air-­to-­air missiles equipped with HE warheads, probably including one suit­ able for all-­weather engagement at ranges up to 5 n.m. Soviet air-­to-­ air capabilities will probably improve, and some large-­caliber air-­to-­air rockets or guided missiles could be equipped with nuclear warheads during 1958–62. In the air-­to-­surface category, subsonic missiles capa­ ble of carrying nuclear warheads up to about 55 n.m. could probably now be available, primarily for use as anti-­ship weapons, but also suit­ able for use against isolated and well-­defined radar targets on land. In 1961, a 100 n.m. supersonic air-­to-­surface missile could probably be available for employment by heavy bombers. It will probably also be within Soviet capabilities to develop specialized decoys and anti-radar missiles to aid in penetrating enemy defenses. 114. Earth Satellite. In addition to their obvious psychological pur­ pose, the artificial earth satellites launched by the USSR are intended to acquire data of scientific and military value. While it is too soon to say how much data is being acquired, the satellites launched to date are known to be providing new information on ionospheric effects and refractions at certain radio frequencies, and probably also on the effects of weightless flight and outer space radiation on equipment and living organisms. They are also providing data on pressure, temperature, and meteoric densities at extreme altitudes. Future Soviet earth satellites, which may be launched at any time, will provide additional scientific data contributing to both military and non-­military Soviet projects. A reconnaissance satellite, previously estimated for 1963–65, may be available considerably earlier. Space vehicles and space platforms are almost certainly included in Soviet planning. 115. Chemical and Biological Warfare. Current Soviet military doctrine recognizes the potentialities of CW and BW as adjuncts to nuclear and other weapons, and Soviet forces are thoroughly trained in the offen­ sive use of CW. A stockpile of CW agents is believed to have been main­ tained at least at World War II levels, and may have been increased. It probably consists primarily of such nerve gases as GA (Tabun) and GB (Sarin), as well as some standard agents such as mustard. One of the “V” series of nerve agents, far more persistent and toxic than the “G” series, may have been in production in the USSR since 1956; effective use would depend on Soviet solution of the problem of generating a proper aerosol for its dispersal.
