754  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
very same time you are insisting on this position in CFE and START, 
you are in the process of moving large numbers, hundreds of combat 
aircraft into this category that you insist be excluded from the limits.
If you say it’s naval, it doesn’t count. This is a commitment without 
a commitment, a limit without a limit, both here and in CFE. If I tried to 
sell this, I would get no further that the first burst of laughter.
Karpov: Let me say this, there may be only one solution. That air-
craft is not, has never been, and will not be a strategic system. We know 
that it has been your wish to have the TU–22M limited somehow in 
connection with the START treaty. We are ready to give you a unilateral 
commitment, even though it is not required. We are giving it in order to 
resolve other issues. The commitment would be not to give this aircraft 
the capability to operate at intercontinental distances. We are also ready 
to say we will not exceed a numerical limit on that aircraft. That we are 
ready to do with regard to an airplane that is not intercontinental and 
not related to strategic armaments. We want to do that and are ready to 
do that to ally fears and concerns.
Bartholomew: Let’s not repeat 15-­year-­old arguments. You know 
this is a problem to be solved. The question is whether you appreciate 
the problem to be solved, as we appreciated SLCMs as a problem to 
be solved. The issue is not inside or outside START. The issue is the 
form and content of the outside commitment. The form and content 
you propose is not a solution. The form does not give a politically bind-
ing commitment as we are prepared to do on SLCMs. The content omits 
refueling, and most important the number omits naval Backfire.
Karpov: I don’t understand why a letter by the Secretary of State 
on Tacit Rainbow is binding, but a letter by the Foreign Minister on the 
TU–22M is not.
Bartholomew: I will make you a proposal: we will make the SLCM 
deal a letter.
Karpov: Such a letter on Tacit Rainbow was given by Secretary 
Baker to Foreign Minister Shevardnadze. If you would like something 
like that on Backfire, we are ready to give it.
Bartholomew: To put Tacit Rainbow in the same category 
as Backfire makes me wonder if you want to solve this problem. 
Whether you like it or I like it, this is an important issue. The question 
is whether you are going to cooperate with us on Backfire, as we coop-
erated with you on SLCMs. In form or content you have not shown 
the effort to solve this problem. And you have not spoken at all on the 
problem of resubordination.
Karpov: After all, we proposed from the outset that CFE include 
naval armaments. So why don’t we stop this discussion and address 
this specific statement and what you need for that statement. What I 
said, and I am ready to confirm, with regard to Backfire, is that we
