Dominican Republic 503 downfall might not occur for weeks or even months but, on the other hand, the situation might become critical at any moment. The Vice President wondered whether the worst outcome of the situation in the Dominican Republic would not be a take-­over by the pro-Castro elements. He also wondered whether we were doing everything possible to support other elements. Mr. Dulles said the difficult question was that of leadership of moderate elements in the Dominican Republic. The vice president of the Republic might be able to assume power or the principal military officers might govern through a military junta. Many prominent anti-Trujillo Dominicans were in exile. Mr. Dillon said this government was following the situation in the Dominican Republic closely and intended to try to prevent seizure of power by any pro-Castro group. This would involve working closely with the OAS. The Vice President believed that we could not let Castro or a pro-Castro group take over the Dominican Republic even if we had to intervene in order to prevent such a takeover. Mr. Dillon felt that in order to intervene we would need an invitation. The Vice President feared that the old story was being repeated in the Dominican Republic; that is, the pro-Castro element was the only minority group with strong leadership and definite objectives. Mr. Dulles said there was a group in Venezuela which would like to move into the Dominican Republic and take over the government. Mr. Dillon believed the Castro element in the Dominican Republic was not strong enough to assume control of the government without support from Cuba. It was, accordingly, very important that the U.S. be prepared for rapid action. The Vice President agreed that it was very important that the U.S., if necessary, take rapid action to prevent any move by Castro to seize power in the Dominican Republic. Mr. Dulles said the situations in Haiti and Venezuela were being affected by the situations in Cuba and the Dominican Republic. Betancourt, it is reported, has made a deal with the army whereby he will abandon government by coalition, will rule Venezuela with his own party supported by the army, and will take action against the communist movement. However, it is possible that the communists know of his plans and may take action to thwart them. Mr. Dillon said there was one favorable aspect to the situation in the Caribbean. If Trujillo could be removed from power in the Dominican Republic while pro-Castro elements were prevented from seizing power in that country, our anti-Castro campaign throughout Latin America would receive a great boost. The Vice President agreed that getting rid of Trujillo would be a favorable development for us.4 4 In NSC Action 2218, taken at this meeting, the NSC: “Noted and discussed recent developments with regard to the situation in the Dominican Republic, with particular reference to the importance of seeking to prevent anti-Castro and anti-American elements from seizing power in the event of the collapse of the Trujillo regime.”
