242 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV Moreover because we would recognize its susceptibility we would be tempted to launch on warning thereby putting a “hair-­trigger” on our deterrence forces. In short, our ICBM force would become destabilizing. For this reason I believe it is urgent that we seriously explore alternatives so that we don’t drift into this situation by the Soviet threat developing before our response was ready. I am exploring a number of R&D and acquisition alternatives that will provide a timely solution to this problem. Accelerating the M–X is the major alternative but one in which I still have serious concerns because of the technical problems I see and the cost problems I expect to see. We will continue an intensive effort (DRE, AF, and DSB) to develop a technically acceptable MX program. In the meantime, we are pursuing at a conceptual level alternatives to MX. These concepts, if pursued, would entail the following programatic actions: 1. Expedite the TRIDENT II program. a. The TRIDENT II missile would be accelerated to allow an IOC of 1984. b. The advanced development phase could be run as a design competition between the TRIDENT contractors and the MX missile contractor(s). 2. Redirect the MX missile program. a. The MX missile would be a [less than 1 line not declassified] missile plus an additional stage [1 line not declassified]. It would also have a 1984 IOC. b. [1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified] c. [1 paragraph (3 lines) not declassified] 3. Redirect the MX missile basing program. a. The new MX missile would be put in some of the MM III silos, thus increasing the residual warheads after attack by a factor of three. b. The balance of the silos would be replaced with deep silos [2 lines not declassified] 4. Consider deployment of a “thin” ABM system. a. Complete development of the new light-­weight non-­nuclear interceptor. b. Install this system for a thin defense of one MM wing [less than 1 line not declassified] with an IOC of 1984. System would include PARS already there plus 100 interceptors (to be compatible with SALT). c. The deployed system could stop (at most) 100 RVs, but provides a base from which an effective ABM system could be made operational in a year or two from decision. d. Accelerate R&D in non-­conventional (Garwinian) “bloody-­ nose” defenses of individual silos as a backup to ABM deployment.
