September 18–December 16, 1978 467 B. If linkage cannot at this time include the West Bank, Sadat said, it should at least include Gaza. President Carter had noted that a separate Gaza arrangement had not been discussed at Camp David. Sadat claimed that he tried to make clear that in suggesting a linkage timetable in Gaza, he had sought to make a “concession.” He emphasized that Gaza is part of the area seized by the Israelis from Egypt and is also part of the Palestinian question. GOE would prefer joint West Bank/ Gaza negotiations, but if there is difficulty in getting West Bank talks underway, a start should be made with Gaza. This idea, he claimed, had commended itself to Callaghan, Schmidt and Giscard. Sadat wanted President Carter to know that if USG and Egypt give way to Israel on this point, i.e., without fixing early dates for negotiations on West Bank/Gaza or at least on Gaza, this will be detrimental both for Sadat and for President Carter in the area. He will not agree to sign a Sinai treaty, he repeatedly stated, without some such linkage. If that is to be the breaking point, so be it. He repeatedly stressed that in suggesting beginning negotiations with Gaza he was not introducing a new element. He was simply seeking to “facilitate” President Carter’s task. The Israelis, as President Carter is fully aware, do not want to go ahead. Bowing to their unwillingness, Sadat reiterated, will be “very grave” for him and for President Carter in the area. It will mean that the Sinai treaty is in effect a separate agreement. C. President Carter had also asked that Sadat contact King Hussein and the Saudis. Sadat had refused to do so at the present time. He had told President Carter that Prince Fahd had sent him a message, but that he had refused to receive it. He is trying to “punish” Hussein and the Saudis for “putting themselves in the other camp.” He intends to put all kind of “pressure” on Hussein and the Saudis so that they can “regain their reason.” D. He wished to emphasize to President Carter that Hussein will not join the negotiations, at least not for now. Perhaps after Hussein sees a successful effort in Gaza, he may do so. At the moment, in Sadat’s view, it is simply too profitable for Hussein to stay out. At one and the same time Hussein gets Baghdad Conference money7 and asks more questions of the U.S. E. Sadat said President Carter told him that the Israelis will not be ready before the end of 1979 to establish an autonomous self-governing body in the West Bank/Gaza. He, Sadat, had responded that if the Israelis are not ready, Egypt can wait. He could not envisage Sinai withdrawal steps in the absence of some similar West Bank/Gaza, or at least 7 According to a November 7 briefing given to Jidda Embassy officials by the Saudi Deputy Foreign Minister, the Baghdad Conference participants voted to extend $1.2 billion in aid to Jordan. See footnote 7, Document 91.
