3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 246 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI 6. Shcharanskiy himself was arrested two weeks after Lipavskiy’s March 1977 public confession and has, as you know, been held incommunicado ever since. We presume that part of Lipavskiy’s deal with the KGB has involved extensive testimony against Shcharanskiy. We do not know any specifics of this testimony. 7. Valentin Turchin, another prominent Soviet dissident who has since emigrated, told Embassy Moscow in late May 1977 of another possible basis for a Soviet charge of espionage against Shcharanskiy. Some time before, Shcharanskiy had compiled a list of refuseniks whose exit visas were denied on grounds they had done classified work in Soviet institutes. The specific institutes were listed. While Shcharanskiy did not use classified information in drawing up his list, Turchin felt he could be accused of espionage because he had shown the list to Westerners as well as Soviets. Shcharanskiy, of course, had extensive contacts with Western diplomats and correspondents during his two years of active campaigning for Jewish emigration and broader human rights concerns prior to his arrest. 8. One of Shcharanskiy’s many correspondent contacts, Bob Toth of the Los Angeles Times, was interrogated extensively by the KGB in June 1977 as a “witness” in connection with his relations with Shcharanskiy. Toth admitted to his interrogators that Shcharanskiy had given him lists of refuseniks, their places of employment, reasons for their visa denials, and information about alleged violations by Soviet authorities of Soviet law and the Helsinki accords. Toth signed the protocols drawn up after each interrogation, and was permitted to leave the USSR on 16 June. Embassy Moscow concluded (in EXDIS Moscow 8811 [8677], 16 June 1977)3 that “Toth’s interrogation was clearly aimed primarily at Anatoliy Shcharanskiy . . . The clear intent . . . is to show that Shcharanskiy is guilty of passing information—written and oral—in violation of Article 64 (treason) and perhaps Article 70 (anti-Soviet slander and activities) of the Russian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic Criminal Code.” 9. A further Soviet effort to link Toth, (and presumably Shcharanskiy thus indirectly,) to American intelligence surfaced in a 31 August 1977 Literaturnaya Gazeta article, which chronicled Toth’s alleged working relationship with DIA and the Pentagon, quoting from the alleged contents of a letter Toth received in Moscow in December 1976 from [2½ lines not declassified] —[6 lines not declassified] Then, after a long and convoluted paragraph on General Haig’s concern with the balance of NATO and Warsaw Pact forces, Litgaz again quotes from the alleged [less than 1 line 3 In telegram 8677 from Moscow, June 16, 1977, the Embassy described the Toth case in full. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770215–0455)
