558  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
begs the question. While the PRC alone cannot resolve the issue, it’s 
hard for us to imagine anything of higher priority for the agenda. In 
fact, discussions of lesser issues in the CG could well be idle so long as 
that basic issue remains unresolved.
A suggested agenda based around that central issue (and fleshed 
out below):
1. The Needs of National Security
A. The Basic PD–18 Criterion
B. Strategic Forces
C. NATO
D. Non-NATO
2. Affordability of Current Programs
A. Navy
B. Air Force
C. Army
3. Alternatives
As for 1A, PD–18 states that “the United States will maintain an 
overall balance of military power between the United States and its 
allies on the one hand and the Soviet Union and its allies on the other 
at least as favorable as that that now (August 24, 1977) exists.”4 The 
PRC might want to address our performance in that regard during the 
intervening year and a half, and we can supply some background mate-
rial to illuminate the issue. But it might also want to reconsider the 
policy itself, since it states only that the balance shall get no worse, but 
does not explicitly address the balance itself, or the possible need for a 
worldwide perception of a positive (rather than merely non-­negative) 
first derivative of the balance function over time.5
As for 1B, we can furnish the principals with a great variety of 
both static and dynamic indicators of the strategic balance, both now 
and in the future, and with all sorts of alternative assumptions as to 
both US and Soviet programs. While all that is essential background 
material, the larger issue has to do less with our own mathematical 
calculations of that balance than with how others perceive it. Essen-
tial equivalence—­which PD–18 adopts as a central policy—­is largely, if 
not entirely, perceptual.6 The group believes that an evaluation of that 
perception and its likely trend for the future is a most important issue 
4 The full text of PD–18 is printed as Document 31.
5 In the right margin next to this sentence, Brown drew a vertical line and wrote: “I 
agree—­this is the most important issue—­even if PRC can’t resolve it.”
6 In the right margin, Brown drew an arrow pointing to this sentence and wrote 
“largely, but not entirely.”
