Chapter 4, February–April 1990 657 111. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, April 20, 1990, 10:55–11:50 a.m. SUBJECT START PARTICIPANTS Bartholomew Karpov Afanasenko (interpreter) Omelichev Timbie (notetaker) Zolotov (interpreter) Karpov: I have one question while we wait for the interpreters. What is wrong with the distinguishability of non-­nuclear SLCMs from nuclear SLCMs? Bartholomew: Anything that takes us over the line on verification gives us a problem. Bartholomew: Let us begin with para 9 of your ALCM paper.2 We speak of exhibitions, your paper says demonstration. Is this a difference, or simply translation? Karpov: There is no difference, it is another interpretation. Bartholomew: In the same para, we say “confirms the distinguishing features,” and you have “allowing differences to be ascertained.” Karpov: This is again a question of translation. The translation was speedily done. Bartholomew: I understand. That is exactly why I am clarifying these points. Bartholomew: In para 10, can you confirm this is a continuing right? Karpov: What is a continuing right? Bartholomew: We are permitted 100 (our number is 115) heavy bombers converted for conventional roles. Over the life of the treaty some bombers could be converted into conventional bombers so long as others are taken out and retired, so the number never exceeds 100 or 115. Karpov and Omelichev: Da. Bartholomew: On para 12, there is a phrase “inability to carry nuclear arms.” This is new. Why has this been added? Karpov: The whole idea is that this bomber has been converted precisely so it cannot deliver nuclear weapons. Bartholomew: This language prejudges the procedures for conversion. Karpov: We say that beyond the 1600 there can be a certain number, say 100, that have been converted that once carried nuclear weapons but that now cannot. All we are doing is 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Under Secretary for Arms Control, International Security Affairs, Lot 01D127, 1969–1990 Subject Record of James P. Timbie, START Meetings (Bartholomew) April 1990. Secret. Drafted on April 20. The meeting took place in Bartholomew’s office. 2 Not found.
