370  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
CO–33.	
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the 
Office of West Coast Affairs (Coerr)1
 
Washington, April 7, 1960.
SUBJECT
Conversation Between the Secretary and President Lleras of Colombia: Role of the 
Military.
PARTICIPANTS
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 721.11/4–760. Confidential. Approved 
in the Office of the Secretary of State on April 13.
President Alberto Lleras Camargo
Ambassador Sanz de Santamaría of 
Colombia
Secretary Herter
Mr. Rubottom, ARA
Mr. Mann, E
Ambassador McIntosh
Mr. Bell, U/MSC
Mr. Mau, S/S-RO
Mr. Coerr, ARA/WST
President Lleras said that the Cuban revolution was fanning 
Colombian peasants “turbulent unrest”, not only by the allure of its 
land reform but also by its defeat of the Batista uniformed forces. 
The Colombian people know that after ten years of civil war the 
Colombian uniformed forces put down the guerillas, but that in Cuba 
the guerillas won quickly. The next ten years, he predicted, would see 
a “widespread flourishing of guerrilla forces in Colombia among the 
peasants—65 percent of the population—­who have nothing to lose”.
President Lleras said it was imperative that the United States re-­
orient its military missions in Latin America by instructing them to teach 
the Latin American military to concentrate on the new internal danger 
of guerrillas, rather than on the outdated external danger of aggression. 
The United States with its missiles will defend Latin American coun-
tries against extra-­continental attack. The Latin American countries’ 
internal security is in far greater danger than their territorial integrity, 
but the Latin American military, inspired by the United States military, 
are “so classic”. Ambassador Sanz commented that Latin American 
officers find it repugnant to think of their role as anything but interna-
tional war and are reluctant to think of themselves as policemen.
Mr. Rubottom agreed in the desirability of adjusting the United 
States military program in Latin America to give priority to internal 
security. He pointed out, however, that such an adjustment would pos-
sibly encounter opposition within the United States defense establish-
ment and very probably in Congress.
