Afghanistan 781 our Allies to accommodate them on this, it seems safe to predict that we will hear no more from the Soviets about negotiating a political settlement involving complete withdrawal. If the Soviets are serious, a little stalling on our part should produce additional indications that the Soviets are willing to take the steps which will make real negotiations possible. If not then we will have avoided giving ground in response to a Soviet ploy. 293. Letter From Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko to Secretary of State Muskie1 Moscow, June 27, 1980 Dear Mr. Secretary, I have carefully read your letter of June 5, which is a continuation of the exchange of views we started in Vienna.2 As we agreed at that time the purpose of this exchange is to promote the improvement of Soviet-U.S. relations, to seek solution on a wide range of bilateral and international problems of mutual interest. Now about the specific problem you raised in your letter: that of Afghanistan. As you know, a few days ago we withdrew from Afghanistan, in agreement with the Government of the DRA, some Soviet military units. It was done in view of the fact that the present situation does not make it necessary to maintain in Afghanistan our military contingent of previous strength. It goes without saying that the Soviet Union will continue to render necessary assistance to Afghanistan against any action aimed from outside at depriving it of independence and territorial integrity. You must be well aware of that, though, from the report by L.I. Brezhnev at the recent plenary meeting of the Central Committee of our Party and from the resolution on international questions adopted by that meeting in connection with the report of the Minister of Foreign Affairs on international situation and foreign policy of the Soviet Union. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 61, Soviet Exchanges: 1/79–10/80. Secret; Sensitive. The letter was transmitted in telegram 175021 to Moscow, July 2. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 61, Soviet Exchanges: 1/79–10/80) 2 See Document 284.
