1024
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
deeply resented the fact that we had first approached the Germans.2
They feel that if any deal is to be made it must be struck with them and not im-
posed upon them by the Northern powers. They feel that by going to the
Germans first, we relegate them to second class status.3 On the other hand,
we owe the Germans the consideration due a close ally—particularly
where major economic interests may be at stake.
I therefore recommend (with the concurrence of Smith and State),
that you simply make clear to Schmidt that we are still working on de-
vising some mutually acceptable solution to this problem, that we have
some new ideas, and that Smith will be coming to Bonn to discuss
them.
If you approve this strategy, your points to Schmidt would simply
be:
—We are deeply concerned about recent events in Argentina,
which point strongly to a regional race towards acquiring nuclear
weapons capability.4
—We (Germany and the US) share a heavy responsibility to do ev-
erything possible to avoid such a development.
—This is too important an issue for the US to ignore, but at the
same time, we are determined that it not sour our relations with the
FRG.
—We are developing some new ideas—which protect Germany’s
economic interests. When they are fully developed, Gerry Smith will be
coming to Bonn to discuss them with you.
2 The Carter administration scheduled a meeting between Christopher and a FRG
Delegation headed by Ambassador Peter Hermes to discuss the nuclear issue on Feb-
ruary 10 and 11. Christopher arranged to “personally brief” Ambassador Pinheiro about
the meeting. (Memorandum from Tuchman to Brzezinski and Aaron, February 10; Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South, Pastor Country File, Box
2, Brazil, 1–2/77) During his meetings with Hermes, Christopher said that the Carter ad-
ministration believed that “it is urgent that we halt the transfer of sensitive technologies
leading to acquisition of weapons usable material.” Hermes replied that “proliferation is
best met by development of adequate safeguards, not by refusal to supply sensitive tech-
nologies, control of which in any event is uncertain given relatively wide knowledge of
basic elements of sensitive technologies in question (particularly reprocessing).” The
Federal Republic of Germany, Hermes stressed, was “obligated by its agreement with
Brazil” to supply such materials. (Telegram 32301 to Bonn and Paris, February 12; Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 24, German
Federal Republic, 1–3/77) Vance briefed Carter on Christopher’s discussion with Hermes
on February 11. (Memorandum from Vance to Carter, February 11; ibid.)
3 The CIA reported that “Brazil sees US efforts to halt the spread of nuclear
weapons technology as a deliberate attempt to impede the country’s economic and tech-
nological development” while its military leaders “firmly believe that a sine qua non of
great power status is the ability to explode a nuclear device.” Predicting a coming decline
in U.S. influence in Brazil, the CIA suggested that Brazil was now “willing to take eco-
nomic risks in its relations with the US on the nuclear issue.” (Intelligence Memorandum
RP–M–77–10022, February 11; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
North/South, Pastor Country File, Box 2, Brazil, 1–2/77)
4 Carter drew a check mark in the right-hand margin next to this paragraph.
