Afghanistan 293 104. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State1 Islamabad, December 28, 1979, 0700Z 15303. For the Secretary. Subject: Afghanistan: Reassuring Pakistan. 1. (S)—Entire text. This is an action message. 2. Like the rest of us, the Pakistanis are still in the process of assessing the implications of the latest events in Kabul. FonSec Shahnawaz this morning gave me preliminary GOP reaction about as follows: the Soviet troops came in during last few days at request of Amin, but Sovs then doublecrossed Amin. Sovs have now thrown into the political arena the last elements of alternative (leftist) leadership, and it remains to be seen whether these Parchamists can maintain the loyalty of the army, despite their use of the label “true Khalq” to describe themselves. It is “inevitable” that the army will suffer severe splits despite Sov milit pressures. It is [clear?] the new Parchamists are even more puppets of the Sovs than previous leaders, and will be obedient servants of Moscow. There will likely be an initial period of moderation, as after takeovers by Taraki and Amin, but later on Babrak and co. will revert to their natural Communist extremism. The Pushtoonistan issue, on which Babrak earlier was more militant than Taraki or Amin, will later on become even more of an issue than it has been, and Pakistan expects severe pressures along border and Afghan subversion in NWFP and Baluchistan. 3. Our Pak sources suggest, inter alia, that a 30/31 Dec. visit to Kabul by Fon Advisor Shahi will be scrubbed. 4. USG policy makers should consider advisability very quick message to Paks, in next few days. Obviously broader and longer-term reactions will have to await fundamental USG decisions, but now is the time for giving the Paks whatever can be given to reassure them of U.S. concern and U.S. determination to prevent further Soviet expansion in this, or other, regions. 5. Obviously from my limited perspective I cannot make firm judgements on the elements that might be included in any message, but here are my suggestions. 6. Several avenues are open for us. One would be for me to be authorized, specifically, to reaffirm to the Government of Pakistan, at the highest levels, our continuing commitment to Pakistan’s integrity 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P800040–2162, N800001–0001. Secret; Nodis; Niact Immediate.
