723.2515/2076: Telegram
[Document 217]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 29, 1926—1 p.m.
30. Both Chile and Peru have now accepted this Government’s good
offices. Original offer, which has never been modified, embodied express
understanding40 “that pending the consideration of any adjustment other
than by the celebration of a plebiscite the authority of the Plebiscitary
Commission and the general arrangement made by it for the holding of a
plebiscite under the terms of the award shall be maintained unimpaired.”
The present difficulty arises from the different interpretations the two
parties give to this construction. Peru’s construction is that it imposes an
immediate suspension of all plebiscitary proceedings including registration.
Chile’s construction is precisely the opposite; that is, it guarantees that all
proceedings, including registration, shall continue. Neither interpretation
corresponds to the true intent and purpose of the offer which was, as it
states, to the effect that Commission’s authority and the general
arrangement for holding plebiscite should be maintained unimpaired so that
it might be held should the negotiations prove fruitless. Nothing was said in
the offer about suspension of plebiscitary activities, the Secretary of State
having assumed that the proceedings in the plebiscitary area would, in event
of acceptance of good offices, readily be adjustable to needs of the new
situation by agreement on part of Chile and Peru. This agreement to be
carried out through proper instructions to be given by Governments of Chile
and Peru to their respective delegates on the Commission.
Accordingly, after receipt of acceptance of good offices, the Secretary of
State suggested to both Governments that they issue appropriate
instructions to their respective delegates looking to suspension of
proceedings during the negotiations. It will be appreciated, therefore, that
the only question remaining open now is whether, all things being taken
