1188 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Prime Minister Begin said that second, the average reader will think we have agreed to abolish the Continuing Committee. The President asked why. Prime Minister Begin said that since Camp David originally says that it will deal with the 1967 displaced persons. President Carter said he believes that the last sentence includes that. This is not a departure from Camp David. Prime Minister Begin asked if it were clear. The President said yes. Prime Minister Begin said that at Camp David, Israel said they would accept a reasonable number of persons. The President said 100,000! Prime Minister Begin said several tens of thousands. On zeros, he never exaggerates. (laughter) The President said: Okay, several tens of thousands. Prime Minister Begin said that he will think it over. There are absorption problems; but he will think it over. It is a human problem. He would like to do it (expand the Continuing Committee?), but not make it look as though we are abolishing the Continuing Committee’s main task of dealing with the displaced people of 1967. On the Continuing Committee, there are two possibilities: to be very specific or put it in general terms. He prefers the latter, since it is not in existence yet. Otherwise, it would be putting the cart before the horse: “economic”; “detailed negotiations”; “water.” It would be better to agree on: “matters of common concern and cooperation”—that’s enough—“are referred to the Continuing Committee.” Maybe we can put further details in abeyance for a while. A partial detailing, with others left out, would leave the impression that our work is not finished. “Matters of common concern” is good. “Coordination will be required, etc.” First of all, we have to reside on basic principles, not on this paper. The United States would be in the Continuing Committee (according to the U.S. paper): is this a change of Camp David? The President said no. Prime Minister Begin said: really? The President said: well, go ahead and talk. Prime Minister Begin said that he does not see it in the Camp David agreement. If it is agreed, then all right. The question is, why is the U.S. needed in this Continuing Committee? The U.S. is not in all committees, is it? Minister Kubersky said that in the negotiations, the U.S. is in all committees. It is a full partner. Prime Minister Begin asked: in all committees?
