548 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 209. Draft Letter From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan) to Iranian President Bani-Sadr1 Bern, March 13, 1980 Dear Mr. President: I am taking the liberty of sending you this personal and private message through our mutual friend, Mr. Hector Villalon. The only copy of this letter is in the possession of President Carter. Because we have reached a critical point in the process of trying to peacefully resolve the differences which face our countries, I thought it was important that I convey my thoughts to you personally and in complete frankness. I would welcome your frank reaction to these suggestions. I was pleased to receive your message of March 10th that the 50 American hostages would be transferred to the custody of the Iranian government within fifteen days.2 I conveyed this message to President Carter, and he considered it an encouraging development. I believe that we share a single objective: to put an end to the present crisis and to build a new relationship with your country and government based on equality and mutual respect. But quite frankly, the possibility of having such a relationship in the future will not be possible unless all our hostages (countrymen being held in Iran) are returned safely to our country at an early date. From the outset, President Carter has pursued a policy of patience and restraint. He did this not only to insure the safe ultimate release of our hostages, but also to create an atmosphere after their release which would allow our respective governments to build a new relationship which recognizes the new realities created by the Iranian revolution. This continues to be our objective and our hope. However, the atmosphere of restraint created and sustained by President Carter [cannot last forever] [is under heavy mounting criticism]. A growing number of political figures and journalists who have supported President Carter’s policy of restraint are now advocating extreme measures [as a result of the Commission’s departure from Tehran]. Despite this growing frustration, President Carter has not abandoned his policy of restraint. As soon as we learned of the Commis- 1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 34, Iran 3/80. Confidential. The editor transcribed the text from the handwritten original. Bracketed material represents Jordan’s drafting alternatives. All brackets, except the last, are in the original. This letter is partially quoted in Jordan’s memoir. (Jordan, Crisis, p. 195) No final signed copy of this letter or indication it was sent has been found. 2 See footnote 4, Document 207.
