Comprehensive Test Ban
323
II. Recent US and Soviet CTB Statements
The US has long declared its support of the goal of an adequately
verified prohibition of nuclear testing and has undertaken commit-
ments in treaties such as the Limited Test Ban Treaty (LTBT), Non-
Proliferation Treaty (NPT), and Threshold Test Ban Treaty (TTBT) to
work toward that goal. Since assuming office, the President has on sev-
eral occasions strongly expressed his intention to move immediately
and aggressively toward cessation of all nuclear weapons testing.
Advocacy of a complete cessation of nuclear weapons testing has
long been a central feature of Soviet declaratory foreign policy. A recent
public declaration of this policy was contained in the September 23
speech of Foreign Minister Gromyko before the UNGA3 and a Soviet
memorandum on disarmament4 which was subsequently circulated as
a UNGA document. The two statements were notable in that they con-
veyed the impression that verification measures beyond national tech-
nical means, including some limited form of on-site inspection, might
be negotiable. This position had been signaled to US Ambassador
Stoessel last Spring by Gromyko and one of his deputies in conversa-
tions which also hinted at some flexibility in the established Soviet po-
sition that all nuclear powers would have to participate in a CTB.5 A
draft CTB Treaty tabled by the Soviets at the UNGA in November con-
tains a provision for “voluntary” acceptance of on-site inspection,6 but
does not extend the scope of prohibition to include PNEs.
III. Historical Background
The concept of nuclear test bans as measures independent of more
comprehensive disarmament arrangements dates from the middle
1950s when first India and later the Soviets proposed test bans that did
3 Gromkyo actually spoke on September 28, 1976. He said that “nuclear weapons
testing should be stopped everywhere and by all. This would put an end to the qualita-
tive improvement of those weapons.” He also charged that “the start of negotiations on
this question is being unjustifiably delayed. The problem here is not the absence of objec-
tive conditions—–they have long existed—–but the unwillingness of some nuclear
Powers to begin negotiations.” (Documents on Disarmament, 1976, pp. 643–650)
4 On September 28, 1976, the Soviet Union introduced a resolution at the UN Gen-
eral Assembly that claimed it was “prepared, as it has been in the past, to conduct negoti-
ations on the most radical disarmament measures, going even so far as general and com-
plete disarmament.” Among other measures, the resolution called for “the prohibition of
all nuclear-weapon tests. This problem,” the Soviets contended, “should be tackled
without waiting for the outcome of negotiations on complete nuclear disarmament.”
(“Soviet Memorandum on Questions of Ending the Arms Race and Disarmament [Ex-
tract],” September 28, 1976, Documents on Disarmament, 1976, pp. 631–641)
5 The Gromyko-Stossel conversation occurred on April 12, 1976 and is reported in
telegram 5682 from Moscow, April 13, 1976; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D760143–0740.
6 The proposal is available in telegram 279503 to Colombo, November 13, 1976; Na-
tional Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D760425–0034)
