1957  1393
relaxation of our travel ban on correspondents for Communist China if 
that should take place.
On a hurried reading of the draft press release I am somewhat 
struck by the word “experiment”. It appears in it several times. Would 
perhaps “trial period” be preferable?
Hurriedly yours,
U. Alexis Johnson
818.	 Letter 72 from Clough to Johnson1
Letter No. 72
Washington, August 2, 1957
Dear Alex:
We have just received your letter of July 26 with your recommen­
dation against mentioning at Geneva any partial relaxation which may 
take place in our ban on travel to Communist China. The results of 
the meeting to which I referred in my letter of July 18 were inconclusive 
as you will see from the enclosed memorandum of conversation. The 
Department has just written to all news organizations which maintain 
at least one full-­time correspondent abroad, inquiring whether they 
would station a correspondent in China if it were possible to do so. It 
is hoped on the basis of the replies to reach a more realistic estimate 
of the number of American correspondents who might be stationed in 
Communist China on a more or less permanent basis. The matter will 
then be discussed further with the press.
Wang’s comments on the Secretary’s speech have been paral­
leled by other Chinese Communist statements, notably a speech to 
the National Peoples’ Congress by Chang Han-­fu (copy enclosed). 
Judging from these statements I would expect Wang to maintain his 
rather hard line at the next meeting. We have just received a report 
from a highly sensitive source to the effect that Mao Tse-­tung in his 
speech of February 27 stated that the most appropriate time to estab­
lish diplomatic relations with the United States would be during the 
third 5-­year plan (1962–1967), since the disparity between the two 
countries in economic power would be considerably reduced by that 
time. However, he added that the Formosa problem would have to be 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Drafted by Clough and Osborn. A copy was sent to Martin.
