648 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 Mr. Cutler said the best time to move would be in the evening. The diplomats could be picked up outside the Embassy. Mr. Aaron observed that 30 or more are reported to be living inside the Embassy. The Vice President said he thought the evening would be the best time. The Attorney General agreed, but added that he saw no real problem with the diplomats themselves. It was earlier agreed that we would not grant immediate asylum to any of the diplomats, but they need 24 hours at least to get out of the country. That could be from 3 o’clock today until midnight tomorrow night. He said he disagreed with Dr. Brzezinski only if there were armed resistance. He did not think it would be advisable to storm the Embassy. Dr. Brzezinski wondered if the Embassy could not be saturated with tear gas. It should be done quickly so no siege could develop. The Deputy Secretary of Defense said he agreed with Dr. Brzezinski. A prolonged seige would be the worst possible scenario. Mr. Jordan asked if those with weapons would not be in violation of the law. The Attorney General said that possession of weapons within the Embassy at this time and until the deadline for departure had expired was not illegal. The President asked what our position would be if we called the Chargé to the State Department and advised him to depart and he said he needed to go back to the Embassy to get some papers together. The Attorney General said we would permit him to go to the Embassy. We cannot violate the Embassy premises until the expiration of the 24-hour notice. Presumably, if we broke relations and allowed only an hour to comply, we could do everything necessary. However, this would be contrary to traditional diplomatic law and practice. The President wondered what would prevent him from going back to the Embassy and barricading himself inside. Mr. Powell said that he was not a very gutsy individual, and it seemed less likely that he would do it than some others. Secretary Vance said that the FBI had had experience with situations of this kind over the years. He had faith in their experience and ability to get people out of buildings. Mr. Claytor said the FBI could starve them out, talk them out, freeze them out. But that would take 2–3 days which would give the militants the opportunity to use threats against the hostages. This situation was very different from the usual siege type situation. Mr. Powell said he was not sure we would look inept if we cut off the Embassy utilities and if they barricaded themselves in against
