United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  35
subsidiaries of governments, whether the Bank would lend for housing 
and other non-­productive purposes, and similar questions. He added 
that any international agreement on a charter for the Bank should 
be reached outside the forthcoming meeting of foreign ministers in 
Washington, but within the OAS.7 With respect to a suggestion that the 
OAS ask the Inter-American Economic and Social Council (IAECOSOC) 
to draft the charter, the Chairman said that the drafting was a task for 
specially qualified financial experts rather than the usual delegates to 
IAECOSOC.
Mr. Dillon agreed the drafting of a charter should not be done by 
the staff of IAECOSOC, although it could be done under the aegis of 
that organization. The drafting should be done by specially designated 
representatives of governments, including ad hoc financial experts. 
Ambassador Randall8 commented that no difficulty was expected in 
IAECOSOC, since the United States had already made clear its view 
that the drafting should be done by a specially qualified group.
7 The Foreign Ministers of the American Republics met in Washington, September 
23–24, 1958, to confer informally about measures to strengthen economic cooperation, 
including the establishment of an inter-American development bank. At the meeting, 
U.S. representatives took the initiative in obtaining agreement that the Inter-American 
Economic and Social Council (IA–ECOSOC) should convene a specialized commit-
tee to draft articles for the new institution. For text of the Communiqué on this sub-
ject approved at the meeting, see Department of State Bulletin, October 13, 1958, 
pp. 575–576.
8 Harold M. Randall, U.S. Representative to the IA–ECOSOC.
ETA–10.	
Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs (Rubottom) to Milton S. Eisenhower1

Washington, November 19, 1958.
Dear Milton:
Three draft replies to your letter of October 27 2 have been over-
taken by the swift march of events. Moreover, I’ve had difficulty 
consulting with some of the officials concerned with economic and 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 398.14/11–1958. Confidential and 
Personal. Source text is a carbon copy bearing Rubottom’s typed name.
2 Not found in Department of State files.
