Arms Control and Disarmament  1595
3. Nonetheless, it would seem inevitable that the U.S. must now 
withdraw or recess from further discussions leading to acceptance of 
a specific control system until further technical information is at hand 
that will permit definition of capability of the system in the face of 
possible concealment through underground and outer space testing. 
Whether the withdrawal is in the form of a break or recess depends 
upon the political advantages of dwelling on the veto issue as opposed 
to leaving a grain of hope that the U.S. has not abandoned the possibil­
ity of agreement of an adequate safeguarded inspection plan.
4. Despite the negativeness of a withdrawal of the Geneva discus­
sions, I believe that it is possible to counteract this impression to some 
extent by working toward a positive program:
a. Propose an agreement (possibly through the U.N.) that all 
nuclear powers restrict future testing of nuclear weapons in such a way 
as to avoid further build-­up of radioactive contamination in the atmo­
sphere, i.e. underground or at a sufficient distance from the earth.
Because of the unresolved differences of technical opinion between 
Los Alamos and Livermore on the ability to get adequate diagnostic 
information from underground testing, it would appear desirable to 
have an early technical examination of this problem before proposing 
agreement on underground testing.
b. Consideration should be given to proposing a cooperative 
research and development program, including U.S., U.K., and USSR, 
which is designed to further determine effects of nuclear weapons 
under different geophysical environments and the development of 
improved equipments for detection of nuclear detonations in such 
environments. There may be military security aspects that would limit 
such cooperation, i.e. the need to reveal design information in order to 
determine detectability, but it is believed that there will be adequate 
opportunity for a cooperative program without serious compromise of 
security information. If such a cooperative program were to be seri­
ously considered, it would have to be developed in some detail before 
final decision on such a proposal.
5. I feel that withdrawal from Geneva coupled with the two pos­
itive approaches indicated above will avert a good deal of the pessi­
mism that would attend the failure of the Geneva conference. It could 
be pointed out that although more work needs to be done to estab­
lish the capabilities of detection systems, the U.S. would not be willing 
regardless of the outcome of such tests to accept a veto by the USSR 
over the right of inspection of unidentified events. However, it could be 
pointed out that the U.S. believes that some of the Soviet concerns over 
inspection could be mitigated by improvement of the detection system 
to reduce the number of on-­site inspections required to identify events 
as natural or artificial. Through a cooperative research and develop­
ment program it may be possible for the U.S., U.K., and USSR to draw 
closer together in defining a system that the Soviets would have suffi­
cient confidence in as to overcome their insistence on the right of veto.
DB
