Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 we imply either final failure in seeking restraint by others, or that we have concluded our goal was misguided. G. Eastern Mediterranean: Progress on Cyprus is needed, both for the sake of Greek-Turkish rapprochement, including Greek reintegration into NATO, and to avoid a congressional backlash that could endanger our Turkish security assistance package. Turkey’s economic difficulties are profound, and could at some point create a political crisis that would be damaging to our interests. Our own ability to respond is limited, and we will continue to urge our European allies to think creatively about ways to form ad hoc multilateral arrangements that could complement IMF support.32 This is a part of a broader problem: how best to support financially troubled important upper tier LDC’s and weaker European nations. The IMF itself will bear an increasing load. We face an important effort next year to gain congressional authorization and perhaps appropriation of some $5 billion for our share of an agreed 50 percent IMF quota increase, unless we decide to defer this request until the following year. H. Refugees: We plan to introduce new legislation that will simplify existing authorities and expand the ceiling for “foreseeable” refugees, thus reducing the pressure on the Attorney General’s parole authority.33 I believe we should appoint a high-level Refugee Coordinator to focus interagency actions, so that the issue receives the priority concern that it deserves.34 The Select Commission on Immigration and Refugee Policy, mandated by the Congress last September, should get under way early next year.35 Its terms of reference will be very broad. Its report, due October 1, 1980, offers an opportunity to pull together a more coherent way of managing this complex and politically charged area.36 32 The President underlined “complement IMF support.” In the left-hand margin next to this sentence, the President wrote “Guadeloupe item—not bypassing IMF” and drew an arrow from this comment to the sentence.
