498 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Your Administration has significantly increased foreign aid. The biggest increase has been in multilateral aid; this makes sense because one US dollar here mobilizes three dollars from other donors. You have also improved the quality of aid by directing concessional development loans and PL 480 more clearly to the needs of poor people in poor countries—leaving hard loans to meet the needs of middle-income countries and SSA to meet political needs. This maximizes the amount of concessional aid available for the poor. (U) We have moved toward the developing countries’ views about the Common Fund, although it’s not yet clear whether this will result in agreement.8 (U) North-South oratorical tensions persist, and this will continue for some time. But US substantive policies toward LDC’s have improved and this should be reflected in these countries’ attitudes, as well as prospects. (U) Our main North-South task in the next two years will be to continue these policies. The most important innovation may be creation of the Foundation for International Technical Cooperation with developing countries announced in your Caracas speech.9 The Ford and Rockefeller Foundations are so impressed that they have said they might contribute $10 million.10 (U) All this may have only a limited political pay-off, at least in the short run; aid recipients are not noted for their gratitude. But it will have a lot to do with what happens to a good many human beings— and thus with whether your effort to restore moral purpose to US foreign policy succeeds. (U) 4. Conclusion. A common thread runs through this memo: Your foreign policy achievements to date have been considerable—more than most Presidents can count in their first two years; ultimate success rests on continuing these policies in the next two years. (U) But here is the dilemma: Success of your foreign policy also rests on your anti-inflation program achieving its goals. This will probably, as I suggested after the London Summit, have to be our central task for the next several years: Like European countries and Japan in the early 1970’s, we will have to stick to tight fiscal and monetary policies, de- 8 See footnote 8, Document 99. 9 Reference is to the President’s March 29 speech before the Venezuelan Congress. In it, the President commented: “For the rest of this century, the greatest potential for growth is in the developing world. To become more self-reliant, developing nations need to strengthen their technological capabilities. To assist them, I am proposing a new United States foundation for technological collaboration.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book I, p. 621) For the full text of the President’s remarks, see ibid., pp. 619–623. 10 In the right-hand margin, the President drew an arrow to this sentence and wrote: “Let’s pursue aggressively.”
