793.00/48: Telegram [Document 638] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State PEKING, June 26, 1925—4 p.m. [Received June 26—1:25 p.m.] 249. My 247, June 24, 6 p.m. 1. Representatives of Washington Conference powers are today sending following identic telegram to respective Governments in reference to identic note addressed to them by Chinese Government under date of June 24th. Translation: “The representatives concerned limited themselves to acknowledging the receipt of the note in question stating that they were transmitting this document to their respective Governments. They are unanimous in thinking that this note responds especially to the immediate needs of the internal situation. In the reply to be made they consider that it would be opportune to recall that the Conference for the Revision of the Tariff should assemble in the near future. Likewise the Governments should propose the hastening of the arrival of the Extraterritoriality Commission which alone is capable of studying the question. They should state moreover that the abolition of extraterritoriality must be dependent on equality of rights between Chinese and foreigners. It is understood that the reestablishment of order is an indispensable preliminary. The representatives concerned request identic instructions.” 2. As I expressed myself generally at meeting of representatives of Washington Conference powers I consider that we should take advantage of opportunity afforded by reply to Chinese Government’s note aforementioned to record and give publicity to the other side of the shield; that, while reaffirming principles and policies of Washington Conference and reassuring Chinese of our desire to go forward along that line as soon as [may be], we should clearly indicate the practical difficulties involved and the necessity for facing facts rather than fancies in the request which the note presents for a readjustment of the treaty relations between China and the friendly powers. In my opinion our reply should frankly express the hope that the Chinese Government while demanding additional sovereign rights will commence seriously to realize the sovereign responsibilities which the possession of those rights entails.
