Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 3. negative measures and positive statements or moves to encourage favorable trends 4. multilateral and bilateral approaches V. Potential Risks in Human Rights Policy A. Possible consequences of impinging on sovereignty sensitivities of individual countries 1. Strained US relations with regime leaders, with possible negative impact on other US national interests 2. Opportunities for regime leaders to arouse popular nationalistic support for resistance to foreign interference 3. Possible counterproductive results of US response leading to more severe repression B. Possible negative consequences for human rights efforts generally 1. Widespread loss of faith in human rights efforts if expectations are raised too high in this relatively intractable area and results are meager 2. Loss of impact of public statements if employed too frequently, with the US ultimately ignored as a tiresome (and ineffective) international scold 3. Danger that authoritarian regimes in a region, or around the world, will join forces, especially at the UN and OAS, to resist large-scale, across-the-board human rights campaign 4. Inhibiting effect on whole effort if one or two major fiascos occur—such as replacement of authoritarian regime by one more repressive following US criticism C. Problem of inconsistencies in US responses 1. Likely pressure for US to be obviously even-handed in treatment of human rights violations in strong and in weak countries, in left and in right regimes, in allied and in adversary states 2. Difficulty of demonstrating even-handedness if quiet diplomacy is used in some cases and publicized approach is used in others of an apparently similar nature 3. Use of argument about inevitable inconsistencies (“lack of balance,” “double standard”) as excuse for US not taking action in this field at all D. Risks of inaction 1. Continued erosion of politically valuable US image as supporter of freedom everywhere 2. Injury to US interests and loss of US influence in a country whenever its authoritarian regime, with which the US is identified, is swept away 3. Loss of opportunities to identify with future leadership elements in many countries 4. Weakened US posture in ideological contest with totalitarian adversaries
