Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX need for them is obvious in view of heightening tensions within the Soviet Bloc and heightening tensions in our own relations with the Soviets. Chto delat’?5—Gronouski and Ferguson understand the need to work rapidly to build up more active and solid support for the radios in Congress. So does Jan Nowak, who is working wisely and well on this objective. Within the executive branch we need to call OMB to heel. The idea of cutting out nationality broadcasts at the very point when we are working to develop a long-range program for increased U.S. Government attention to this field is incongruous. I suggest we take a number of steps, systematically, to persuade/press OMB to be less arbitrary in its approach to radio budgeting. The best defense is to go on the offensive; I suggest: • As part of our current Soviet nationalities exercise in the SCC we should get strong endorsement6 for the concept of expanding broadcasting to non-Russians, expanding research to back it up, and expanding personnel so that all these tasks can be performed effectively and sustained over time. That we arrange for the BIB to prepare strong documentation on the policy significance of the radios, drawing on State and our own staff as sources of policy guidance, and authorize them to present this as justification for increased budgetary requests for FY 1980 and further increases in subsequent years. That you speak to McIntyre on the importance of the radios, getting backing from the President if you consider it desirable.7 That I have a formal session with key senior staffers of OMB sometime in September, before the 1980 budgetary process goes into the home stretch, to brief them on our approach to the radios and the policy importance we attach to them. • That we supplement what is being done in respect to Congress by BIB, by the radios and by Jan Nowak and others, by discreet efforts of our own. 5 “What to do?” 6 Brzezinski underlined “strong endorsement” and wrote in the margin “from whom?” An unidentified staff member (possibly Bartholomew or Inderfurth) answered by writing “SCC.” 7 Brzezinski wrote “give me a brief” in the margin below this recommendation.
