Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980 801 161. Minutes of a Cabinet Meeting1 Washington, December 3, 1980, 11 a.m.–12:10 p.m. The seventy-fourth meeting of the Cabinet was called to order by the President at 11:00 a.m. The Vice President and all members of the Cabinet were present except Secretary Goldschmidt, who was represented by Deputy Secretary Beckam. In addition, the following people were in attendance: Rosalynn Carter Sol Linowitz Max Cleland Gus Speth Douglas Costle Stansfield Turner Roland Freeman Jack Watson Rex Granum Anne Wexler Thomas Higgins Eugene Eidenberg Bruce Kirschenbaum 1. The President opened the meeting by expressing his gratitude to the members of the Cabinet for their work during his administration. He commented on their fine working relationship, and said they had made a significant contribution to the country. He said the transition had been both graceful and generous so far, and mentioned that his meeting with President-elect Reagan had gone well.2 —The President reminded the Cabinet that this administration still had the authority and responsibility to run the government and urged them not to be timid in exercising that authority. —The President encouraged the Cabinet to compile an accurate historical record of their time in office, and to be aggressive in disseminating that record. —The President also reported his plans to return to Plains, Georgia, after the inauguration. He said he and his family would make their home there, although he would spend some portion of his time in Atlanta, where the Presidential papers would be housed until a library is built. —The President told the Cabinet they would be receiving information prepared by Lloyd Cutler, Counsel to the President, concerning the identification and handling of Presidential papers. 1 Source: Carter Library, Vertical File, Cabinet Meeting Minutes, 12/21/78– 12/13/80. No classification marking. The President wrote “ok. J” in the top right-hand corner of the first page of the minutes. 2 The President met with Reagan in the Oval Office on November 20 from 2:07 until 3:32 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) For Carter’s recollection of the meeting, see White House Diary, pp. 486–487.
