Yugoslavia 837 Vance said that the statement is being used as a basis for negotiating a Declaration of Principles among the relevant states. There is nothing inconsistent between the statement and our mediating role. Unfortunately, the parties are still far apart on the questions of the Palestinians and the Gaza Strip. It is still too early to say that direct negotiations have failed and we feel that we should continue to support this approach. In this connection we invited Prime Minister Begin, and President Sadat agrees with this. (The Secretary said that we would inform Yugoslavia about the results of the Begin visit.)9 We must pursue the present course until its succeeds or fails, and we should know soon about the outcome. If it fails we believe that the Waldheim proposal for a wider meeting within the context of the United Nations but separate from the Geneva Conference, is a worthwhile possibility. It should, however, be seen as a preparation for the Geneva Conference. The Secretary said that he had discussed this question last week with Secretary General Waldheim. Minic said he agreed with this assessment and Vance said that he did not see a third alternative as being necessary yet. Secretary Minic then said that he had been very satisfied with this discussion and felt that this personal contact was very useful and helpful. He suggested that in addition to the messages between the two Presidents, he and Vance write to each other if there are matters which they feel can be dealt with at that level. Secretary Vance said that is an excellent idea which he wholeheartedly supports. Minic then invited Secretary Vance to come to Yugoslavia as he had previously promised and Secretary Vance said that is a promise he intended to carry out with great pleasure. 9 In telegram 114888 to multiple posts, May 5, the Department provided talking points for briefing of host governments on Begin and Dayan’s visit to the United States. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780192–0898) In telegram 3633 from Belgrade, May 12, the Embassy reported Eagleburger’s conversation on May 10 with Yugoslav Foreign Ministry Assistant Secretary Komatina, in which the Ambassador briefed the Yugoslav official on the visit. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780203–0446)
