Romania Mr. Habib said that had the PLO and the Syrians accepted the earlier proposals of the US we and they would be in Geneva by now. Macovescu replied that the Syrians and Palestinians are now analyzing that situation. Mr. Habib suggested that the Romanians could be helpful in influencing that analysis. Macovescu then reiterated what he had told President Carter that since the PLO and the Syrians want a conference that US should press the Israelis for some concessions to Sadat to bring the conference about. The Secretary said that it is our view that we should continue to strive for a Geneva conference and discourage separate agreements. This Administration has stood for a comprehensive negotiated settlement and continues to do so, realizing that within a comprehensive settlement separate peace arrangements would be possible. The Secretary said that it is difficult now to determine how this new element (the Sadat visit to Israel) will affect the timing of the preparations. The Secretary said that he is strongly in favor of having such a conference well prepared in advance. Macovescu replied that he was very glad to hear that the US still favors a Geneva conference and a comprehensive settlement; that there are rumors that the US was behind the Egyptian-Israeli meeting and that the US supported separate settlements. The Secretary replied forcefully that the US for years has been saying that we wanted the parties to the dispute to talk to each other. Naturally we feel that the Sadat visit to Jerusalem was a major step in this direction which we fully favor. But this does not change our position that we favor a Geneva conference which will deal with the matter comprehensively. The Secretary asked that the Romanians do what they could to kill the rumors to the contrary. Reception of Ambassador Aggrey The Secretary thanked the Foreign Minister for the warmth of the reception given to Ambassador Aggrey in Bucharest and the speed with which his credentials were accepted. Macovescu thanked the Secretary for the message conveyed by Ambassador Aggrey and made some general remarks about disarmament issues and the fact that the Belgrade conference is now into its second phase. He said “the show is now over” as they move to work on new proposals and to drafting the final communique at Belgrade. Human Rights—Goma The Secretary said he would like to raise a delicate matter. He asked what the facts were behind this mornings press reports of the remarks of Romanian writer (Paul) Goma (who had recently left Romania). Macovescu replied that he had known about this in advance. The Foreign Ministry had learned of the PEN Club invitation to Goma and
