March 27–December 31, 1979
847
sador Strauss emphasized the importance of preparing the way care-
fully in Congress and the American Jewish community first. Begin
needs to see that restraint on settlements will be advantageous to him
in terms of his standing in this country, however much it may be diffi-
cult for him in Israel. Secretary Vance and Ambassador Leonard also
stressed the importance of Israeli restraint in Lebanon. (S)
4. US Role in Negotiations. Ambassador Strauss urged that we not
stake out positions on sensitive issues from the outset. Dr. Brzezinski
argued that we should base our initial statement on the Camp David
accords, allowing the Egyptians and Israelis to go through an inevitable
period of arguing over how Camp David should be implemented. At a
later date, the US could step in with proposals to help bridge the differ-
ences. (S)
5. Vance Trip. It was generally agreed that Ambassador Strauss
should make an effort to accompany Secretary Vance on the first part of
his Middle East trip.2 Ambassador Strauss felt that he should begin
to be seen as directly involved in the West Bank/Gaza issues and
would try to adjust his schedule. State and NSC will work together on
a statement for Secretary Vance to make at the opening of the
negotiations.3 (S)
2 Vance’s trip included stops in London May 20–24 for meetings with British Prime
Minister Margaret Thatcher, Foreign Secretary Lord Carrington, and Begin; Cairo, on
May 24, for a meeting with Sadat; and Tel Aviv and Beersheba, to attend the opening of
the autonomy talks, as well as El Arish, to attend the ceremonies accompanying the
transfer of power there from Israeli to Egyptian authorities May 24–27. Vance then visited
Rome, Vatican City, The Hague, and Madrid May 27–June 2.
3 Vance’s statement, delivered at the opening of the negotiations in Beersheba, May
25, is printed in the Department of State Bulletin, August 1979, pp. 48–49.
256.
Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department
of State and the White House1
Cairo, May 26, 1979, 1221Z
Secto 4053. White House to Dr. Brzezinski for the President from
the Secretary. Subject: Opening of the West Bank/Gaza Negotiations.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
Middle East, Box 49, 5/16–31/79. Secret; Sensitive; Cherokee; Immediate; Nodis. Printed
from a copy that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room.
