March–August 1953
655
by an [illegible—TCA?] request for material aid in an amount sufficient
to bring the ’54 program up to the current level of expenditures. If the
Point Four Program were reduced without additional material aid at a
time when a new government is struggling for position in Iran, it
would be considered evidence of U.S. disinterest which might not only
weaken the new government but could quite possibly lead to the can-
cellation of the Point Four Agreement and expulsion of that source of
U.S. influence.4
7. Economic Development. Any new government of Iran must lay
claim to a program to develop the country economically. To support
such a program the U.S. should be in a position to offer immediately at
least $15 million to help the Iranians complete dams or other projects of
a long list of worthy subjects developed by American and other ad-
visers since the War. Appendix II5 describes three separate irrigation
projects, each of which could be developed with $45 million over a
three-year period.
The Export-Import Bank has long had earmarked a $25 million
loan for economic development in Iran, and it is probable that this loan
could be advanced quickly with Departmental encouragement. It must
be frankly admitted, however, that Iran’s ability to repay any such loan
or provide the rial costs of the projects involved without oil income is
limited.
Iranian Airways. The Iranian Airways which at present is faltering
for lack of money and equipment and which is dominated by a known
Soviet agent could be restored to effective operation by a U.S. private
concern supported unobtrusively by the U.S. Government.6
IV. Relations With the United Kingdom
1. Any British statements welcoming a successor to Mosadeq or
otherwise indicating that the successor will serve U.K. interests, will
probably serve as death warrants for the new premier.
2. If the U.K. restricts U.S. action vis-a`-vis a new Iranian Govern-
ment on the plea that the oil dispute must first be settled on terms satis-
factory to the British, the problem of supporting a new government will
become almost insurmountable.
3. Neither the U.S. nor the U.K. can hope to obtain public economic
concessions or political rights in Iran, and this fact should be mutually
4 To the left of this paragraph is a handwritten note in the margin by Waller that
reads: “This appears to be extremely important aspect—JW.”
5 Not found attached.
6 To the left of this paragraph is a handwritten note in the margin by Waller that
reads: “Doubt if this contributes greatly to economy—JW.”
