Afghanistan
707
262.
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
NIC–M–0001–80
Washington, May 2, 1980
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE COUNCIL MEMORANDUM2
SUBJECT
Soviet Policy Toward West Europe in the Aftermath of Afghanistan
Summary
Soviet policy toward Europe since the invasion of Afghanistan has
been characterized by elements of defensiveness and of opportunism.
To a great extent, it is a policy of reactive and ad hoc efforts to exploit
what Moscow perceives as significant West European concerns about
the wisdom and predictability of US policy toward the USSR. Moscow’s
policy, therefore, is less a “peace offensive” than a combination of
blandishments and threats intended to undercut West European sup-
port for potential economic sanctions or other retaliatory measures
against the Soviet Union. ([classification marking and handling restriction
not declassified])
In seeking to influence West European opinion, Moscow has
strongly condemned West European endorsement of US policies.
Threats of a harsh Soviet response have been conveyed directly—as in
President Brezhnev’s letter of 2 March to Chancellor Schmidt—and
have also been evident in the increasingly acerbic tenor of Soviet media
commentaries directed at West Europe.3 At the same time, our reporting
clearly indicates that in private the Soviets have taken care to differen-
tiate between the harsher aspects of Moscow’s public posture and
an underlying flexibility in Soviet policy. ([classification marking and
handling restriction not declassified])
Overtures to the West Germans appear to be the most frequent
and subtle. Brezhnev has sent two letters to Chancellor Schmidt—the
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81),
Box 7, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Soviet Moves/Options (May 1980). Secret; [handling restriction
not declassified].
2 This memorandum was prepared by the Analytical Group of the National Intelli-
gence Council at the request of the National Intelligence Officer for the Soviet Union
and East Europe. It has been coordinated with the National Foreign Assessment Center
and within the Directorate of Operations. [Footnote is in the original.]
3 The letter, a response to a letter Schmidt sent to Brezhnev in late January, was
described by Schmidt during a news conference as “moderate in tone but hard in content,”
with a “warning undertone” against West Germany following U.S. policy with regard
to Afghanistan. Schmidt was quoted in Bradley Graham, “Brezhnev Warns Schmidt
Against Bowing to U.S.,” Washington Post, March 13, 1980, p. A26.
