70 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV 22. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, June 22, 1977 SUBJECT Budgetary and Strategic Implications of the B–1 Production Decision This memorandum responds to your request for a brief analysis of the budgetary and strategic implications of alternative options for modernizing the strategic bomber force. It was produced by a small working group of NSC and OMB staff members. In moving this fast, we were forced to make some rough estimates. The information should be accurate enough to realistically appraise the relative merits of each of the options, however. The Alternatives Four general alternatives for modernizing the strategic bomber force were considered. These range from going ahead with B–1 production at the four aircraft per month rate that the Air Force wants, to complete termination of the B–1 program. The rationales for these options are summarized below. —Option 1. Continue production of the B–1, building up to a maximum production rate of four aircraft per month by 1982. This option equips the B–52Gs with cruise missiles at a modest rate of 20 aircraft per year starting in 1981. The objectives of these conversions are to complicate the Soviets air defense problem, and to extend the effective lifetime of the B–52Gs. These objectives are not pursued vigorously, however, in view of the rapid and extensive deployment of the B–1. —Option 2. This is an elaboration of Harold Brown’s tentative recommendation. It slowly builds up the B–1 production rate to a maximum of two aircraft per month. It also equips first B–52Gs and later B–52Hs with cruise missiles. These conversions are pursued more vigorously than in Option 1 in order to offset the slower rate of acquisition of the B–1. —Option 3 (Variant A). This is an elaboration of the two-­year delay concept I suggested in my previous memos. It cuts off the current production program for the B–1, buying only three aircraft over the next three years for test and evaluation purposes. In addition, it begins an R&D program for a new cruise missile carrier. Under this variant, we 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 6, B–1: 6/11–30/1977. Top Secret; Sensitive. An unknown hand wrote in the top right corner of the memorandum: “The President has seen.”
