January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1351 as to whether the Israeli suggestion might complicate the issue. It went beyond supervision and enforcement of navigational freedom; it contained an active ingredient. Nevertheless, it was something which might be worthwhile looking into. (S) Foreign Minister Shamir referred to Iraq’s effort to create a nuclear capability. Israel knew that a decision had been taken by the Iraqi government to create nuclear arms. This could not be done without French and Italian help. Israel was sure this was also a concern of the U.S. and asked that the U.S. act to stop this dangerous development. (S) The Secretary replied that the U.S. had no direct influence with Iraq, unlike with certain other Arab states where the U.S. had the leverage of being the principal arms supplier. The U.S., therefore, would have to work through its European allies. We would continue to do so, pointing out to them the dangers of nuclear capability for Iraq. (S) Foreign Minister Shamir asked the Secretary for his assessment of the strategic situation in the Eastern Mediterranean. Israel, he said, was concerned about recent developments in Greece and Turkey and wanted to know more. (S) The Secretary replied that the military balance in that area was somewhat precarious. It had not greatly changed by the transfer of a carrier battle group to the Indian Ocean (land based aircraft could substitute for most of that capability), but the political problems were worse than the military balance. Greece and Turkey each depended for their security on the other being an ally. This was a necessary but not sufficient condition for each country’s safety. Relations between the two, however, had been bad. There was some hope that the Turkish military government, however deplorable in terms of democratic principles, would feel freer to negotiate, and in the short run, this could help solve the problem. Thus there was some hope of improvement, but given the complicated problems of Cyprus and Greece’s military reintegration into NATO, this area would continue to be a political weak spot. (S) The Secretary continued that Turkey was particularly vulnerable to the loss of Persian Gulf oil. It had obtained a larger fraction of oil from Iran than most countries and the military takeover could create a problem in this regard. This was another reminder of the grave problem which would face many countries, Israel included, if Persian Gulf oil were cut off or fell under Soviet political or military domination. (S) Foreign Minister Shamir said that Israel would welcome the visits of Under Secretary Komer and Chairman Jones. The success of their missions, however, would depend on the political instructions they received. Dr. Brown replied that these visits were part of the continuing dialogue between the U.S. and Israel. The Marshall talks had by agree-
