339 3 0/
8 S/800 8
IV
About the Series
agencies, departments, and other entities of the U.S. Government en-
gaged in foreign policy formulation, execution, or support cooperate 
with the Department of State historians by providing full and complete 
access to records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions and 
by providing copies of selected records. Most of the sources consulted 
in the preparation of this volume have been declassified and are avail-
able for review at the National Archives and Record Administration 
(Archives II), in College Park, Maryland.
The editors of the Foreign Relations series have complete access to
all the retired records and papers of the Department of State: the central
files of the Department; the special decentralized files (“lot files”) of the
Department at the bureau, office, and division levels; the files of the De-
partment’s Executive Secretariat, which contain the records of interna-
tional conferences and high-level official visits, correspondence with
foreign leaders by the President and Secretary of State, and the memo-
randa of conversations between the President and the Secretary of State
and foreign officials; and the files of overseas diplomatic posts. All of
the Department’s central files for 1977–1981 are available in electronic
or microfilm formats at Archives II, and may be accessed using the
Access to Archival Databases (AAD) tool. Almost all of the Depart-
ment’s decentralized office files covering this period, which the Na-
tional Archives deems worthy of permanent retention, have been trans-
ferred to or are in the process of being transferred from the
Department’s custody to Archives II.
Research for Foreign Relations volumes is undertaken through spe-
cial access to restricted documents at the Jimmy Carter Presidential Li-
brary and other agencies. While all the material printed in this volume
has been declassified, some of it is extracted from still-classified docu-
ments. The staff of the Carter Library is processing and declassifying
many of the documents used in this volume, but they may not be avail-
able in their entirety at the time of publication. Presidential papers
maintained and preserved at the Carter Library include some of the
most significant foreign-affairs related documentation from White
House offices, the Department of State, and other federal agencies in-
cluding the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency,
the Department of Defense, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Editorial Methodology
The documents in this volume are presented chronologically ac-
cording to Washington time. Memoranda of conversation are placed
according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date
the memorandum was drafted.
Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Rela-
tions series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance
