September 18–December 16, 1978
513
as final until we work out together a formula that would meet our min-
imum. We realized that the closure of negotiations on the text could
confront us with an undesirable prospect, namely the prospect of
having to oppose something which was proposed by you. For these
reasons I would like to seek your help in solving the main problems
and I am quite willing to forego the less important ones.
As it stands now, the provision of Article 6 remains explosive and
detrimental.33 As the negotiations evolved with respect to that issue,
the successive proposed drafts tended to be harsher and more difficult
to accept.34 Your fifth draft, presented on October 19, carried the fol-
lowing text for paragraph 2 of that article:
—“The parties undertake to fulfill in good faith their obligations
under the present treaty”. The seventh draft, submitted on October 21
added a phrase to that text as follows:
—The parties undertake to fulfill in good faith their obligations
under this treaty without regard to action or inaction of any other
party.35
The latest draft went further to state that:
—“The parties undertake to fulfill in good faith their obligations
under this treaty without regard to action or inaction of any other party
and independently of any existing instrument external to this treaty”.36
Such a sweeping provision which came at the last minute cannot
be taken lightly. It could be used by Israel or any other party to prove
that the treaty is in fact and by law a separate agreement.37 If one
stretches the argument further, it could be alleged that the treaty is in-
dependent even of the “Framework” of Camp David,38 for it is merely
“another instrument external to the treaty”. If it becomes plausible that
the treaty constitutes a separate peace agreement, then it would be a vi-
olation of the “Framework”.
You can imagine the devastating impact of such a provision.
Suffice it to refer to a statement made by the Israeli Foreign Minister on
November 23 in which he said in effect that Egypt’s commitments to Is-
rael have acquired priority over her Arab commitments. This trend is
33 Vance underlined this sentence.
34 Vance underlined “the successive proposed drafts tended to be harsher and more
difficult to accept,” and wrote in the right-hand margin: “not so.”
35 Vance highlighted this sentence, and wrote in the right-hand margin: “Pres.
language.”
36 Vance highlighted this sentence.
37 Vance underlined this sentence.
38 Vance underlined “could be alleged that the treaty is independent even of the
‘Framework’ of Camp David,” and wrote in the right-hand margin: “No.”
