Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
349
Finally, some believe that because we do possess nuclear weapons
of great destructive power, that we need do nothing more to guarantee
our Nation’s security. Unfortunately, it’s not that simple.
Our potential adversaries have now built up massive forces armed
with conventional weapons—tanks, aircraft, infantry, mechanized
units. These forces could be used for political blackmail, and they could
threaten our vital interests unless we and our allies and friends have
our own military strength and conventional forces as a counterbalance.
Of course, our national security rests on more than just military
power. It depends partly on the productive capacity of our factories
and our farms, on an adequate supply of natural resources with which
God has blessed us, on an economic system which values human
freedom above centralized control, on the creative ideas of our best
minds, on the hard work, cohesion, moral strength, and determination
of the American people, and on the friendship of our neighbors to the
north and south.
Our security depends on strong bonds with our allies and on
whether other nations seek to live in peace and refrain from trying to
dominate those who live around them.
But adequate and capable military forces are still an essential ele-
ment of our national security. We, like our ancestors, have the obliga-
tion to maintain strength equal to the challenges of the world in which
we live, and we Americans will continue to do so.
Let us review briefly how national security issues have changed
over the past decade or two.
The world has grown both more complex and more interdepend-
ent. There is now a division among the Communist powers. The old co-
lonial empires have fallen, and many new nations have risen in their
place. Old ideological labels have lost some of their meaning.
There have also been changes in the military balance among na-
tions. Over the past 20 years, the military forces of the Soviets have
grown substantially, both in absolute numbers and relative to our own.
There also has been an ominous inclination on the part of the Soviet
Union to use its military power—to intervene in local conflicts, with ad-
visers, with equipment, and with full logistical support and encourage-
ment for mercenaries from other Communist countries, as we can ob-
serve today in Africa.
This increase in Soviet military power has been going on for a long
time. Discounting inflation, since 1960 Soviet military spending has
doubled, rising steadily in real terms by 3 or 4 percent a year, while our
own military budget is actually lower now than it was in 1960.
The Soviets, who traditionally were not a significant naval power,
now rank number two in world naval forces.
