Romania 595 196. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Vest), the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian), and the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)1 Washington, April 5, 1978 SUBJECT The Ceausescu Visit—Human Rights Issues ISSUES FOR DECISION How three humanitarian issues should be taken up during President Ceausescu’s visit. Decisions are needed well before Ceausescu’s arrival on April 11. BACKGROUND We agree that the President should raise the subject of human rights with Ceausescu, making reference to obligations in the Helsinki Final Act assumed by all signatory states to respect human rights and discuss such matters with one another. The President should urge Ceausescu directly to take favorable and prompt action on present and future emigration and marriage requests including emigration to Israel, particularly if Romania wishes the Administration to seek Romanian MFN status from Congress on a multi-annual basis. Since human rights problems are already an important item on our bilateral agenda, there is disagreement within the Department over the degree to which and whether the following three additional and sensitive human rights issues should be raised with the Romanians during this visit. THE THREE ISSUES A. Hungarian Minority The Romanian Government is periodically accused of officially sanctioned discrimination against the approximately 1.7 million ethnic 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Official Working Papers, S/P Director Anthony Lake, 1977–Jan 1981, Lot 82D298, Box 3, S/P-Lake Papers— 4/1–15/78. Confidential. Drafted by Andrews, Sillins, Brody, and Kaplan; cleared by Luers, Fuerth, and Wolf. Luers initialed the memorandum for Vest; Brody initialed for Derian. The undated memorandum was sent under a covering memorandum through Nimetz on April 5. In his memorandum, Nimetz recommended that Vance raise the Hungarian minority issue with Andrei, that there was no need to raise the IFI issue, and that the Rauta case not be brought up during the Ceausescu visit. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Mr. Matthew Nimetz, Counselor of the Department of State, Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance, Science and Technology, January 1977 thru December 1980, Lot 81D85, Box 1, MN Chron—Official, January–June 1978) Nimetz forwarded Christopher’s decisions to Vance under an April 10 covering memorandum. (Ibid.)
