824
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
“Conceptually, our overall strategy will be composed of four cate-
gories of policies:
1. Those dynamic changes to which the Administration has al-
ready committed itself in the areas of trade, aid, international monetary
arrangements, international food reserves, and increased support for
international development institutions.
2. Policies which relate more directly to the politically, econom-
ically and militarily strong LDCs, where our immediate economic and
security interests are most obvious.
3. Basic human needs policies which directly attack the problem of
“absolute poverty” throughout the world.
4. Policies which analyze, advocate and implement systemic
changes in those international arrangements which reveal increasingly
limited capacity to manage old problems or cope with new ones.
“There is little argument that efforts should be devoted to each category
of policies. The difficult choices are the degree to which each is pursued relative
to other US goals (e.g., human rights, non-proliferation), and relative to one
another; and the mechanisms to be used in implementing each set of policies.
“In short, an appropriate US strategy will be one which starts from the
Administration policies already adopted and incorporates the insights of each
of the three focuses on North-South relations examined by this Working
Group. It will need the bilateral finesse suggested by the focus on the
‘upper tier’ of developing countries; it will need a program to rapidly
increase the standards of living of the world’s poorest people—a pro-
gram incorporating many ideas relevant to the fulfillment of basic
human needs; and it will need to build upon some of the most sugges-
tive insights which the global systemic reform approach brings to the
linkages between major problems on the ‘global politics’ agenda for the
coming eight years. The leadtime needed to make progress on a
problem like population control is so extensive that the United States
can no longer afford to relegate such problems to the lower echelons
typical in past Administrations.
“Finally, and fundamentally, an appropriate US strategy will be
one which continues movement toward trade liberalization; a global
food reserve program; substantially increased foreign assistance; aug-
mented resources for such crucial international organizations as the
IMF and the IBRD; and altered norms for the operation of and repre-
sentation in these key organizations that meet Southern desires in ways
that gradually strengthen the operation of the international economic
system. It is difficult to overestimate the importance of progress along these
lines to which the Administration is already committed. Indeed, one of the
major reasons that this PRM response has not focused on the so-called
‘middle-tier’ developing countries in any discrete way is that these countries
in the aggregate should find the economic policies already enunciated by the
Administration very congenial to their economic aims and development pol-
