1955  11
Menon he had carefully refrained from claiming any credit; important 
point was only how he and India could quietly help etc.
3. GOI (Menon’s) work at Bandung etc. had made possible holding 
present talks.
4. Cease fire agreement possible on basis evacuation Quemoy and 
Matsu.
5. CHICOMS anxious for agreement with US but also must con­
sider Chinese “public opinion”.
6. Not fair to say CHICOM position is they will fight obtain 
demands if not successful in obtaining them by negotiation. Also in 
Chinese eyes question guns 7th Fleet pointing at them. Important point 
(according Menon) is they willing negotiate and important get negoti­
ations going. (In context he was obviously pointing to Foreign Minister 
meeting.)
7. CHICOM revolutionary phase now finished and they are no lon­
ger “hanging people”.
CHICOM different from Soviet Union or satellites. Political par­
ties with views different from commies tolerated and are not just 
commie stooges. Many former ChiNat officers successful in Chicom 
Army. CHICOM attitude toward Formosa “very liberal” and (accord­
ing Menon) not many years until Chiang will be a “Governor General” 
of Formosa. Chiang entirely discredited on mainland and no serious 
opposition to commies.
8. Without directly referring travel relatives prisoners Menon 
raised desire CHICOMS receive American visitors, cultural exchanges 
etc.
I made no response except where it was possible do so without 
giving away my hand as I was convinced he was going to run and tell 
Wang anything I said. However I bore down heavily on renunciation of 
force by CHICOMS and gave him copy Secretary’s July 26 press confer­
ence statement with recommendation he carefully read it.
Menon called again this morning to say goodbye. He had seen 
Wang last night and said Wang was anticipating these talks will not last 
more than one week if “Americans are sincere”. Wang will raise trade 
embargo and few other matters but does not intend get down much 
serious business on “other questions”. All this to be left for ForMin’s 
meeting. Chinese realize probably cannot take place for some time but 
want agreement in principle and definite settlement date. Will more 
fully report this morning’s talk in later telegram.
Gowen
