March 27–December 31, 1979
995
306.
Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 5, 1979
SUBJECT
The Lebanese Situation (U)
At Tab I is a memorandum from Habib to Vance reporting on his
trip.2 In summary:
—there is something approaching consensus among the Arabs on
several points: strengthen the cease-fire; strengthen UNIFIL and UNSC
425;3 in principle, re-establish a Lebanese presence in southern Leb-
anon (especially Tyre); talk about the issue at the Arab summit;4 get the
PLO to give some cooperation to the Lebanese; see Lebanon out in
front; get the PLO to stop taking credit in Beirut for any attacks that do
take place in Israel;
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presiden-
tial Advisory Board, Box 84, Sensitive XX: 11/79. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action. In the
upper right-hand corner of the memorandum, an unknown hand wrote: “Please set up
with ZB, Linowitz/Strauss, VP (if here), Vance, Hal, L, etc.” Another handwritten nota-
tion in the right-hand corner reads: “11/7–CD’s ofc will handle.”
2 Habib’s November 3 memorandum to Vance, reporting on his October
24–November 1 trip to the Middle East, which included stops in Lebanon, Syria, Israel,
Jordan, Italy, and France, is attached but not printed. Habib submitted to Vance for ap-
proval eight proposals for U.S. action: “continue a strong effort” to support the Lebanese
and the UN to bring about a “first-phase modus vivendi;” instruct Dean to continue a dia-
logue with the Lebanese; brief Waldheim on Habib’s trip; “make representations to the
Saudis, the Kuwaitis, the Moroccans, and perhaps the Sudanese” to help develop an
“Arab consensus which would help neutralize the situation in Lebanon and gain full PLO
cooperation;” send Habib on another trip to the region; discuss with the Israelis French
plans for discussions with Arafat; continue to consult with the UN regarding UNIFIL’s
technical capabilities for detection and surveillance; and review the situation further fol-
lowing the Arab Summit.
3 United Nations Security Council Resolution 425, March 19, 1978, called on Israel
to withdraw its forces from southern Lebanon and established the United Nations In-
terim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
4 See Document 309.
