Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Prime Minister Begin: I also agreed to start the negotiations on autonomy one month after the treaty. President Carter: There is nothing in Camp David that says the treaty must precede the West Bank /Gaza negotiations. It might go a long way to removing obstacles to the peace treaty negotiations. It could help overcome the linkage problem. This might be the only door to keep open if there is a deadlock. Prime Minister Begin: I will tell you what I have told my colleagues. There should be no judicial linkage. The American view is that there is a political linkage. President Carter: That’s right. Prime Minister Begin: But I say there is no judicial linkage and there is no political linkage, there is just a time linkage. We are prepared to start the negotiations on Judea, Samaria, and Gaza almost immediately. But there can be no political linkage, only a time linkage. Secretary Vance: On the question of the annexed documents, there is no mystery. You had it in your own counterdraft. Mr. Rosenne: We met on Saturday at Camp David to talk about the agreed minutes. The draft we got on February 24th had different language on Article 6. Secretary Vance: We are not talking about Article 6. I am talking about the annexed documents. This was mentioned in our first draft, and your counterdraft included it. Mr. Rosenne: Previous drafts had said that there would be just one annexed document. This was only the document on the autonomy. We object to having both documents annexed. When we included in our draft that both documents could be annexed, it was because there was a sentence that said that implementation of both frameworks would be independent of each other, and there was a phrase about unconditionality that was dropped, but the two documents were left. Egypt also did not want the two documents. At least Khalil was prepared to delete the first two pages of your draft. Our position is that we object to both documents being annexed with the deleting of the phrase about independent implementation. Secretary Vance: We talked about the problem of full autonomy for the inhabitants. On the question of “other related issue,” there should be no difficulty. Prime Minister Begin: But we want it understood that this means security for Israel in the transitional period and beyond. Secretary Vance: There is no problem. On Article 6, paragraph 5, let me review how we got to this point. Originally there was language that this treaty would “prevail over other treaties.” This was dropped. Agreement could not be reached on that. Then we reached agreement
