506
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Our agreement to these actions should be received quite positively
by the press, the exchange markets, and our colleagues abroad.6
W. Michael Blumenthal7
6 In his September 22 cover memorandum (see footnote 1 above), Owen com-
mented: “The amounts that Mike has in mind are reasonable in terms of world liquidity
requirements: 50% quota increases were recommended by the IMF management; a 4 bil-
lion SDR allocation is a good compromise between the management’s proposal for 4–6
billion and the German desire to settle on lower amounts.” On September 24, the Interim
Committee agreed to a 50 percent IMF quota increase and a 3-year annual issue of 4 bil-
lion SDR. (Hobart Rowen, “Finance Chiefs Agree to Boost IMF, World Bank Resources,”
The Washington Post, September 25, 1978, p. D14)
7 Blumenthal signed “Mike” above this typed signature.
163.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1
Washington, September 22, 1978
SUBJECT
A Political Assessment Of The Tokyo Round
This memorandum will enlarge upon the brief reference to the
Tokyo Round and its negative aspects in last week’s summary.2 For
sometime now, I have wanted to give you a personal report on the ne-
gotiations. I have been reluctant to add to your concerns, which I know
are many, but I sense that the time has arrived to give you my judgment
of where we are and where we are heading.
Background.
Twenty months ago, as you know, the Tokyo Round was in danger
of foundering. The political will of key participants—an indispensable
ingredient for such an ambitious undertaking—had been sapped by the
oil crisis and the ensuing global recession. Repeated efforts by the pre-
vious Administration to revitalize the negotiations had failed. Many
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
File, Box 103, 9/25/78 [1]. Secret. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Bob—The harder &
better we bargain now, (obviously) the better in Congress next year. J.”
2 The summary was not found.
