Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  295
— Agreeing to equal rights for heavy ICBMs;
— Accepting a number of requirements for notifications we had 
proposed;
— In the inspection protocol, agreement to three key definitions 
relating to continuous monitoring; agreement to temporary expansions 
of monitoring personnel; and tentative agreement on how to provide 
lists of inspectors in advance;
— Agreement to the concept of unique identifiers;
— Hints of flexibility on ALCM counting rules;
— Attempts to engage us on SSI.
4. The major U.S. initiative, of course, was our verification and sta-
bility measures. The Soviets never got instructions on how to respond, 
but some useful preliminary exchanges were held and we were able to 
table the texts of agreements on notifying major strategic exercises and 
on telemetry encryption.
5. Soviet concerns about SDI no longer cast as large a shadow over 
START as they once did. Although some settlement of the D&S prob-
lem will still be required, it appears that it need not be as traumatic as 
was thought earlier. In any case, the D&S problem is not at this stage 
interfering with START.
6. The bad news is that zero progress was made on the major issues. 
We cannot afford to let that happen in the fall round or we risk losing 
momentum and allowing START to become the MBFR of the 1990s. 
For the first time, I can see a real possibility that this could happen. I 
suspect that many people who favor START, including high levels of 
the USG, are reassured by stories that the treaty is 80 percent completed 
and there are only 4 or 5 major issues to solve. They conclude that we 
can coast until CFE is completed, or all our defense budget problems 
are resolved, or the constellations of political factors are just right. Then 
the President can give the signal and START can be wrapped up in six 
months or so. This sort of complacency is very dangerous:
— First, the complexity of the JDT precludes a scenario that wraps 
it up in a short time.
— Second, even if that were possible, it would not be wise. Although 
INF certainly had a happy ending, I think congress and public opinion 
would be very suspicious of any repetition of the sort of wild scramble 
that characterized the concluding stages of that negotiation.
— Third, and perhaps most important, it is far from clear that the 
opportunity that now exists will be available to us a year or two in 
the future. There are many examples of unforeseen events, perhaps 
not desired by either side, upsetting a sensitive negotiation. The most 
obvious possibility is that the Soviet leadership may not be as conge-
nial then as it is today. A recent analysis by Embassy Moscow gives
