year 1921, as well as a comparison with the figures of certain preceding
years, are enclosed herewith in duplicate. You may, if you consider it
desirable, file one copy with the T. M. C. The Department understands that
the material for the publication of a similar pamphlet covering the year
1923 is now being collected and will be available in a comparatively short
time. This information will also be sent you as soon as received by the
Department.
From informal inquiry of the Census Bureau, which prepares these reports,
the Department understands that the Bureau sends representatives to the
various munition plants in this country to collect the information desired.
An effort is made to reach every establishment having an annual production
value of $5,000 or more and in the opinion of the Census Bureau no
establishment of any consequence has been overlooked. As stated in the
publication of the Census Bureau it is believed that the inclusion of all
establishments having an annual production of less than $5,000 would
affect the figures in the enclosed pamphlet to the extent of less than one-
tenth of 1 percent.
The report of the Census Bureau does not include government
establishments. With respect to such establishments the Department has
informally obtained the following information through the courtesy of the
War Department.
In 1914 the government owned and operated six plants and it has the same
number of plants today. The production of military equipment in
government owned and operated establishments is less than half of what it
was in 1914. In 1914, for instance, the government employed
approximately 7,500 people in its plants and today the Department
understands the number employed is less than 4,000. Most of these persons,
furthermore, are engaged in storage plants and not in the production of arms
and ammunition as the only material manufactured by the Government
today is a small quantity of small arms (rifles) and some experimental
material for coast defense.
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
