Costa Rica  399
need for his country to diversify its production, increase its produc-
tion of basic food crops, and reduce wherever possible expenditures for 
imports. Mr. Rubottom pointed out that we are aware of the difficulties 
that a drop in coffee prices would cause to Costa Rica and other coffee-­
producing countries. He said that we were looking into what could be 
done to help increase the consumption of coffee, and that there were at 
present several ways that a country could obtain aid if necessary. In this 
connection he pointed out that such institutions as the World Bank, the 
EXIM Bank, and the International Monetary Fund are available for giv-
ing objective advice and assistance upon request. He also stressed that 
a country should make efforts on its own behalf to take necessary steps 
to put its economy in good order, even if this involved some sacrifice 
on the part of the people.
Armaments
Mr. Echandi said that in keeping with Article 12 of the Costa Rican 
Constitution he desired to get rid of all excess armaments. According to 
him, he wants to keep only those arms necessary for use of the Guardia 
Civil for police purposes. He said that he would like to sell the arms 
to the United States and use the funds derived therefrom to buy trac-
tors and other agricultural equipment. Mr. Echandi stressed that he had 
no personal reason for wishing to be rid of the excess armaments but 
since Costa Rica did not have any real Army of its own, and did not 
desire one, he could see no reason for keeping any excess armaments. 
Mr. Rubottom said he did not know how the United States Government 
could purchase the armaments but that the matter would be looked 
into. Mr. Echandi stated that he had no intention of selling the arma-
ments to any country which would be likely to utilize them for causing 
trouble either within its own country or that of another. Ambassador 
Willauer stated that he in the past had had a great deal of experience 
with arms and that he had some ideas regarding the sale of the excess 
armaments which he would pursue when he took over his post in Costa 
Rica. Mr. Echandi also emphasized that his country was not an aggres-
sive one and in keeping with Article 12 of its Constitution did not need 
arms for any other purposes than policing.
Inter-American Highway
Mr. Echandi said he wondered if a section near the Inter-American 
Highway, between El Coco Airport and San Ramón, covering approxi-
mately 40 kilometers could be included in the Inter-American Highway 
project. Mr. Rubottom informed him that at the present time it seemed 
best to concentrate on completing that part of the Inter-American 
Highway running through Costa Rica rather than attempting to 
reconstruct an additional road as part of this project. He pointed out 
to Mr. Echandi the difficulties of obtaining sufficient funds from our 
Congress in order to carry on the Inter-American Highway project
