1957 1477 do. It would be very awkward to have spent a year and a half training Dexter as a Chinese interpreter just to have him assigned to Geneva as a general service officer with no interpreting to do. We had such a difficult time working out some way of assigning him to Geneva that we are reluctant to suggest delay at this point for fear the arrangement might break down. I agree entirely with your suggestion that some sort of official rec­ ognition be extended to Alex for the unique contribution he has made at Geneva to our diplomacy. I discussed the matter with Sam Gilstrap of FE/EX who suggested a letter of commendation from the Secretary to be followed by a recommendation to the Awards Committee for a superior service award. Whether or not the Chinese Communists decide to appoint some­ one to continue the Geneva talks with you, I am sure you will be pleased to know that Mr. Robertson has great confidence in your ability to carry on the discussions, and it was he who recommended to the Secretary that you be selected for the job. With best wishes for a happy New Year to you and Emma Rose and the children, Sincerely, Ralph N. Clough Enclosure2 DRAFT PRESS RELEASE At the meeting in Geneva with the Chinese Communist represent­ ative on December 12, Ambassador Johnson informed him that he was being transferred and that the United States Government had desig­ nated his assistant, Mr. Edwin W. Martin, a senior Foreign Service Officer assigned to the American Embassy in London, as the United States rep­ resentative in the talks. Mr. Martin is a Chinese language and area spe­ cialist with sixteen years’ service, who was a member of Ambassador Dean’s staff in the negotiations with the Chinese Communists in Korea in 1953–54. He took part in the conversations with the Chinese Communists in Geneva in 1954 concerning the Americans imprisoned in Communist China and was Ambassador Johnson’s advisor at the out­ set of the ambassadorial talks which began in Geneva, August 1, 1955. He has served as Deputy Director of the Office of Chinese Affairs in the Department of State and has acted as Ambassador Johnson’s assistant at the meetings in Geneva since July, 1957. 2 No classification marking. Drafted by Clough on December 22.
