XIII
Sources
Sources for Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI, START I, 1989–1991
The most critical documentation included in this volume was drawn 
from the George H.W. Bush Presidential Library, which contains the 
National Security Council Institutional Files (H-Files) covering meet-
ings of the National Security Council and National Security Council 
Deputies Committee, as well as the preparation of National Security 
Directives. The Bush Library also contains the records of the President’s 
Assistant for National Security Affairs Brent Scowcroft; the President’s 
Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs Robert Gates; and key 
National Security Council staff members including John Gordon, who 
served as Director for Defense Policy before succeeding Arnold Kanter 
as President’s Special Assistant and Senior Director in October 1991. 
Moreover, the Bush Library contains records from Bush’s eight years as 
vice president (January 1981–January 1989), during which he and advi-
sors Donald Gregg and Sam Watson kept close tabs on the strategic arms 
reduction talks that commenced in Geneva on June 29, 1982.
Of the files of the Department of State, the most useful for the 
purposes of this volume were two lot files pertaining to the Under 
Secretary of State for Security Assistance, Science and Technology’s 
Senior Advisor, James Timbie (after April 30, 1990, Timbie was Senior 
Advisor to the renamed position of Under Secretary of State for 
International Security Affairs). Both the Office of the Under Secretary 
for Arms Control, International Security Affairs, 1969–1990 Subject 
Records of James P. Timbie (Lot 01D127), and the Office of the Under 
Secretary for Arms Control, International Security Affairs, Records 
of James Timbie (Lot 05D259) collections contain memoranda for 
Secretary of State James Baker, as well as memoranda of conversation 
between Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance, Science and 
Technology Reginald Bartholomew and Soviet counterparts such as 
Sergey Akhromeyev. In addition, the Office of the Secretary of State, 
Baker’s Classified Papers (Lot 93D187) and the Office of the Secretary 
of State, Subject Files (Lot 96D277) include additional pertinent docu-
mentation. The Policy Planning Staff (S/P) lot files, including Dennis 
Ross’ Subject Files (Lot 03D102), also yielded significant materials. So 
too did a collection of Counselor Robert Zoellick’s lot files that were 
retired in his capacity as Under Secretary of State for Economic and 
Agricultural Affairs (Lot 96D484).
The Central Foreign Policy File of the Department of State, con-
sisting of D (digital), P (paper), and N (nodis) microfilm reels, replaced
