Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 132. Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, August 24, 1979 SUBJECT US–GDR Consular Convention (U) State has informed us that they intend to proceed with the signing of the US–GDR Consular Convention in Berlin on September 4th (Tab A).2 The ceremony will be brief, low key and without press attendance. (U) We made a signing of the Consular Convention a precondition for any normalization of relations. The Convention was finally concluded in May after the GDR backed off their position on the nationality issue. It was scheduled to be signed on July 3, but the date of the signing was postponed in order to indicate our displeasure at the GDR’s attempt to unilaterally change the status quo in Berlin by instituting the direct election of East Berlin deputies to the Volkskammer. (C) Once the Convention is signed we will permit the GDR two foreign trade offices in New York and a branch office of the GDR’s Embassy Commercial Counselor in New York City. In return, we will be allowed to open a trade office in the GDR at a site and time of our choosing (possibly Berlin). At present, however, we have no plans to open such an office. (C) All things considered, I think we should go ahead with the signing, keeping the ceremony very low key.3 The Convention is in our interest as much as theirs. It ensures protection of US citizens and does not imply any major expansion of relations. Moreover, we have gone the furthest of all the allies in showing displeasure at recent GDR actions over Berlin. (After some initial reservations, the French went ahead with a visit by FM Francois-Poncet to East Berlin at the end of July, and despite the initial outcry in West Germany over the GDR move, the FRG proceeded with high-level talks on disarmament, as scheduled, at the end of July.) We made our point by postponing the talks and we have little to gain by drawing this out further. However, in light 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
