Non-Proliferation
813
curity interests, and even prestige and domestic political motives may
be enough to cause some states to reconsider the nuclear option.
While it should be emphasized that years of restraint have not nec-
essarily immunized the nonweapon industrial democracies from pres-
sures for proliferation, it is among the LDCs that the interaction of mo-
tivations and capabilities is of most concern today. In these countries
feelings of political and military insecurity are widespread, aspirations
to greater global or regional status abound, and the demands on do-
mestic stability are difficult to satisfy. All of these political pressures are
occurring at a time when the economic and technical costs of building
nuclear weapons are declining.
Political Motivations
Security: Intense and longstanding regional conflicts account for
much of the anxiety motivating the LDCs to acquire nuclear weapons.
The likelihood that these basic feelings of insecurity will launch con-
crete actions designed to bring the nuclear option within reach has been
significantly enhanced by several international developments, for
example:
—Real or perceived inabilities to compete effectively in local con-
ventional arms races because of deficiencies in access to foreign supply,
in financial means, or in other resources (e.g., Pakistan and South
Africa).
—The acquisition of a nuclear capability by a declared or potential
rival (e.g., Pakistan and Iran).
—Loss of faith in the credibility or utility of great power security
commitments (e.g., Pakistan, Taiwan, South Korea).
Other developments that have increased the security concerns of
some nuclear threshold states (Taiwan and South Korea in particular)
include the US defeat in Indochina, the continuing debate over with-
drawal of American troops from abroad, and mounting evidence of
wide popular support for reducing the level of US commitments gener-
ally. In short, the impression that national security will increasingly be-
come the exclusive responsibility of individual states has buttressed ar-
guments in favor of developing nuclear weapons for deterrence and
defense.
Prestige: The demands of LDCs for more control over international
arrangements affecting their fortunes and futures and their dissatisfac-
tion with the existing international political and economic system have
led many states to give priority attention to enhancement of their global
or regional stature. And for some countries, most notably India and
Brazil, but probably Argentina and Iran as well, the prestige associated
with actual or potential nuclear status has furnished a particularly
strong incentive for developing a nuclear weapons capability.
