784 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX At this point Ljubicic said that arms negotiations procedures could be worked out and asked Brown about SALT II. He wanted to know where the US is in SALT and where it expects to go. Brown replied that in SALT II the US was interested in reduction of the strategic forces on each side, in reducing the rate of new weapon deployment and development in equality and stability to preclude either side from being tempted to launch an attack, in precluding either side from developing systems aimed at the vulnerabilities of the other side. Brown said that this last point was probably the most difficult. Also, he pointed out that the problem of that which each side defines as a strategic system and counts in the strategic aggregate continues to complicate the negotiations. Brown said that the US is concerned over the rapid build-up of Soviet ICBM’s with MIRV’s. As a result of this Soviet build-up, the US sees US ICBM’s becoming vulnerable as Soviet ICBM numbers and accuracy increase. Brown said that the US has strategic bombers that can takeoff before the Soviet missiles land, and the US also has SLBM’s which are not vulnerable. Despite this he still considered the Soviet ICBM build-up as destabilizing. Brown said that he wonders as he views the building of new Soviet ICBM’s and the enlargement of air defense and civil defense systems whether the Soviets really plan to survive a thermonuclear war. He said he viewed such an idea as unrealistic, but if the Soviets believe they can, then it is a very dangerous situation. Brown said that from the US side, the main impediment to an agreement stems from the inability to establish agreeable limits on the Soviet buildup of ICBM number and capability and the inclusion of Soviet Backfire bombers which the US believes to be strategic because they can reach the US. The Soviet side contends the Backfire is not strategic and does not want to include it in the strategic aggregate. From the Soviet viewpoint, US cruise missiles present a serious impediment to an agreement. Brown then proceeded to outline the cruise missile issue. He said that there were two general kinds of cruise missiles: those launched from an aircraft and those which are land-based or sea-based. He said that the air-launched cruise missile was needed to penetrate Soviet air defense. He said that, if air defenses are formidable, air-launched cruise missiles are needed to penetrate them, since it is difficult for a bomber to do so. Turning to the sea-based or land-based cruise missile, Brown said that these systems present a political-military problem because they might be based in or near Europe. The issue of the sea-based and land-based cruise missiles is further complicated by the fact that the Soviets have deployed SS–20 MRBM’s with MIRV’s opposite NATO countries. The Soviet Union does not consider this system strategic
