September 18–December 16, 1978
483
There are two main points I want to make: the first deals with the
West Bank and Gaza; the second deals with the priority of obligations. I
want to explain both of these issues to you.
Since the negotiations began, we believe that there should be a link
between our peace treaty and the comprehensive solution. If there is
just an Egyptian-Israeli treaty without a solution to the Palestinian
problem, this will not lead to peace. It will complicate matters. So Presi-
dent Sadat hopes that you will understand that there should be more
done for the West Bank and Gaza, there should be a guarantee of the
negotiations there. This does not mean that we want to divide the West
Bank from Gaza at all. We are very keen to keep both tied together. But
Gaza was under our administration in 1967 and may be easier to deal
with. We could build a good model there to start. We have influence,
and there are many Palestinians from Gaza in Egypt. We can start on
the West Bank and Gaza, but Gaza will be easier. It can serve as a model
for Hussein and others. We don’t want to separate the West Bank and
Gaza at all.
Sadat wants to start with the timetable for the West Bank and Gaza
both, but he knows that the West Bank will be more complex. Gaza may
be easier. We don’t want to separate the two, but if there is a timetable
for negotiating on both, this will be all right. But we think it will take
time for the West Bank and we want to stimulate King Hussein to join
the negotiations. He has to see real action taking place. I have met King
Hussein several times. He is afraid of the Baath Party in Iraq and Syria,
as well as of the PLO. He wants peace, but he is in a difficult situation.
He won’t join the negotiations unless he sees something at least hap-
pening in Gaza and if possible in the West Bank too. If we neglect Gaza
and the West Bank, the whole Arab world will attack—you saw what
happened in Baghdad—and they will accuse Sadat and President
Carter. They will raise hell. They will say that Egypt has gone for a sep-
arate agreement.
The President: They are already saying that.
Vice President Mubarak: We hear this everywhere, even in Europe.
They are all pushing the Palestinian problem. They all say that if only
an agreement is reached on Sinai this will amount to a separate peace.
So President Sadat insists that we push the Palestinian problem along
with Sinai, even if we must postpone the withdrawal in Sinai. Things
will be easier in Gaza. It can be a good model to the Palestinians and
King Hussein. This is the main point. It does not mean separation. Pres-
ident Sadat sees this as a concession. He wants both the West Bank and
Gaza, but offers Gaza alone as a concession. He expects you to see that
Gaza will make things easier.
The President: We have a wonderful relationship with Egypt. We
also have an equally good relationship with Saudi Arabia, and a fairly
