Venezuela 1295 talks, a group of U.S. private banks have informally agreed to extend $200 million in credits to the Government of Venezuela, although the terms are not yet known to the Department. To cover the interim before these credits can be formally arranged, it is expected that the Federal Reserve Bank of New York will respond favorably to a Venezuelan request for a $150 million, 90-­day, gold collateral loan. A factor which bears on the future stability of Venezuela, both political and economic, is the still unsettled petroleum industry-­labor contract negotiations. Recommended Position Bearing in mind Venezuela’s hitherto aloof attitude toward the International Monetary Fund, you might wish to express satisfaction with the manner in which Venezuela is now seeking the advice and guidance of the Fund and the serious efforts the Government is making to remedy its financial problems before they attain crisis proportions and while there is still room for maneuver. VE–40. Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in Venezuela1  Washington, April 25, 1960, 9:13 p.m. 914. Recent Castro-Leon rebellion attempt,2 particularly with implication GODR advance knowledge if not direct involvement, regarded by Dept as additional manifestation international tensions Caribbean area which Inter-American Peace Committee directed to study by Santiago Fonmin Mtg Res IV. Request you inform Fomin or President as appropriate U.S. Chairman IAPC considering suggesting that Committee, noting apparent increase in Caribbean tensions, renew its request of September 18, 1959 to all OAS Govts that they provide any information they may have regarding such tensions in order to aid Committee in preparation general report required under Res IV. In this connection would be desirable for Venezuela and Colombia submit any evidence re international aspects recent Castro-Leon rebellion and we would appreciate knowing whether they would do this. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 731.00/4–2560. Confidential. Drafted by Jamison and initialled by the Deputy Assistant Secretary Mallory. Repeated to the Embassies in Colombia, Cuba, and the Dominican Republic. 2 Reference is to Jesús María Castro-León. Documentation concerning his activities is contained in decimal files 731.00/1–1160 and 731.00/4–2560.
