400 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI embodied in the ABM Treaty. There is no virtue in trying to resolve these issues in the abstract against a timetable, especially without having specific technologies or a specific context to adjudicate. That effort would swiftly devolve into a negotiation of restrictive “lists” of permitted activities or of vague codewords for the restrictive interpretations of the ABM Treaty. The SCC remains the appropriate forum in which to resolve specific issues and, in the longer term, both sides anticipate holding stability talks. Hopefully, we will have our new Defense and Space Treaty tabled in Geneva soon which will provide a renewed basis for negotiating predictability measures “delinked” from START. Most efforts to place a timetable on resolution of Defense and Space issues works against delinkage. Our theme should be that if the Soviet Union is truly delinking START and D&S, then we don’t need a deadline for D&S issues in our START workplan. Watch out for Soviet grandstanding in Europe With all of the press speculation over an “arms control summit” in the context of political change in Europe, despite our efforts to keep expectations down, there remains a prospect that a Soviet proposal to withdraw at some point in time all foreign stationed forces from Europe may in fact materialize. We may also see a proposal for deeper cuts in Phase II of CFE or even in Phase I. We must make clear to Gorbachev that NATO exists for reasons other than simply to counter the Warsaw Pact, and that U.S. troops must remain in Europe for now regardless of whether Soviet troops are withdrawn from Eastern European countries or not. The U.S. will withdraw its troops only when they are no longer wanted or needed. The CFE Agreement is no obstacle to further reductions. It does not compel any nation to station forces outside its borders nor does it require nations to maintain their forces at the proposed ceiling. To introduce and encumber Phase I of the CFE Treaty with politically grandiose schemes could undo the treaty and introduce instability into Europe and panic into the NATO alliance, which is even now struggling to deal collectively with the rapid pace of change in Eastern Europe. Thus, a diversion to a debate over deep cuts to Phase II levels in a Phase I agreement could cost us a treaty and an alliance. The Soviet Union has already indicated that they will have difficulty in reducing to the Phase I levels in the timeframe we propose. A Soviet proposal to radically alter Phase I of CFE could signal Soviet reluctance to conclude a treaty early. Our difficulties in negotiating with 23 nations will be made far worse if we let ourselves get off track. Remember the broader agenda Much has been made of the notion that an “at sea” meeting will highlight the Soviet public campaign for naval arms control or naval
