1979 535 114. Report Prepared in the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower, Reserve Affairs, and Logistics1 Washington, January 30, 1979 [Omitted here is the title page, the forward, and the table of contents.] SECTION I—INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY A. (C) Background In November 1975, the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Manpower and Reserve Affairs) began a study that resulted in a report in April 1976 to Congress on U.S. Conventional Reinforcements for NATO.2 The study effort continued into a broader review of mobilization and deployment planning. Concern about this area was greatly reinforced by an Army exercise, MOBEX–76. In response, besides undertaking some immediate actions, the Secretary of Defense called for extensive testing of the full mobilization process. In this context, exercise NIFTY NUGGET–78 was designed and scheduled by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. It was to: (1) determine the adequacy of plans, systems and procedures for full mobilization, (2) examine limitations and shortfalls in manpower and logistics through the period of initial deployments, (3) fully exercise the mobilization and deployment responsibilities (without actual call-­up or movement of units) of the Military Departments, the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the transportation operating agencies (Military Airlift Command, Military Sealift Command, and the Military Traffic Management Command), the Organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and participating Federal departments and agencies, and (4) assess the effectiveness of deployment planning. The Joint Chiefs of Staff, to fully exercise the support provided through the civilian Federal agencies and the coordination needed to gain that support, encouraged and helped in the design of a companion civil sector exercise REX–78. REX and NIFTY NUGGET were held simultaneously, 10–30 October 1978, with some organizations extending their play into November. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/Security, Russell, Box 112, Mobilization Planning Study: 1/79–8/80. Confidential. According to the title page, the report, entitled “A Review of Military Mobilization Plans,” was prepared for the House Committee on Armed Services. For more on NIFTY NUGGET, see Document 94. 2 Reference is to Robert J. Murray and Herbert C. Puscheck, A Report to Congress on U.S. Conventional Reinforcements for NATO. (Washington: Government Printing Office, June 1976)
