Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI Option 3. Let prototype loan offer stand and press Soviets for response. —Would signal US interest in making progress on NSS issues. —Would keep pressure on Soviets to move forward with NSS technical issues. —Would forego opportunity to use withdrawal of NSS loan offer to reinforce post-Afghanistan technology transfer policy. II. UK Funding Issue Should the US offer to fund equipment for three UK NSS in the Southern Hemisphere, in the context of the UK shifting its negotiating position from one NSS to four? A. Background For well over a year, negotiation of NSS issues in Geneva has been deadlocked over the question of the number of UK NSS sites.9 The Soviets have taken the position that the UK should have ten NSS (one in the UK proper and nine in dependent territories around the world) if the US and USSR are to have ten. The UK has offered one NSS in Scotland and has strenuously resisted moving to a larger number, citing technical and budgetary considerations. We have supported the UK on this in Geneva, particularly in the last round, although advising them privately that we thought they would eventually have to move to a larger number in order to resolve the impasse. During Prime Minister Thatcher’s December 1979 visit to Washington,10 the President suggested that the UK consider offering three additional NSS sites, for a total of four, and it was agreed between Foreign Secretary Carrington and Secretary Vance11 that the UK would consider the possibility of three additional locations for installing NSS while the US would look into the possibility of funding the equipment for those stations. During discussions on January 10 with a US team visiting London,12 UK spokesmen presented a staff-level technical review of NSS siting issues, but said the UK did not intend to initiate a policylevel review of this matter until they have received a specific US funding proposal. What is needed, therefore, is a decision on the next step with regard to making a specific funding proposal to the UK; if the UK then decided to shift from one NSS to four, we could consider with them questions of timing and tactics for presenting the new UK position to the Soviets in Geneva. A new UK NSS position need not be presented to the Soviets early in the February round, and perhaps not until we have heard from the Soviets again on this issue.
