3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
760
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
Congressional reaction, then we might consider moving to approve
certain licenses which are consistent with policy. The SCC agreed on
this phased approach. (C)
Approve
11 Other
3. Credits. Mr. Newsom had talked to Richard Cooper12 in Europe
just prior to the meeting and reported that he was getting nowhere with
the allies on restricting the granting of export credits to the USSR. The
prospects for progress in this area were extremely dim, and he won-
dered whether it was worth the effort of continuing to push. Mr. Aaron
said it would be useful to get at least some measure of agreement with
the allies—even if limited in scope—which could be reported as
progress. Mr. Newsom said we could push the approach Mr. Aaron
had suggested previously: identify two or three major projects in the
USSR and get agreement that credits or bids would not be extended for
those. Commerce, Treasury and State all agreed that we are up against
the simple fact that the Europeans want the jobs and the exports. (C)
Mr. Aaron said that the allies have done nothing, despite the diffi-
cult and painful decisions which the President has taken on grain and
trade.13 He wondered if they were aware that this would have signifi-
cant political implications for America’s view of the alliance. State said
that indeed the allies were getting the message and they were worried.
They have slowed down on their contracting with the USSR and they
have not undercut us on major deals such as ARMCO and ALCOA—at
least not yet. However, they all say that they are afraid to act so long as
there is the likelihood that the French will take advantage of their deci-
sion. The Japanese have generally been cooperative, but they are com-
plaining that they may be undercut by the European allies to the detri-
ment of their own business community. (C)
All agreed that the Germans were the key nation, if economic sanc-
tions are to hold and be made effective. It was agreed that several key
projects with the Soviets would be identified which the President could
raise with Schmidt. We could also continue to press the Europeans to
change the date of maturity of credits, which would cost the Soviets
something by raising the price. Commerce and Treasury pointed out,
however, that even the denial of all official export credits to the USSR
would not prevent them from getting the development projects they
want. They did not feel that this was an area which was promising if
11 Carter checked the Approve option.
12 Under Secretary for Economic Affairs.
13 Carter wrote in the left margin, “Correct.”
