August 8–September 17, 1978
193
There then ensued a lengthy debate about language which should
be used to describe the concept of withdrawal of both armed forces and
settlements, much of which went on among the Israeli delegation.
Dayan then asked Secretary Vance if he could accept Dayan’s idea of
making clear that the principle had been accepted in this document of
withdrawal of Israeli armed forces and establishment of the full exer-
cise of Egyptian sovereignty. He said this would defuse the airfields
issue and leave only the settlements question to be hammered out in
subsequent negotiations. The Secretary said he understands the con-
cept, but did not comment on it. Dayan said that Weizman should be
able to work out here a timetable for the turnover of the airfields to ci-
vilian control, but that obviously the status quo would have to be main-
tained until final negotiations are complete for the treaty.
The Secretary then asked Weizman whether paragraphs C1, 2 and
3 of the draft and the subsequent paragraphs were satisfactory. There
was a confusing discussion among the Israelis, and Weizman said that
the concepts were generally satisfactory but the wording was unfa-
miliar and did not accord with previous concepts of buffer and demili-
tarized zones used in the previous agreements between Israel and
Egypt. They would have to accept some alternate language.
After another long debate in Hebrew took place, Secretary Vance
suggested that perhaps we leave the Israeli delegation to examine the
document at a more leisurely pace and to give us their reactions the
next morning. Begin agreed. The meeting then adjourned with an un-
derstanding that it would reconvene at 10 a.m. on September 14,4 at
which time the Israeli reactions to this draft would be available.
4 Carter met with Barak alone from 10:11 a.m. to 10:40 a.m. and with Dayan and the
rest of the Israeli delegation from 11:05 a.m. to 12:05 p.m., September 14. (Carter Library,
Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) See footnote 59, Document 28.
49.
Editorial Note
On September 14, 1978, General Secretary of the Communist Party
of the Soviet Union Leonid I. Brezhnev wrote a letter to President
Jimmy Carter on the state of U.S.-Soviet relations. As part of his tour
d’horizon of the “specific manifestations of the unsatisfactory state of
affairs in our relations,” Brezhnev offered an assessment of the
“problem” of the Middle East and of the Carter administration’s role in
the Egyptian-Israeli peace process. Brezhnev wrote that the Soviet
