X
Preface
themselves. The former Shah of Iran is also an important element in the
volume. Until his death in July 1980, his movements in exile provoked
Iran into continued efforts to obtain his extradition and his alleged for-
tune. Another, and not insubstantial focus of the volume, is on policy
discussions within the administration concerning rescue efforts.
The volume can be divided into three main sequences: the initial
embassy takeover and response by the Carter administration, efforts to
negotiate with Iran through various intermediaries, and the resort to
military force in the attempted rescue mission and its fallout. These de-
velopments took place against the backdrop of one of the twentieth
century’s most significant revolutions, the scale and historical back-
ground of which confounded U.S. policymakers who nevertheless
made tremendous efforts to understand. Their frustrations with the
situation are all too obvious.
Several themes are apparent by volume’s end. First, the Carter
administration, for all its effort, lacked appropriate leverage to influ-
ence Iranian developments. The hostages were held in the heart of a
major city by non-governmental actors. Communication with mem-
bers of the Iranian Government, therefore, was of little avail. Military
power was also judged to be proven ineffective. The fact that the
whereabouts of all of the hostages was unknown limited planning op-
tions. Moreover, the lack of an institutional structure for effective
inter-service coordination of special operations activities hindered the
execution of the rescue attempt. Other military actions were consid-
ered, but were deemed too risky in the context of Cold War confronta-
tion with the Soviet Union. Economic sanctions were hampered by a
lack of international support. Furthermore, Iran itself was relatively
economically insulated from dependence on foreign supplies.
Acknowledgments
The editor wishes to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the
Carter Library, Atlanta, Georgia. Special thanks are due to Mark Ell-
cessor and David Robarge of the History Staff of the Center for the
Study of Intelligence of the Central Intelligence Agency, who were ex-
tremely helpful in arranging full access to the files of the Central Intelli-
gence Agency. Douglas Richards and Mike Johnson of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff were likewise extremely helpful in expediting access to the
records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Delta Force papers held by the
JCS relating to the hostage rescue mission. The Office of the Historian
wishes to thank Greg Perett of the Office of Information Programs and
Services for coordinating the declassification review of this volume
within the Department of State. Additional thanks are due to the His-
torical Programs Staff at the Central Intelligence Agency, the Office of
Access Management at the National Security Council, and the Govern-
