Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
403
for rapid deployment of additional forces to that continent. United
States theater nuclear forces are being modernized, and the United
States will maintain strategic nuclear equivalence with the Soviet
Union.
Our Alliance centers on Europe, but our vigilance cannot be lim-
ited just to that continent. In recent years expanding Soviet power has
increasingly penetrated beyond the North Atlantic area.
As I speak today, the activities of the Soviet Union and Cuba in Af-
rica are preventing individual nations from determining their own fu-
ture. As members of the world’s greatest alliance, we cannot be indif-
ferent to these events because of what they mean for Africa and because
of their effect on the long-term interests of the Alliance itself.
I welcome the efforts of individual NATO Allies to work for peace
in Africa and to support nations and people in need, most recently in
Zaire.4
Our Alliance has never been an end in itself. It is a way to promote
stability and peace in Europe and, indeed, peace in the world at large.
Our strength has made possible the pursuit of de´tente and agree-
ments to limit arms, while increasing the security of the Alliance. De-
fense in Europe, East-West de´tente, and global diplomacy all go hand
in hand. Never before has a defensive alliance devoted so much effort
to negotiate limitations and reductions in armaments with its potential
adversaries. Our record has no equal in the search for effective arms
control agreements.
The United States continues to move forward in its negotiations
with the Soviet Union on a new agreement to limit and reduce strategic
nuclear weapons. Our objective is to preserve and advance the security
of all the members of our Alliance. We will continue to consult and to
work closely with our allies to ensure that arms control efforts serve
our common needs.
NATO Allies are also working for the mutual and balanced reduc-
tion of forces in Europe to provide greater security for all European
peoples at lower levels of armaments, lower tensions, and at lower
costs. The Allies have recently made a new proposal to the Warsaw
Pact, and we call upon those nations to respond in the positive spirit in
which our offer was made.
4 Reference is to the mid-May second Katangan invasion from Angola into Zaire’s
Shaba province. (“Zaire Reports an Attack in South By Communist-Backed Katangans,”
The New York Times, May 15, 1978, p. 15) The United States provided support to Belgian-
French rescue efforts in Zaire by contributing Air Force transport planes. The Carter ad-
ministration also extended credit to Zaire under the terms of the Arms Export Control
Act. (“Belgian and French Troops Fly to Zaire to Save 2,500 Foreigners; U.S. Sends Planes
and Speed Aid,” The New York Times, May 19, 1978, p. 17)
