Afghanistan 109 and not in the near term. If the radio propaganda option is being seriously considered, a technical study would be required to determine the best way to reach the Afghan radio audience. Assuming the broadcasts are fairly widely heard, they could have a significant impact. If the broadcasts originated from a neighboring country such as Pakistan, this would be considered a serious hostile act and the DRA could be expected to take countermeasures. 4. Insurgency Support—Non-Lethal. The easiest way to support the insurgents is to furnish them with money on a unilateral basis. We have identified a number of Afghan exile leaders through whom such funds could be channelled, although our ability to monitor how the money actually is spent would be limited. A possibility also exists to establish direct contact in Pakistan with Nuristan leaders, via discreet, unilateral Pakistani intermediaries. If we wanted to remove ourselves a step from such transactions, we might be able to get Saudi Arabia to front for us, but this would further reduce the element of control. Small amounts of non-lethal material such as medical supplies, rations and low-grade communications equipment, might be furnished unilaterally through Pakistan territory, although obviously this could be done more easily with GOP cooperation, or possibly by having the Saudis broker the deal with the GOP. U.S. assistance to the insurgents, whether in the form of money or non-lethal supplies or both, could be expected to encourage the anti-regime movement, but its ultimate effect would be difficult to predict. If significant quantities of aid were involved, this could not be kept secret. The USG probably would be accused of supporting the rebels by the Soviets and the Afghan press, whether or not concrete proof was available. Nevertheless, plausible denial could be maintained, or the USG might even admit to supplying “humanitarian aid” to the exiles. Pakistan’s attitude would be critical. The GOP could be seriously embarrassed if it developed that an increasingly creditable insurgency movement was operating from its Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP) and might take steps to restrict activities of the insurgents. 5. Insurgency Support—Lethal. Funds could be provided to the insurgents to purchase lethal military equipment, as in the non-lethal insurgency support option outlined above. Likewise, the Saudis could be asked to front for us on this. Small amounts of lethal equipment probably could be introduced clandestinely, but GOP cooperation would be required if significant amounts were involved. Equipment which could upgrade the insurgents’ combat capabilities might include small arms, sniper equipment, light to medium crew-served weapons, unconventional demolitions, and anti-aircraft weapons such as the Soviet SA–7 missiles. Training also would be required, and with full GOP
