432
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
on a new line of approach and that Mr. Nitze would be going to
London soon for further discussion. I also observed that the present
Administration is not in a good position to take serious decisions of this
kind since it will be going out of office so soon. Sir Christopher said he
fully understood this and did not expect any immediate firm answer
from us, although it would probably be necessary to take a decision by
the end of January, since the best time for the coup would be in the
Spring and a certain amount of preparation would be necessary.
It was agreed that no action would be taken at the present time but
that we would keep the suggestion in mind. It was also agreed that
there should be no further discussion between CIA and the British in-
telligence representatives on the subject until further notice. Burrows
said that the two British intelligence officers now in Washington were
returning to London almost immediately and that in any case it was
thought preferable that further technical discussions be held in the
Middle East.
150.
Memorandum Prepared in the Office of National Estimates,
Central Intelligence Agency1
Staff Memorandum No. 296
Washington, December 11, 1952.
SUBJECT
De-briefing of Ambassador Henderson
(The bulk of the following notes were made at the Ambassador’s
conference with the NSC Senior Staff on Tuesday, 2 December. Addi-
tional points have been inserted on the basis of statements made by the
Ambassador to CIA and State intelligence personnel at an earlier ses-
sion on the same day.)
1. Background. By reason of their Shiite religion and Aryan racial
background, the Iranians were isolated among the nations of the
Middle East. They were also traditionally underdogs. As a result they
had less admiration for force than other Moslems and more sympathy
for the defeated in any conflict. In their personal characteristics, the Ira-
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDI Files, Job 79T00937A, Box 2, Folder 1,
Staff Memoranda—1952, Substantive. Secret; Security Information.
