208
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
Iranian relations, signs of discontent with the quality of economic man-
agement were apparent, especially among some of the staunchest back-
ers of the revolution such as the Bazaaris and urban workers. These
tensions are likely to grow in the next several months as a result of
commodity shortages, accelerated inflation, and persistent unemploy-
ment. [portion marking not declassified]
Whether or not the strains generated by a deteriorating economic
situation will crystallize into resistance against the Ayatollah’s leader-
ship will depend on several factors. Once the crisis with the United
States is resolved the Ayatollah will have to find another focus of blame
for his policy blunders. He will also have to select his future policy
options gingerly, taking care to avoid extremist measures such as wide-
spread wage and price freezes or forced return to the countryside,
which would provide a focus for protest. Failure to follow an economic
course that holds the promise of a better future for most Iranians would
provide opportunities for the left and others to exploit. [portion marking
not declassified]
Impact on Oil Producers
Over the long term, the US blockage of Iranian assets will cause
other oil producing countries to reassess their asset portfolios. Oil
producing governments are likely to try to continue diversifying their
new investment as well as their existing assets away from the dollar
and from US institutions, more closely matching their asset holdings
with trade patterns. [2½ lines not declassified]
If other countries join in the blockage of Iranian assets, the trend
toward reduced oil production in countries currently accumulating
excess oil revenues will likely accelerate. Given the tight world oil
supply-demand balance, even a small shift in production policies
induced by the financial aspect of the US-Iranian crisis could have a
significant influence on the oil market. At this juncture we have no
indication that production policies have been changed. [portion marking
not declassified]
It is important to note that a number of countries were already
considering production cuts prior to the US-Iranian flareup, and that
moves in this direction in coming months should not be construed as
support for the Ayatollah Khomeini.
• [3 lines not declassified]
• [7 lines not declassified]
• [8 lines not declassified]
Implications for the US Dollar
The US blockage of Iranian assets has added to already existing
concerns about the suitability of the US dollar as the major international
currency. Yet, there is no other currency capable of assuming this role.
