670
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
213.
Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for
Health Issues (Bourne) to Chip Carter, the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski), the
President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs and Policy
(Eizenstat), and the President’s Science Adviser and Director
of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy
(Press)1
Washington, June 11, 1977
SUBJECT
World Hunger Initiative
Background:
The President’s interest in World Hunger is very timely and
needed. Recent estimates indicate that 1.2 billion people are malnour-
ished. Malnutrition is concentrated in the poor, infants and children,
and among women (particularly nursing mothers). The largest number
of chronically hungry people are found in India, Bangladesh, Pakistan,
and Indonesia. The largest number of chronically food-deficient devel-
oping countries are found in Africa with the Sahel and Ethiopia of par-
ticular concern. Malnutrition, however, is endemic to almost all poor
countries. In parts of South Asia, for example, malnutrition affects over
50 percent of the children. In Latin America, where nutrition is consid-
erably better, malnutrition is a primary or contributing cause of almost
60 percent of the deaths of preschoolchildren. Nonetheless, experience
in Sri Lanka, the State of Kerala in India, and China indicates that there
is hope. Even very poor countries, if they strongly focus comprehensive
social programs on the basic needs of the population, can alleviate or
limit malnutrition significantly.
The food production and nutrition problem has several major in-
ternational aspects. The world’s food production is now sufficient to
meet the current needs, and promises to remain so in the immediate fu-
ture. However, the demand for food in developing countries has been
growing and continues to grow more rapidly than the supply of food
distributed to those countries. Poor countries increasingly depend on
food exports from the United States and a few other major agricultural
exporters.
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files,
Box 324, World Hunger [2]. No classification marking. A copy was sent to Onek. Another
copy is in the Carter Library, White House Central Files, Box HE–6, Subject Files—Execu-
tive, 1/20/77–9/29/77.
