National Security Policy  439
16. Limited Aggression. Our military response to Communist limited 
aggression, overt or covert, should deny the objectives of the aggres­
sion in a manner least likely to lead to a large expansion of the scope 
and intensity of the hostilities.
Enclosure
Memorandum From Smith to John Foster Dulles
Washington, January 20, 1959
SUBJECT
Review of Strategic Concept
In your letter of July 23, 1958, to the President, you said you had 
told Secretary McElroy that you remained of the opinion that the mil­
itary doctrine set forth in paragraphs 13 and 14 of the Basic National 
Security Policy paper (Tab B) is rapidly outgrowing its usefulness and 
that we need to apply ourselves urgently to finding an alternative 
strategic concept. You stated also that we should seek the President’s 
approval of further study of an alternative doctrine by a small State-
Defense group. You will recall that the President later gave his approval 
for this study.
When I approached Defense on this subject in early August, they 
requested that the study be deferred until the FY 1960 budget was 
behind them. I accordingly let the matter lie dormant.
The budget process is now drawing to a close, and we should press 
ahead without further delay. My talks with General Picher, Director of 
the Joint Staff of the JCS, and others in the Pentagon have convinced me 
that we must take the initiative, as Defense and the Chiefs seem to be 
paralyzed by inter-­service differences.
S/P has accordingly ventured to draft “A concept of US Military 
Strategy for the 1960s” (Tab C) to serve as a basis of discussion with the 
Pentagon. This concept, which I believe reflects views that you have 
expressed in several conversations with Secretary McElroy, differs from 
the current strategic concept in the following major respects:
1. We abandon the major premise of the current concept—­i.e. the 
threat of massive nuclear retaliation is the primary deterrent to all kinds 
of Communist aggression. A corollary current premise is that general 
war forces are also limited war forces. Our premise is that the massive 
retaliation threat of our general war capability effectively deters only 
major Communist aggression. To prevent limited Communist aggres­
sion, a separate deterrent strategy and force, specifically designed for 
this purpose, is required.
