Arms Control and Disarmament 1449 asked whether the answer to the problem was not to establish specific goals for the Agency and to pursue them. Mr. McCone said that he was seeking specific objectives for the forth­ coming conference but that he had not been able to get very far as yet. The Secretary remarked that we certainly did not wish to see the IAEA fail. While Mr. McCone had referred to Mr. Hammarskjold’s con­ cern about this, the United States had an even bigger investment of prestige in the Agency. The Agency had been created in response to a proposal of the President. There had been a major battle in the Senate over it. It would be a blow to the United States if the Agency collapsed or withered away. Commissioner Vance thought that the Agency’s purposes, as stated in its Statute, were so broad that they were capable of almost any interpretation. He said that Mr. McKinney and Mr. Cole wanted the Agency to go into the power promotion business. He considered that the Agency did not have a place in this. All the plans that had been advanced implied that the United States would have to come up with very substantial funds to support power development. Commissioner Vance believed that the Agency should be a regulatory body and that it should also carry out some research. In the latter connection, Commis­ sioner Vance believed that research contracts, supported by US funds, could be placed in other countries. He referred particularly to a “pool of talent” in atom research in Western Europe. In an exchange of views with Mr. McCone, Commissioner Vance indicated that we would need to know where these research contracts would be placed. Mr. McCone thought there might be some resistance to this idea by other countries and that the Agency would want to have some voice in how and where such research would be carried out. Commenting on the possibilities of a nuclear power program, Mr. McCone remarked that there was now a much greater degree of realism about the possibility of nuclear power than heretofore. Com­ missioner Vance observed that operating costs were very high. He said that he presumed that we should not be so willing to bolster up the IAEA that we would be willing for the United States to go into an extensive nuclear power development program. The Secretary indi­ cated agreement. At the end of the meeting, Mr. McCone again said that he would need guidance as to whether we wanted the Atomic Energy Agency to continue in a position like the World Bank or whether we would want it tied more closely to the United Nations. He felt that the Agency would be likely to be ineffective unless it were tied more closely with the UN.
