726 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I I am confident of that leadership or I would not be here before you. Americans want their country to be a constructive international presence. And we are. We have many strengths, not least of which is our system of values, founded upon a belief in individual worth. Role of the Secretary of State Your inquiry today is directed not only to the substance of our foreign policies but also to my concept of the role of the Secretary of State. The Secretary of State must carry out a number of duties. And priorities must be set among them. These are my priorities. First, and most important, the Secretary of State is the principal adviser to the President on foreign policy issues. He must have the primary responsibility for recommending our foreign policy course, and seeing that the President’s decisions are then implemented. President Carter has made it clear that he expects me to play this role, and I intend to do so. Second, the Secretary of State is the President’s principal spokesman for his foreign policies. I intend to be very active in this role. I strongly believe in the value of clear and direct public discussion of our foreign policies. And I intend to consult very closely with the Congress on the shape and direction of our foreign policies. Third, the Secretary of State must make sure that the State Department and the Foreign Service, as a whole, are fully engaged in the processes by which policy is made and in discussions of foreign policy with the Congress and our public. Neither the Secretary nor the Department can succeed if they do not have confidence in each other, and work together. I intend to make full use of the Department and our Ambassadors in a fourth role: the conduct of our diplomacy abroad. There are times when only a Secretary of State can manage a negotiation for our nation. But to the extent possible, I will limit my own travel and rely on our skilled diplomats. A Secretary of State has other roles, as well: in administration of the State Department, in helping manage and coordinate the overseas activities of U.S. Government agencies, and in managing the flow of information from the State Department to the White House and other agencies. Each must be carried out efficiently. Each should require less of the Secretary’s time than the first roles I discussed. This is my concept of the job. The President has said that he supports me in it. I will need your support, and counsel, as well. Concluding Thoughts Let me conclude with these thoughts. I come to this new assignment after 22 years as a member of the U.S. Senate. I have participated
