711.743/21
[Document 384]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Bulgaria (Wilson)
WASHINGTON, September 23, 1925.
No. 141
SIR: The Department refers to your despatch No. 503, of July 1, 1924, regarding an
inquiry by the French Minister at Sofia as to whether the exchange of the ratifications
of the Extradition Treaty between the United States and Bulgaria was to be taken as an
indication of the relinquishment by this country of its capitulatory rights in Bulgaria.
You state that apparently the countries which have ratified the Treaty of Neuilly intend
to maintain their capitulatory rights and that upon examining the past records of your
Legation you have been unable to find that the United States has relinquished its
capitulatory rights in Bulgaria.
The Department does not perceive that there is any direct relation between the
capitulatory rights enjoyed by the United States in Bulgaria and the provisions of the
Extradition Treaty between the two countries. As noted in Moore’s Digest of
International Law, Volume IV, page 259, the United States has not generally followed
the practice of certain Powers in seeking to obtain the recovery of fugitive criminals
through the action of their ministers and consuls in countries in which such ministers
and consuls are by treaty invested with judicial powers. This country has, on the other
hand, in two cases, that of the Ottoman Empire, in 1874,4 and Japan, in 1886,5 entered
into extradition treaties with countries in which citizens of the United States were
entitled to capitulatory privileges. “The Government of the United States,” Mr. Moore
observes, “has been induced to take this position not only by reason of doubts as to the
applicability of the extraterritorial stipulations to extradition, but also because the
statutes passed to carry such stipulations into effect confer upon the ministers and
consuls no authority for that purpose.”
Inasmuch as the United States has not ratified the Treaty of Neuilly, it is of course not
in a position to rely directly upon the provisions of that Treaty as a basis for any claim
which it may care to assert in regard to the continued enjoyment of capitulatory rights
in Bulgaria. On the other hand, it does not appear that this country has at any time
relinquished its capitulatory rights in Bulgaria and, accordingly, those rights may be
said to be still subsistent. For your confidential information and guidance it may be
added that the Department’s interest in this matter is that of assuring to American
nationals in Bulgaria treatment as favorable as that which may be accorded to nationals
