3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1979
531
Vance,3 on the few outstanding issues make it possible to complete this
work really in the nearest future.
As for the question of telemetric information which you raised in
your letter, frankly, I am surprised that you return to this issue once
again since it has been considered already closed by mutual agreement
of the sides.
I must say it straight that from the very beginning the US side in-
troduced into the question of telemetric information many far-fetched
things that are not related to the agreement being worked out.
Nevertheless, here again we have shown good will. As a result,
during the Geneva meeting of Foreign Minister Gromyko and Secre-
tary Vance last December4 a mutually acceptable formulation was
worked out which provides that each side has the right to use various
methods of transmitting telemetric information during testing, in-
cluding its encryption, except for those cases when it would impede
verification of compliance with the provisions of the agreement.
We confirm that we intend to strictly adhere to the reached agree-
ment having in mind that in practice there should be no encryption of
such telemetric information which could become necessary for verifica-
tion of the provisions of the concluded Treaty. I would like to remind in
this connection that we proposed earlier to the US side that it names a
list of parameters transmitted by telemetry which, in its view, would
not be subject to encryption.
However, the US side would not come along. It was agreed that in
case of any ambiguities in future regarding the telemetric information
they will be considered at the Standing Consultative Commission
which has been established precisely for the purpose of removing any
misunderstandings whenever they arise. Indeed, practice has shown
that the Commission effectively performs its duties.
There was even no discussion at all that at the time of including the
worked out formulation in the agreement any additional statements or
interpretations would be made.
Meanwhile, on January 31, when the understanding on telemetric
information, worked out by the ministers, was technically included in
the draft agreement the head of the US delegation accompanied the text
with a statement which cannot be considered otherwise but as an at-
tempt to undermine the reached understanding.5
Suffice it to point out the assertion contained in that statement to
the effect that “any encryption of telemetric information could impede
3 See Documents 164, 166, and 167.
4 See Document 167.
5 See footnote 2, Document 180.
