The Secretary stated that he realized of course that if any corridor was to be transferred under any arrangement with Bolivia the arrangement must be arrived at and defined. The Secretary’s suggestion was merely a basis for discussion. He hoped that both parties would say that they would consider it and state how they would be willing to divide the territory and make a corridor. The Secretary repeated that it was impossible to arrive anywhere by rejections and he inquired whether either party had any suggestion or statement as to what it will do so that negotiations may be carried on. The Secretary then inquired of the Peruvian Ambassador if he had any suggestions to make.

The Peruvian Ambassador replied in the negative. He stated that Peru had accepted the Secretary’s proposal as made as according to the Secretary’s statement it was a proposal in principle and not a proposal in detail. The Ambassador was not prepared to discuss the details but accepted the proposal as made in principle. He felt that the Secretary’s statement opens the way for negotiations. The Chilean Ambassador replied that he had no suggestion to make. It is, he said, a question of judgment as to the best way to arrive at a settlement. A vague suggestion of a corridor to Bolivia the limits of which are not established is not in Chile’s opinion the right way to make a settlement. Chile hopes that the Secretary after the meeting can make a more definite proposal. The Secretary replied that he would be willing to do so if he knew what Chile and Peru would agree to but there is no use in making proposals of division or of a corridor unless he has some idea what will be agreed to. As to Bolivia the Secretary stated that he had made it plain that unless both parties wanted Bolivia included the Secretary will not discuss the matter with Bolivia. To do so there must be an agreement on this point first between Chile and Peru. The Secretary stated that if each party would give to the Secretary personally any definite suggestions as to what they will consider that he would make a suggestion in greater detail.
