3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 802 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI the scene, the new Secretary could make the changes suggested without reflecting unfavorably on Marshall or implying that Senator Muskie has no confidence in him, since his desire to return to the Academy is well known. (C) (a) Designate an Under Secretary for Strategic and Soviet Affairs. Reporting to him would be both the Bureau of Political-Military Affairs and either the offices of Soviet and of East European Affairs or a newlycreated Bureau of Soviet and East European Affairs (see below). This would ensure that one official at the top level of the State Department would be responsible for the entire range of questions dealing with the Soviet Union, just as Korniyenko deals with all aspects of American affairs within the Soviet Foreign Office. Such a move at one stroke would overcome most of the irrational aspects of organization that have plagued us in our relations with the Soviets in the past, parallel the bureaucratic structure which the Soviets use to deal with us and thereby rationalize the process of US-Soviet diplomatic interchange, and considerably ameliorate some of the burdens on the Secretary, who on too many occasions has been acting as Soviet desk officer, since there has been nobody underneath him in the hierarchy who dealt both with bilateral affairs and arms control matters. (This meant, incidentally, that the Soviet side of the Department made no input into a whole range of questions which formed the most important US-Soviet business from Moscow’s point of view.) The rationality of having a single Under Secretary of State for both Soviet, strategic, and arms control matters should be obvious, since the latter fields are really only separate aspects of US-Soviet relations. (C) My candidate for the job is Matt Nimetz. He is already in place as the Under Secretary handling security policy. He is smart, tough, and realistic about Soviet affairs—by far the best man in this regard on the seventh floor of the State Department. At least as important, Nimetz is a well-known Vance protege, a former partner in his law firm. Both for its symbolic continuity and for its substance the appointment would be an outstanding one. (C) (b) Create a Bureau for Soviet and East European Affairs. The United States spends more than a third of its national budget dealing with the Soviet Union. Yet it is the only major Western nation without an official of Assistant Secretary or comparable rank dealing with Soviet and East European affairs in its Foreign Ministry. Instead, we subsume Soviet affairs under the broader aegis of European affairs and ask one Assistant Secretary of State to be in charge of everything from London to Vladivostok. The fact of the matter is that George Vest and all of his predecessors spend more than 90 percent of their time dealing with our knotty relations with the allies. This is inescapable. It is impossible for someone handling Western European affairs to devote adequate time
