It is understood that the Cantonese contemplate using the so-called Customs Memo for valuation purposes, although the Customs authorities are not to take any part in the actual collection of the new taxes. It is evident that the Cantonese authorities intend to levy these taxes regardless of protests from the Powers concerned. It is also equally clear that once these taxes are applied they will be continued indefinitely. In a conversation with Mr. Eugene Chen, so-called Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs, the writer of this despatch was informed that the Cantonese régime expected to raise $500,000, Canton currency, monthly through the new taxes, the money to be paid over as collected to the strikers, who would then be expected to find other employment. When questioned as to what would be done about the tax after the strikers had been paid, Mr. Chen said this question had not yet been decided, but the taxes would probably be continued indefinitely if the Government found it expedient and necessary to do so. The Acting British Consul General, Mr. Brenan, is frankly in favor of allowing the Cantonese régime to institute the new system of taxation without objection on the part of the Powers. Mr. Brenan believes that the Powers are not in a position to do more than file the usual protests and since these would have no effect, he thinks an effort should be made to regularize and control the collection of the taxes through the existing machinery of the maritime customs. Colonel Hayley Bell, the Commissioner of Customs, is of the same opinion, and a copy of a private letter just received from him by the writer of this despatch is enclosed herewith for the information of the Legation.48 Colonel Bell draws attention to the fact that the local government probably intends to use the existing picket machinery for the collection of the new taxes. He points out that if this is not done the present system of extortion, intimidation and illegal interference with foreign trade may be expected to continue indefinitely. For these reasons, Colonel Bell believes that the Powers should endeavor to induce the Cantonese régime to consent to the collection of the taxes through the customs with the understanding that the money will be paid over at stated intervals to the Cantonese régime, instead of being sent on to Peking.
