National Security Policy  969
one or another of the countries in the area within the next five years. 
US action, however, could in most cases reduce this chance and in any 
event could probably prevent any chain reaction if an individual coun­
try did go Communist. It is hard to see the situation in the area as a 
whole improving markedly over this period, and a bellicose Chinese 
Communist policy could produce widespread turmoil and even major 
hostilities.
IV. THE ROLE OF WESTERN EUROPE
41. Western Europe as a whole is likely to prosper over the next 
few years, and the economies of most countries, especially the major 
continental states, are likely to grow at rates only slightly below those 
of the last five years. Economic efficiency is generally increasing rap­
idly, and the basic terms of trade with underdeveloped areas are likely 
to continue favorable to Europe for some time to come. Even the avail­
ability of oil is far less uncertain than it was a few years back.
42. The movement toward economic integration will continue 
to have great momentum. However, the current differences between 
the Common Market (Six) and the European Free Trade Association 
(Seven) will be difficult to resolve. If, as seems likely, the Six move ahead 
rapidly—­with increasing political consultation among themselves—
then the UK and the rest of the Seven will feel increasing compulsion to 
reach some sort of accommodation embracing the 13 and perhaps oth­
ers. However, British viewpoints in particular must undergo marked 
changes before any type of association becomes possible. Moreover, the 
strong, though declining, protectionist attitudes of the French and their 
aspirations to lead the continent will have to be modified. Association 
could also be prevented by serious French domestic difficulties. A con­
tinued split between the groups, with rigid economic divisions forming 
between them, would have serious consequences for the political cohe­
siveness of the West.
43. International Economic Policy and Economic Aid. The prospect of 
continued sound economic growth carries with it a substantial Western 
European capacity to reduce trade barriers and to assist in aid to the 
underdeveloped areas. A great part of the capacity to render assist­
ance will continue to be exerted, particularly by France, in colonial or 
recently colonial areas, so long as some form of political tie remains. 
For more general aid and private investment efforts, West Germany 
has by far the greatest potential, while the UK effort probably can rise 
only modestly.
44. NATO. NATO faces a serious problem in maintaining firmness 
and cohesion. One factor creating this problem is a difference of view 
on policy toward the USSR. Substantial official and public opinion, par­
ticularly in the UK, tends to see little likelihood of Soviet military action
