National Security Policy 1035 Naval-­Launched Missile Systems (See paragraphs 86–94, NIE 11–5–59) 26. Submarine-­Launched. Recent evidence continues to indicate an emphasis on ballistic missile armament in Soviet submarines. There has been no additional information on the few submarines believed to have been converted some years ago to topside stowage of cruise-­type mis­ siles (SS–7), and they may have been supplanted for operational use by ballistic missile types. A total of about four long range, conventionally-­ powered “Z” class submarines have been modified by enlarging the sail and installing hatches, probably to accommodate ballistic missiles. Each can probably launch two ballistic missiles (SS–11) against land targets at ranges of 200 n.m. and possibly 350 n.m.6 More recently, the USSR has undertaken construction of a comparable new class of sub­ marine, designated “G” class, at least six of which may now be oper­ ational. This class is probably also designed to accommodate ballistic missiles. Considering the size and configuration of the “G” class sub­ marines, we estimate that each can probably launch about six missiles (SS–12) with 350 n.m. range. It is possible, but less likely, that the mis­ sile has a range of 700 n.m. Although we have no specific information on ballistic missiles employed by these submarines, we estimate that both the SS–11 and SS–12 systems would be capable of achieving 1 to 2 n.m. CEPs under operational conditions. For missile launching, both the “Z” and “G” class submarines would need to be surfaced or more likely with the sail awash. We believe that their missiles do not use solid propellants. 27. We continue to believe that the USSR will develop a system capa­ ble of delivering ballistic missiles against land targets from a submerged submarine, although there is still no firm evidence of its development. Assuming that an active program is well under way, a 500–1,000 n.m. system of this type (SS–9) could become operational in 1961–1963. 28. Other Naval Systems. The USSR has made further progress in its program of arming surface ships with missiles. Some destroyers have been modified and others newly constructed to launch surface-­to-­surface cruise-­type missiles. Two types of cruise missiles are utilized, with speeds in the Mach 1 region and with effective ranges of about 30 n.m. against ships at sea. With the use of forward sea or airborne observation sta­ tions, the range of one (SS–8) could be increased to about 100–150 n.m. 6 The Assistant Chief of Naval Operations for Intelligence, Department of the Navy, and the Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff, believe it probable that a 350 n.m. missile is used with both the “Z” and “G” class submarines. It is believed that the modified “Z” class submarine served as a prototype for the “G” class submarine, and that the 350 n.m. ground launched missile (SS–3), with minor modifications, could be accommodated by vertical tubes observed in the “Z” class submarine and believed to be in the “G” class submarine. [Footnote is in the original.]
