576
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
192.
Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for European Affairs (Vest) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, March 21, 1978
SUBJECT
State Visit of Romanian President Ceausescu—A Preview
I. Setting and Objectives
Ceausescu’s visit is a logical complement to Tito’s trip in March
as a step forward in U.S. relations with Eastern Europe. Both countries
are important to us because they have successfully preserved their
independence from the USSR. Both regard good relations with the
United States and the PRC as vital to their security.
Our long-standing policy of improving relations with Romania
was reaffirmed by the President in PD–21, which directed that the
United States accord favored treatment to those Eastern European
countries which are relatively autonomous in foreign policy or rela-
tively liberal internally.2 Our interest in supporting Romanian inde-
pendence continues undiminished.
At the same time, the visit provides an opportunity for discussion
of human rights issues and for encouraging further Romanian action
on humanitarian problems such as divided families and binational
marriages.3 We have made significant progress in recent years but
there is more to be done. We want to urge some liberalization of
Romania’s tight internal policy, while aware that Ceausescu considers
internal discipline a prerequisite for the maintenance of Romania’s
independence from Moscow, its territorial integrity and economic
growth. To achieve further progress, we must persuade Ceausescu that
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Office of
Analysis for the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Office Subject Files, 1965–1980,
Lot 92D412, Box 2, Romania—Ceausescu Visit. Confidential. Drafted by Silins; cleared
by Andrews and Fromowitz, and in EUR/PP, C, S/P, and HA/HR. Luers initialed the
memorandum for Vest. The date is handwritten at the top of the first page.
2 See Document 16.
3 Derian met with Pungan on February 14, and discussed human rights, an ongoing
cause of tension between Washington and Bucharest. Derian raised U.S. concern regard-
ing emigration from Romania, as well as the rights of the Hungarian minority. Emigration,
Derian told Pungan, was directly related to the ability of the U.S. Government to extend
MFN status to Romania under the Jackson-Vanik Amendment. The Carter administration
took a new direction regarding human rights, “and it is only fair to explain our concerns
to the GOR and to point out that these factors affect our decisions and our relations
with other countries,” Derian told Pungan. (Telegram 43849 to Bucharest, February 18;
National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780077–0269)
