The 5–5–3 ratio (Washington Treaty 192289 ) should be firmly maintained
as applicable to all types of combatant naval units so far as the United
States, Great Britain and Japan are concerned. The United States is
interested in a general way in the limitation of the naval armament of other
countries. Such limitation may properly be a matter of negotiation in so far
as not already determined by the Washington Conference and provided the
Washington agreements are not disturbed.
This Government would welcome any practical steps which might tend
toward the limitation of competitive naval construction. In this connection it
should be borne in mind that while a substantial part of the program
presented to the Washington Conference by the American Delegation was
realized, no agreement was reached as to the limitation of competitive
building of naval craft other than capital ships and aircraft carriers. This
Government would welcome an agreement which would complete the work
begun at Washington.
Separation of the Problems Involved in the Limitation of Land Armament
from those Involved in the Limitation of Naval Armament.
It is appreciated that the scope of the work of the Preparatory Commission
will include the consideration of problems relating to the limitation of both
land and naval armaments. It is believed, however, that you should
endeavor to arrange for the consideration of these problems by separate
committees of the main Commission with a view to the eventual
preparation of separate agenda for conferences which may be called later.
The ultimate success of any effort toward the limitation of armaments
seems to lie along the line of isolating from the general problem as many
concrete questions as possible and it is therefore felt that the consideration
of the limitation of both land and naval armaments jointly at the same
conference would tend to render more difficult definite achievement along
either line.
Five nations are particularly interested in the question of the limitation of
naval armament: the United States, Great Britain, France, Italy, and Japan,
and the success of any program would depend primarily upon an agreement
between those five powers. There are, however, other nations which may be
