Arms Control and Disarmament  1507
4. Tie between the Control System and Cessation. The Commis­
sion believes that the Treaty documentation should establish the link 
between control system and cessation and that link should be defini­
tive, unmistakable, and irrevocable. The Commission would like to see 
the specific provisions for the control system and the agreement for 
cessation in a single document. Whether it is necessary that it be in one 
document or in two lies within the province of the State Department. 
The Commission would repeat that, even if in two documents, the link 
must be “definitive, unmistakable, and irrevocable.”
5. The Gore Proposal. The Commission is in agreement that an 
immediate unilateral proposal as set forth by Senator Gore would not 
be desirable. They are in agreement also that, if an announcement along 
this line is to be made later, it should not be a unilateral declaration 
but a proposed international agreement, and that the time of making 
should be at the time of deadlock or breakdown of the current Geneva 
discussions. (The Commission believes that we should seek a multilat­
eral controlled ban on atmospheric tests as an immediate and practical 
and enforceable objective. This, as we understand it, is very similar to 
Senator Gore’s proposal.)
6. Limitation of Test Cessation to Controllable Tests. The Commission 
believes that whatever happens at Geneva we must not agree to a ban 
on tests which cannot be controlled. We must recognize the threshold 
problem for underground tests and also the outer space detection prob­
lem as both involving thresholds of detectability.
Analysis of the underground shots in the HARDTACK II series 
indicates that the questions of both detectability and identification of 
subterranean nuclear explosions are substantially more difficult than 
previously assumed on the basis of the RAINIER shot, the only infor­
mation available to the Geneva Technical meeting. The increase in diffi­
culty is of a magnitude such as to raise additional substantial questions 
of the practicality of an inspection system which includes underground 
shots; the problems of difficulty of staffing; quality of staffing, cooper­
ation by all nations, expense, etc., are compounded by the recent data. 
It may well be, therefore, that the only practical detection system at this 
time is one that is restricted to the detection and control of atmospheric 
nuclear explosions only.
7. The Commission is concerned by the fact that prolonged nego­
tiations during which we continue to suspend all U.S. tests might have 
the practical effect of making the test ban permanent with no opportu­
nity of establishing controls or other necessary conditions.
On November 7, the President said in part, “If there is not shortly 
a corresponding renunciation by the Soviet Union, the United States 
will be obliged to reconsider its position.” The Soviet Union has not in 
the intervening time declared its intention of refraining from further 
nuclear tests during the discussions at Geneva. A clear statement of our
