832
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
ties with the United States had not developed sufficiently. Trade with
the Soviet Union last year was approximately $2.5 billion. With the
FRG, trade was approximately $2 billion, but was not balanced, with
Yugoslavia having a huge deficit of $1.2 billion. In the past the deficit
had been largely made up by revenues from tourism and remittances
from Yugoslavs working in Germany. But this past year there was a
short-fall of $200 million. With Italy trade was over $1.5 billion, and
was well developed but also unbalanced. With the U.S. the long-term
aim is to expand trade and the U.S. should be among those in the first
rank of Yugoslav trading partners. The present deficit situation with
the EEC cannot continue in its present form. The difficulties with the
EEC already transcend tolerable limits. Its trade with third countries
is highly protectionist, especially on agricultural products. It is a very
difficult situation in which Yugoslavia can cover only thirty percent
of its trade through exports. The U.S. market is fair but difficult for
Yugoslav exporters. Exchanges in recent years have been more or less
balanced. There have been talks with the EEC, but the first round did
not give grounds for optimism. Yugoslavia’s aim is to expand economic
ties with the U.S., and ExIm should seek to help in this process.
Secretary Vance said that we welcome Yugoslavia’s objective of
expanding economic relations with the U.S. and we agree with it. He
thanked Minic for his proposal on ExIm and said that he would discuss
the matter further with Mr. Albright and President Moore and would
be back in touch. The important thing, he said, is to find a solution to
this question. Minic reemphasized his wish that the U.S. government
promote the long-term expansion of trade and finance and added that
U.S. businessmen know well the Yugoslav laws which encourage
foreign investment. Expansion remains the important thing, including
industrial cooperation.
Krsko Fuel License. Minic called on Assistant Secretary Bernardic to
discuss the Krsko question. He noted that Bernardic and Assistant
Secretary Vest had met the previous evening and that Bernardic had
presented the Yugoslav suggestion for an interim agreement pending
adoption of an international convention on nuclear export controls.6
Bernardic said his talks with Vest had been very useful but he empha-
sized that these were not negotiations, which must be left to Ambassa-
dor Kljun and U.S. officials who deal with this question. Their conversa-
tion was intended to move the effort forward. He said that the situation
is now very fluid with some important matters not clearly defined,
6 No separate record of the meeting was found. In telegram 67708 to Belgrade,
March 16, Andrews informed the Embassy that the discussion took place, but that
“Bernardic did not go into any more detail than he did at the Vance-Minic meeting.”
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780117–0865)
