Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1125
Ms. C.S. Scott	
Col. S.L. Shemyakin
Mr. D. Roesch (Int.)	
Mr. B.R. Ivanov
	
Mr. N.S. Razgonov (Int.)
4. Summary: The Soviet side argued that the U.S. side should drop 
its proposal for exhibitions of variants of the SS–24, 25, and 18, but finally 
accepted the U.S. language. Nazarkin confirmed the Sample-­Kryuchkov 
agreement on solid rocket motors, the Ifft-Masterkov agreement on for-
mer and retired types and accepted the U.S. language for a joint state-
ment on weighing. End Summary.
5. Subject Summary: Exhibition of variants; miscellaneous. End 
Subject Summary.
Exhibition of Variants
6. Nazarkin said that he had called a meeting at this late hour 
because the Soviet side had discovered a problem in the inspection pro-
tocol. He said that Annex 11, para 5(a) on exhibitions of the SS–24, 25, 
and 18 had been previously agreed upon. However, the U.S. side now 
insisted on adding a clarification that “each variant shall be exhibited”. 
He urged the U.S. side to drop this new language, as the concept of 
exhibiting variants of these missiles had not been mentioned previously.
7. Brooks said that this was simply a tracking fix. It was fully con-
sistent with agreed language in Section XIV which provided for exhibi-
tions of ICBMs and SLBMs of each type and variant. The concept that 
variants would be exhibited had been agreed upon by the sides for 
months. Nazarkin noted that Section XIV was fully agreed upon, and 
that the Soviet side would not depart from this. However, the problem 
was that para 5(a) of Annex 11 referred to specific types of ICBMs.
8. Ashratov said that Annex 11 referred to early initial exhibitions 
of existing types of ICBMs and SLBMs. The Soviet side had taken into 
account in this provision that there would be a display of variants. 
However, when the sides agreed on the display of specific types of 
ICBMs, the U.S. side did not state that all variants of types should be 
exhibited. The Soviet side understood that the main purpose of the lan-
guage was to confirm technical characteristics in the Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU). The dimensions of these missiles differed from 
one another by less than three percent. Three percent, Ashratov con-
tinued, was the allowed margin of error for measurements within the 
framework of the treaty. Thus, in this case, there was no specific need 
to exhibit variants.
9. In a heated response, Brooks interrupted Ashratov and asked 
Nazarkin whether the position being presented was the official posi-
tion of the Soviet government. If so, Brooks said, many tired people 
could get some sleep since there would be no treaty signing that week.
