711.4216 M 58/25
[Document 295]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, March 21, 1924.
SIR: I have the honour to refer to the note which you were so good as to
address to Mr. Chilton on February 16th last and to inform you, by request
of His Excellency the Governor-General of Canada, that the question of the
diversion of water from the St. Lawrence River watershed into that of the
Mississippi continues to cause grave concern to the Government and people
of Canada, more especially in view of the provisions of the bill which has
been introduced into Congress in regard to this matter. The Dominion
Government desire me to express the hope that no action will be taken
either to confirm or permit the claim of the Sanitary District of Chicago to
continue the diversion of water referred to above, inasmuch as this would
adversely affect navigation on the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River
as well as the actual or prospective development of power upon river and
inter-lake connecting waters.
The attitude of the Government of Canada in opposition to and in protest
against the most injurious effects of this proposed diversion of water has
been consistently maintained throughout and has been made known to the
United States Government. The Dominion Government feel that it would be
most unfortunate if, now that the development of the St. Lawrence
Waterway for navigation and power purposes is under consideration, any
action should be taken which might adversely affect the possibility of such
development, and they trust that these views will meet with the agreement
of the United States Government.
In this connection I would draw your particular attention to the contents of
Mr. Chilton’s note No. 144 of February 13th, the receipt of which you were
good enough to acknowledge on the 15th ultimo,14 and to enquire whether
you are yet in a position to inform me of the attitude of the United States
authorities in this matter. At the same time it would be a matter of
