Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 The growing problem of illegal immigration is another example of one specific question which reflects a range of larger issues: bilateral relations with Mexico, Korea, and the Caribbean nations; overall international population policy, and the US job situation. c. Foreign economic assistance—How effective have US efforts been and what domestic consensus is there for continuing, changing, or expanding present programs? 2. New Global Roster: Since many still associate State with monitoring diplomatic events and bilateral relations abroad, you might spell out the range of new and expanding concerns (energy, food, population, environment, science and technology, North-South dialogue) and upcoming events that will affect them (CIEC, LOS conference, UN Special Session) which demand the Department’s attention.5 Alternatively, concentrate on just one of the above—energy might be most topical— and stress the connection between domestic and international efforts on conservation, diversification of supply, and longer-term research and development. 3. Multilateral Diplomacy: Few organizations may be as badly understood as the UN. The same applies to US use of the UN. A brief tour d’horizon of the scope of UN activities and US problems and opportunities there could generate greater appreciation for multilateral diplomacy and affirm links with domestic concerns. 4. Human Rights: It’s in the headlines—replete with complexity, contradiction, and potential backfire from abroad and at home. A presentation setting forth the outline of our objectives, preferred approaches, and problems we foresee might elicit helpful discussion. 5. Defense Cluster: Non-proliferation/arms control/arms sales. This area, too, is complicated, timely, and probably badly understood—and has obvious domestic economic spinoffs. Recommendation for Action That you sign the attached memo to Watson6 with the list of topics noted. Approve Disapprove Let’s discuss7 5 The CIEC was scheduled to hold a final ministerial meeting in Paris May 30–June
