Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
95
The growing problem of illegal immigration is another example of
one specific question which reflects a range of larger issues: bilateral re-
lations with Mexico, Korea, and the Caribbean nations; overall interna-
tional population policy, and the US job situation.
c. Foreign economic assistance—How effective have US efforts been
and what domestic consensus is there for continuing, changing, or ex-
panding present programs?
2. New Global Roster: Since many still associate State with moni-
toring diplomatic events and bilateral relations abroad, you might spell
out the range of new and expanding concerns (energy, food, popula-
tion, environment, science and technology, North-South dialogue) and
upcoming events that will affect them (CIEC, LOS conference, UN Spe-
cial Session) which demand the Department’s attention.5 Alternatively,
concentrate on just one of the above—energy might be most topical—
and stress the connection between domestic and international efforts
on conservation, diversification of supply, and longer-term research
and development.
3. Multilateral Diplomacy: Few organizations may be as badly un-
derstood as the UN. The same applies to US use of the UN. A brief tour
d’horizon of the scope of UN activities and US problems and opportu-
nities there could generate greater appreciation for multilateral diplo-
macy and affirm links with domestic concerns.
4. Human Rights: It’s in the headlines—replete with complexity,
contradiction, and potential backfire from abroad and at home. A pres-
entation setting forth the outline of our objectives, preferred ap-
proaches, and problems we foresee might elicit helpful discussion.
5. Defense Cluster: Non-proliferation/arms control/arms sales. This
area, too, is complicated, timely, and probably badly understood—and
has obvious domestic economic spinoffs.
Recommendation for Action
That you sign the attached memo to Watson6 with the list of topics
noted.
Approve
Disapprove
Let’s discuss7
5 The CIEC was scheduled to hold a final ministerial meeting in Paris May 30–June
3. The sixth meeting of the Third UN Law of the Sea Conference (1973–1982) was sched-
uled to take place in New York beginning May 23. The tenth UN Special Session on Dis-
armament (SSOD) was scheduled to take place in New York May 23–June 30, 1978.
6 Attached but not printed at Tab A is an undated memorandum from Vance to
Watson listing seven possible topics for discussion.
7 Vance neither approved nor disapproved any of the recommendations.
