1178  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
714.	 Telegram 301 to Geneva1
Washington, September 17, 1956, 7:33 p.m.
301. For Johnson.
Guidance for September 20 meeting.
1. Renunciation of force. Again show how our April 19 revision 
introduces minimum changes Communist December 1 draft which pro­
vided reasonable starting point for negotiation although not in itself suf­
ficiently explicit constitute acceptable formulation renunciation of force 
declaration. These changes were essential to demonstrate to world both 
sides sincerely willing renounce use of force Taiwan area and pursue 
objectives by peaceful means only. Characterize Communist May 11 draft 
as step backward. (FYI After thorough consideration possible reformula­
tion our April 19 revision, we are satisfied our objectives best served by 
holding to present draft. We consider it strong position on which defend 
ourselves publicly against Communist propaganda effort. We do not 
repeat not contemplate any revision. END FYI)
Refer to passage from Liu Shao-­chi speech before 8th Party 
Congress September 15 regarding Communist intention take Taiwan 
(Deptel 300).
Observe that apparent PRC determination bring Taiwan under 
Communist domination by any means necessary including use of 
force would seem to indicate further attempts to arrive at meaning­
ful renunciation of force may be foredoomed to failure. Surmise that 
PRC high policy reflected in Liu’s speech may afford explanation 
Wang’s persistent refusal to agree to effective renunciation of force 
formula through more than 9 months fruitless discussion this sub­
ject at Geneva. Invite Wang to explain and interpret Liu statement in 
light professed Chinese Communist willingness make comprehensive 
renunciation of force.
(FYI While there is nothing new in Liu statement on Taiwan we 
think his high position as Chairman Standing Committee National 
Peoples Congress and as spokesman for Central Committee of Party 
and importance of 8th Party Congress before which he spoke justify 
this special attention. We wish speech used to draw out Wang more 
fully re Chinese Communist determination use force to extend their 
sway to Taiwan, if they cannot obtain this objective by less costly 
means. END FYI)
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–1756. Secret; Priority; Limit 
Distribution. Drafted by Clough and McConaughy; cleared by Sebald. Repeated to 
London Priority as telegram Tosec 2.
