Negotiating Channels 455 2. Having read the message (our appeal to limit the reaction to the Canadian affair),2 he erupted, saying that the conduct of the Canadian Government was scandalous and that the affair risked blowing everything up at a time that he was making slow but sure progress. Not only did they commit illegal acts, but, moreover, they claimed victory and the government sent congratulations to the Canadian diplomats. This affair is going to have disastrous consequences for the hostages. (His remarks correspond more or less to the press conference that he gave yesterday morning. Swiss journalist Hottinger was there.) I told him that the affair was unfortunately exploited by the mass media. Ghotbzadeh immediately contradicted me, saying that it was not true. The Canadian Government had exploited the affair for reasons of internal politics.3 There had been a declaration by the Prime Minister and the Minister of Foreign Affairs. I gave him some information then to show him how the press had behaved reasonably, quite differently from what he believed. He remarked that if only there had not been this publicity and these governmental declarations that obliged him to make a violent counterattack. 3. While agreeing completely with him on the need for discretion and silence that was broken by the mass media, I put to him some arguments recalling what he had said in his press conference. What would he have done in the place of the Canadian Ambassador if he were faced with the following questions? What was the status of the six in Iran? Clearly, they were diplomats living on Iranian territory with the agreement of the Iranian Government and therefore enjoying privileges and immunities which would permit them to leave the country. What would you have wanted them to do? That they should go politely to ask the students on the compound with whom Ghotbzadeh himself has had little evidence of cooperation? Would anyone have given them passports and their personal effects? Should the Canadian 2 In telegram 25212 to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Tehran, January 29, the Department asked Laingen to inform Ghotbzadeh that the United States was “concerned that the press story could be misinterpreted by those occupying our Embassy and that it could have adverse consequences in Tehran for a speedy resolution to the crisis. Therefore, we hope that the Government of Iran will take whatever steps possible to minimize adverse publicity and reaction in Iran that might negatively affect the prospects for an end to the crisis.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800051–0234) 3 Bourguet and Villalon had explained to “Ghotbzadeh that Canadian politics lay behind the affair, implying that the U.S. was being manipulated for political purposes by the Canadian Government.” Ghotbzadeh promised to try and control Iranian public pressure and asked that the United States do the same. (Memorandum for the Record, January 30; Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 34, Iran 1/80)
