National Security Policy  485
be replaced by guided missiles, first in static defenses within the USSR 
and later in mobile field force units.
123. Airborne Forces. Increasing attention is now being paid to the 
development of Soviet airborne and air transportable forces, as indicated 
by: the rapid augmentation of transport capabilities, especially in assault-­
type helicopters and converted BULL medium bombers; the appearance 
in 1956 of the CAMP, a twin-­turboprop assault transport; the develop­
ment of a new light-­weight self-­propelled anti-­tank gun for airborne use; 
and further improvements in personnel and cargo parachutes. The USSR 
has sizable airborne forces in being, estimated at 10 divisions and a total 
strength of about 100,000 men. Soviet Aviation of Airborne Troops now 
comprises approximately 500 twin-­engine transports, 180 BULL trans­
ports, 140 large helicopters, and 220 large gliders. This strength could be 
augmented substantially by other military and civil transports.
124. Soviet airlift capabilities will increase considerably during 
1958–62, primarily as additional helicopters and transports are intro­
duced. The largest operational Soviet helicopter can now carry 8,800 lbs. 
(40 men with combat equipment), and by 1961 the USSR could probably 
have in operation helicopters with payloads up to 30,000 lbs. The BULL 
will probably be employed as an interim medium transport until late in 
the period, when it will probably have been completely replaced by the 
CAMP and possibly other advanced types. Better auxiliary transport will 
also become available as improved aircraft are introduced into the civil 
air fleet. New turboprop medium and heavy transports will probably 
become operational in 1958, and a new four-­turbojet transport in 1959.18
Soviet Air Forces
125. We estimate the over-­all actual strength of Soviet military air 
units in mid-1957 at about 18,000 aircraft.19 Further modernization of 
all components of the Soviet air forces will occur during 1958–62, and 
will include increases in the proportion of jet all-­weather fighters, in the 
numbers of jet medium and heavy bombers, and the emergence of a sub­
stantial inflight refueling capability. The present combat effectiveness of 
Soviet military aviation is, on the whole, below that of the US. However, 
the introduction of new aircraft types and the relatively low turnover of 
personnel will almost certainly raise combat proficiency to a high level 
by 1962. In the long run, guided missiles will replace manned aircraft 
within many of the missions performed by the latter, but we doubt that 
this process will go so far during the period of this estimate as to lead to 
a major reduction in the numbers of Soviet military aircraft.
18 For estimated performance characteristics of Soviet transport aircraft, see Annex, 
Table 8. [Footnote is in the original.]
19 For detailed estimates of the strength of Soviet and other Bloc air forces during the 
period of this estimate, see Annex, Tables 3–5. [Footnote is in the original.]
