806 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI bombers, ALCMs and airbases. This is not likely to happen if we continue to give the Air Force carte blanche. New Kinds 8. A major battle is shaping up over the issue of new kinds and future systems in general. The Soviets are rather shocked and confused at the U.S. proposal. The deal was supposed to be that we would agree to ban ASBMs and ICCMs and they would drop their new kinds concept. Instead, we seem to have embraced the new kinds concept, while opening big loopholes for ASBMs and ICCMs, all of which strikes me as not negotiable, and bad arms control, even if negotiable. Although many of us are confused as to the real intent of the guidance on new kinds, we understand it is driven by the desire to protect the boost-­ glide vehicle. I would make several points: — Writing treaty obligations based upon “new kinds of strategic offensive arms” is dangerous. No one on either side knows what “new kinds” means, and the ABM treaty experience with “based on other physical principles” is not something either side should wish to repeat. Perhaps more importantly, there is not, and will not be, any agreed understanding in this treaty of what constitutes “strategic offensive arms.” A tacit understanding was reached long ago that a definition of this term is too difficult to achieve. Fortunately, a definition is not necessary, provided that we keep the phrase out of provisions which contain formal obligations, and instead specify exactly what systems we are talking about. This also has some relevance to the non-­transfer commitment. — We seem to be headed toward a treaty regime in which cruise missiles over 600 km range on aircraft are subject to a comprehensive system of constraints, while ballistic missiles over 600 km range on aircraft are subject to no constraints at all. According to our own rhetoric, the latter are far more dangerous and destabilizing than the former. — For the umpteenth time, I will point out that an arms control regime which bans land-­based cruise missiles from 500 km up to 5500 km range but has no constraints at all on land-­based cruise missiles of longer range makes absolutely no sense. A major premise of the INF treaty was that ICCMs would be banned or at least counted as ICBMs. — Guidance on this and other subjects continues to use words in their common usage. It is important to keep in mind the treaty definitions for terms—­e.g., ICBM, SLBM, warhead, long-­range nuclear ALCM, etc. Such terms have been used incorrectly in several instances in recent guidance cables. — Deliberately building in loopholes in the treaty, or taking the view that the treaty should deal only with what exists now and ignore the future, would repeat the mistakes of SALT I and SALT II. Such
