December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
781
part we are ready—and we prove it in practice—to seek mutually ac-
ceptable solutions to these problems.
One of these problems is a Middle East settlement. In our deep
conviction the policy of the Soviet Union on this issue meets the in-
terests of not only the Arab but also of other states including the US if,
of course, one is to proceed from the real interests of peace and not from
some considerations of momentary nature.
In conclusion I wish to stress the following. Whatever direction the
course of events in the Middle East may take the Soviet Union’s reso-
lute position was and is that there should be no war there, that a lasting
and just peace be established, that the possibility be really ensured for
all the Arab peoples, including Palestinians, as well as for the people of
Israel to exist and develop as sovereign states. This is our unswerving
policy and we intend to follow it in future.
At the same time we would like to count on the restoration—and
on our part we are ready for that—of active cooperation between the
USSR and the US in the matters of the Middle East settlement, obvi-
ously, on a principled basis which requires taking into account the le-
gitimate rights and interests of all sides and their full and equal partici-
pation in such a settlement.4
Sincerely
L. Brezhnev5
4 A March 21 analysis of the “content and motivations” of Brezhnev’s letter, pre-
pared by EUR and the Secretary of State’s Special Adviser on Soviet Affairs, Marshall
Shulman, and forwarded to Vance, suggested sending Atherton to Moscow in order to
brief Soviet officials “on how we see the negotiations on Gaza and the West Bank devel-
oping.” This, the analysis argues, “might serve to head off” the Soviets’ “most trouble-
some propaganda,” though Atherton’s mission would have to be discussed with the
Egyptians and Israelis beforehand. (Telegram Tosec 30022/69516 to the Secretary’s dele-
gation, March 21; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840126–2087)
5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
