August 8–September 17, 1978 39 15. Report Prepared in the Vice Directorate for Production, Defense Intelligence Agency1 DIAIAPPR 202–78 Washington, August 22, 1978 SYRIA-ISRAEL: COLLISION OVER LEBANON (U) Summary (C/NOFORN) Syrian and Israeli policies in Lebanon appear to be evolving in a direction that will lead to a major confrontation. This possibility has little to do with the tactical situation in Beirut or in southern Lebanon, but is a consequence of fundamentally contradictory policies. Syria must remain involved in Lebanon if it is to achieve a solution favorable to its own regional interests. Israel, meanwhile, appears to seek an end of Syrian presence there. For Israel, the coming clash with Syria in Lebanon represents the awakening of a conflict that has lain largely dormant since the spring of 1976. Background (C/NOFORN) After more than two years of overt involvement in Lebanon, Syria’s goal of developing a unified, stable, and responsive state on its western border seems more remote than ever. No visible progress has been made on the basic problems complicating the Lebanese situation; no strong central authority has emerged, no national consensus favoring unity has developed, and powerful armed groups opposed to Syrian aims have not been neutralized. The latter problem is the most immediate. (C/NOFORN) Syria’s current difficulties are with its erstwhile allies-of-convenience, the Christian militias of the Phalange and the National Liberal Party. When Syria first intervened overtly in Lebanon in 1976, the Christians were being worsted by the combined forces of the Muslim Leftists and the Palestinians. Syria feared that if that coalition should triumph, the emergent Lebanon would risk coming under radical Arab influence—particularly that of Syria’s arch enemy, Iraq. Out of fear for Syria’s strategic interests, Damascus moved against the Muslim coalition, effectively siding with the Christians. That threat was eventually surpressed, but the Christians soon turned on their “rescuers”, realizing that Syria intended neither to dismantle the Palestinian forces nor permit the Christians to reassert their ante bellum hegemony in Lebanon. (C/NOFORN) The Christians utilized the respite afforded by Syrian intervention to improve substantially their military posture and 1 Source: Defense Intelligence Agency, DIA Historical Collection, Box MEA–1 (5 of 12), 1977–1979. Secret; Noforn.
