1288  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
following the overthrow of the dictatorship. Venezuela is a target of 
the communists who are quick to point out failures and difficulties of 
the present Government as indicative of the weaknesses of capitalism 
and who are as quick to allege American disinterest in the needs of 
the people and our intent to maintain Venezuela in a position of eco-
nomic independence. The importance of Venezuela in the Caribbean 
and the South American political and economic picture, as well as its 
importance as a field of U.S. private investment points up the necessity 
of the United States making every reasonable effort to keep Venezuela 
friendly, politically stable, and economically prosperous.
III. Technical AID
A. MSP Present Program
Mutual Security Program projects in Venezuela at present are lim-
ited to a small Technical Cooperation Program administered by USOM 
Caracas in fields related to public health. A modest TCA program oper-
ating since 1942 was substantially reduced as of June 30, 1959, as a result 
of a request by the Government of Venezuela to transfer rural water sup-
ply program of the Cooperative Health Service to Ministry of Health. 
This leaves only consultants in occupational health and vital statistics as 
the total program at present with several other consultants requested. 
While the costs of the Inter-American Geodetic Survey activities in 
Venezuela are partially reimbursed from MSP funds, this essentially 
military program is not commented upon in this airgram. With excep-
tion of changes in the rural water program noted above the basic need 
with respect to aid, including loans, has not changed substantially since 
Embtel 109 of August 29, 1958. This does not mean that the Government 
has not been making progress but the Constitutional Government has 
confined itself to basic planning for the next four to five years and as yet 
has not executed any extensive implementation of this planning.
B. Non-U.S. Programs
Since the revolution, the Venezuelan Government has stepped 
up the program of requesting and obtaining through the UN an addi-
tional number of technicians, about 30 of whom fall into the techni-
cal assistance class. Specialties of these experts are: steel, coal, forestry, 
veterinary medicine, soils, cattle fences, fisheries, general industrial 
development, telephones, governmental organization, budget, per-
sonnel, tariffs, education, sociology, industrial health and safety (OIT), 
labor training and legislation, nurses training, and econometrics. It is 
expected that about 30 more technicians in different fields complement-
ing the present group will be requested from the UN.
A ten-­man mission from the IBRD is now engaged in a study of 
the Venezuelan economic situation with a view to recommending any 
needed revisions of government economic and fiscal policy.
