Chapter 2, January–June 1989  93
(S) An assessment on the acceptability of a START verification 
regime cannot be completed until the U.S. has formulated provisions 
for distinguishing between modernization of a missile and creating a 
“new type” of missile, and has identified provisions for counting RVs 
on new types of missiles. Because the U.S. START position may provide 
for more stringent verification provisions for new versus existing types 
of missiles, this is a significant gap which must be filled. Finally, some 
are concerned with current provisions which define and limit throw-­
weight for new types of missiles.
Heavy Bombers
[7½ lines not declassified]. Additionally, they believe proposals to 
allow heavy bombers to visit bases of other types greatly degrades any 
capability to monitor basing restriction. Another view is that basing 
restrictions are useful only as a confidence building measure.
(S) The policy community understands that in a breakout sit-
uation, the Soviets could quickly convert additional aircraft to carry 
ALCMs; however the U.S. has been willing to accept that possibility, 
not only to protect U.S. options, but also because bombers and ALCMs 
are primarily second strike, less destabilizing systems, and because the 
U.S. retains a similar capability. Moreover, some believe the uncertainty 
of random, short-­notice, on-­site inspections provides additional deter-
rence and detection of possible reconfiguration efforts. With respect 
to the distinguishability of conventional and nuclear ALCMs, the U.S. 
emphasis is on protecting U.S. options in both types of programs since 
the U.S. enjoys a technological advantage in both.
NTM
(S) Since the requirements of START verification are tied directly to 
U.S. national security needs, expenditure of resources for NTM assets 
will be justified by the requirements of both. In a period of constrained 
resources, NTM assets designed to collect necessary information for 
general intelligence purposes and for Indications & Warning purposes 
will also assist in the monitoring of central limits, albeit with some 
resultant competition for target coverage. Difficult decisions on the 
selection of new overhead assets, therefore, will not be further compli-
cated by the need to procure assets only for verification purposes.
Cooperative Measures
(S) The U.S. has made significant advances in gaining Soviet accep-
tance of wide-­ranging intrusive on-­site inspection provisions and other 
cooperative measures which play a major role in the verifiability of the 
START agreement. Given their strong desire to retain mobile ICBMs, the 
Soviets have already accepted major portions of our proposed mobile 
verification regime. One view is that our negotiating leverage rests in
