between Bolivian commerce on the one hand and Chilean and Peruvian on
the other; that Chile imports mostly cotton and sugar from Peru which are
not produced by Bolivia and, on the contrary, Peru takes from Chile mostly
fruits and nitrates which also are not produced in Bolivia. The Minister
replied that that was quite true; that what he had referred to was the
unfavorable position in which the United States would be put in trade with
these countries. The Secretary immediately replied that, in a political
controversy of the importance of that of Tacna-Arica, he certainly would
not let any question of self-interest on the part of the United States enter
into it. In fact, he did not think that American commerce would be
adversely affected but, even so, he was endeavoring to settle the question on
its merits and to be helpful to the sister Republics concerned. He was not
concerned with trying to obtain any material advantage for the United
States in settling it nor would he let any possible self-interest prevent a
settlement and he could not and would not take any measures to prevent
Chile and Peru from arriving at a settlement solely between themselves.
The Minister stated that he understood this but that he was very anxious, of
course, to see that nothing happened to the detriment of Bolivia. … The
Secretary said that he trusted nothing of this sort would come about but that
the Minister of course must understand that he is unable to bring Bolivia
into the negotiations. As the Secretary had said at the outset of this matter
when Bolivia had asked to come into the good offices, the Tacna-Arica
question was a matter which had been submitted by Chile and Peru for the
arbitration of the United States and then to the good offices of the Secretary
of State and, unless he were given fuller authority in the settlement or were
requested by the two parties at interest, he could not bring a third party into
the negotiations. The Minister stated that he took note of what the Secretary
said and that he very much regretted that the last hope of Bolivia was
denied her as, without the support and friendly aid of the United States, she
could do nothing.
The Secretary replied that the friendly support and interest of this
Government in Bolivia had never been and was not now withdrawn. The
Secretary was merely stating the facts as they are and when he had been
given an opportunity to make a suggestion for a settlement” he had
suggested that the territory be given to Bolivia. The Secretary thought and
