Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 379 Mobile ICBMs 9. This work continues to go well. We are inclined to go along with the new structure for expressing the constraints found in the Soviets’ October 5 rewrite of the mobiles joint working paper. From the discussion at our last working group meeting, it appears that they will accept some constraint based upon length of track for limiting the size of a rail garrison. If you see any problems with this approach, let us know right away. We may send in a recommendation soon on exactly how to do this. Secondary Issues 10. Having plowed over the 5 biggest issues last round, Rick and Nazarkin have decided to go through some of the key secondary issues this round in their private meetings. The emerging list at this point includes “aircraft” vs. “airplane,” heavy bomber definition, non-­ circumvention, the SS-N-5, the Soviet position on removing missiles from canisters, the Soviet ban on new kinds of SOA, observable differences for cruise missiles, duration of the treaty and START II. Verification/Stability Measures 11. These discussions are really taking hold now, with Brooks and Masterkov in the lead. RV counting looks feasible and important and could be worked out this round. A tagging demonstration should be possible soon. PPCMs need more work, as does data exchange. Telemetry is uncertain at this point, but will be pursued in the Burt- Nazarkin channel. The Soviets say that at least one of their ideas must be accepted. Fortunately, it looks as though something could be worked out on the trial OSI of heavy bombers. STOF and the Soviets’ proposal on verifying the presence of nuclear weapons are running last, and may well fade away. Defense Budget 12. When the congressional observers were here, Les Aspin outlined for the Soviets with some confidence how he saw the key U.S. budget issues being resolved. On the theory that state should know at least as much as the Soviets on this subject, we pass along Aspin’s key predictions: — full funding for both mobile systems; — a compromise down the middle between House and Senate versions for SDI funding; — 3 additional B–2s authorized for FY 90, with some restrictions based upon meeting certain design or performance criteria. Burt
