North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979 1063 United States is ready—which, because of our own budget timing, we must be. Proposed Position I think we should support a $12 billion replenishment and a U.S. share of 27 percent. This would result in an average annual contribution of $1,080 million which represents real growth of less than one percent over our IDA V contribution. State, the White House and all other agencies support this figure.4 This level is far less than the President initially approved ($1.2–1.6 billion annually, with a preference for the $1.4 billion midpoint). It is less than the $1.2 billion figure in the spring budget review. It is far lower than the Bank requested and the State Department thought was appropriate. It is less than Congress appropriated for IDA in each of the last two years ($1,258 million for FY 79 and apparently $1,072–$1,092 million for FY 80, though each of those numbers included IDA IV arrearages as well as IDA V current payments). In response to the expressed concern of Congressman Obey that the IDA figure be kept below $1 billion in politically difficult 1980, we have negotiated an arrangement to stairstep our actual payments. The FY 81 total figure would thus be about $980 million. OMB would greatly appreciate stairstepping, as it would help relieve the intense budget pressure for next year. Hill Considerations We have carried out Congressional consultations on IDA VI, and it is these—plus the difficulties of this year’s Hill battle and the overall budget tightness—which have led us to cut back the proposed numbers so sharply. The Hill reactions have ranged from cool to hostile, and some of our leading supporters—including Senator Javits and Congressman McHugh—counsel that we support the international consensus but frankly tell the other contributors that we may not come up with our full payments on time. There has, however, particularly in the Senate, been strong support for our success in negotiating the sharp reduction in the U.S. share. We have deliberately left Representative Obey, the most important House member, until last—although we have had extensive discussions with him on the subject earlier, and know that he has concern about our numbers. We simply cannot risk consulting with him on IDA VI until the current conference is completed, but will do so immediately thereafter. 4 Miller underlined this sentence and put a checkmark in the adjacent margin.
