Arms Control and Disarmament 1569 Such beliefs could have a profound influence on the conduct of national policies and on the world situation. The complexities of this situation and the many unknown factors involved will make for continuing and growing uncertainties. 54. A period of rapid change in weapons development and of uncer­ tanty as to the relative balance of military power could put an increas­ ing premium on striking the first blow. As the time period required for preparation of a devastating attack diminishes, the problem of inter­ preting the intent of the other side—particularly during periods of cri­ sis when precautionary military activities had been initiated by both sides—will become even more critical. The relatively greater certainty of retaliation resulting from the development of mobile missile systems or hardened sites would strengthen the operation of the deterrent on both sides. Even so, either side might decide that the deterrent effect of the other side’s strength or posture was outweighed by the necessity to launch the first strike as the best hope for survival.5 55. We are unable to reach any confident judgments on the prob­ able reactions of peoples and governments in the event general war between the US and the USSR appeared imminent. Under some con­ tingencies, there would be no time for public opinion to operate; the actions of the governments would depend on quick judgments. 56. In a situation of a more gradual buildup of tensions, Soviet threats might induce widespread anxiety and consternation. Unless confidence in the ultimate effectiveness of the Western deterrent could be maintained, the USSR might be able to induce several of the less resolute governments in Western Europe, the Middle East, and Asia to proclaim their neutrality and to deny the US access to bases or military facilities in their territories. Fundamental changes in popular attitudes and official policies could come with little warning in the midst of a crisis situation. Such changes might also come about as a result of unexpected demonstrations of the effect of an important technological breakthrough. 5 The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, and the Assist­ ant Chief of Naval Operations for Intelligence. Department of the Navy, would prefer that this paragraph be deleted but would accept its inclusion if the following language were added: “In any case, we do not believe that the Soviet leaders are content with the status quo, either in the military or political field. They will almost certainly push ahead in their efforts to achieve a clear military superiority over the US. But despite further improvement in Soviet capabilities over the next five years, we believe it unlikely that the USSR will become confi­ dent that it can attack the US without receiving unacceptable damage in return. This judg­ ment assumes the maintenance and improvement of US armed strength and the absence of an unforeseen Soviet technological breakthrough of major military significance.” The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, would recommend inclusion of this additional language in the body of the estimate without qualification. [Footnote is in the original.]
