The Award was the result of a careful examination of the elaborate record submitted by the parties. This record fully covered all the questions treated in the views now submitted on behalf of the Government of Peru and argued all the questions which it is now sought to reargue. Under the Terms of Submission agreed to by both parties as well as by general principles of International Law these questions have been decided by the Award “finally and without appeal.” This reply well might end here. In deference, however, to the great nations who are the parties to this arbitration, and keeping in mind the importance of a correct understanding of the Arbitrator’s Award, and the proper procedure thereunder, the Arbitrator deems it advisable to make certain additional observations. A large part of the communication now presented to the Arbitrator is based upon a claim of an improper translation of Article III of the Treaty of Ancon, it being claimed that this Article as translated should read “at” and not “after” the expiration of the term of ten years. As pointed out in the Award, the translation complained of is the translation submitted by Peru in her Case, and in the opinion of the Arbitrator fairly interprets the meaning of the passage in question. The problem before the Arbitrator was one of substance—of construction rather than translation, a problem which had been debated by the parties long before this arbitration gave rise to any questions of English translation. It goes far beyond the relatively unimportant and largely academic question of the use of any particular English word in translating the Treaty whether that word be “after”, “at”, “on”, or “upon”, all of which are used at various places in the Peruvian documents. It may also be said that the Award of the Arbitrator is in entire harmony with the practical construction placed upon the Treaty by the parties in their dealings with one another after the expiration of the ten-year period, from 1894 to 1912; the parties repeatedly negotiated for a plebiscite and in 1898 agreed on the terms of a protocol providing for a plebiscite which was not ratified by the Chilean Congress. The President of the Peruvian Defense Commission suggests that the Arbitrator failed to give weight to the “proofs offered by Peru relative to the expulsions, spoliation of property, acts of terrorism and fraudulent colonization of Chileans on lands of the Peruvians,” (page 6 of communication under consideration). There was a large body of testimony submitted by both parties on this subject and the Arbitrator weighed the evidence with the greatest care but did not find the proofs sufficient on which to base a finding “that a fair plebiscite in the present circumstances cannot be held under proper conditions or that a plebiscite should not be had” (Award of Arbitrator page 36). Second: The Arbitrator also notes the specific instances of expulsion and oppression which the President of the Peruvian Defense Commission charges have taken place
