Chapter 6, June–December 1990 917 [4½ lines not declassified] The Soviets have linked this issue to data exchange (see issue below), arguing that there is no need for a tape exchange if they cannot read the tapes. As we discussed, “power levels” is a shorthand term for a set of technical parameters. Your meeting should not get diverted into a discussion of these technical issues. Data Exchange The critical data denial issue is to weigh the benefits for treaty monitoring and threat assessment of gaining access to Soviet telemetry against the costs of permitting the Soviets to read and understand U.S. telemetry. The various protagonists in this debate can more or less describe what additional information we or the Soviets might gain, but no one is very good at explaining how exactly the additional information could be exploited to our security benefit or detriment. The IC can provide a somewhat clearer picture of the implications of the ban on data denial for the narrow issue of START monitoring. [3 paragraphs (19 lines) not declassified] On the other side of the issue, U.S. ICBMs and SLBMs have had reliability and performance problems that appeared only in telemetry. DOD argues that these flight-­test problems would give the Soviets valuable information on the status of U.S. strategic forces and their capabilities. Some have suggested that such information could alter perceptions of the balance in ways that would decrease deterrence and crisis stability. There have also been suggestions that the Soviets could gain information useful in designing ballistic missile defenses. There is little doubt that the Soviets will be able to learn more about the details of U.S. missiles with access to our telemetry. The question is what they would be able to do with that knowledge. The Services believe strongly that the details, which may not be available to the Soviets through other sources, are vitally important. So far they have not explained their case well, and Don Atwood seemed skeptical when they tried to do so with him. Politically, the U.S. has had a clear position since 1982 to ban data denial and has offered this ban as a primary benefit of START. Although the Administration will face criticism during ratification regardless of the outcome, the SSCI has already made clear that it regards this issue as of primary importance both for the treaty and for future Intelligence collection programs. Proposals The IC proposes a full tape exchange and data exchange (i.e., enough information to allow confident interpretation of the tapes provided by the other side). They would base the requirements for
