differ materially from deciding the question involved upon issues submitted by
contending parties. Up to the present time the court has given an advisory opinion
when it judged it had jurisdiction, and refused to give one when it judged it did not
have jurisdiction. Nothing in the work of the court has yet been an indication that this is
an impairment of its independence or that its practice differs materially from the giving
of like opinions under the authority of the constitutions of several of our States.
No provision of the statute seems to me to give this court any authority to be a political
rather than a judicial court. We have brought cases in this country before our courts
which, when they have been adjudged to be political, have been thereby dismissed. It is
not probable that political questions will be submitted to this court, but again up to the
present time the court has refused to pass on political questions and our support would
undoubtedly have a tendency to strengthen it in that refusal.
We are not proposing to subject ourselves to any compulsory jurisdiction. If we support
the court, we can never be obliged to submit any case which involves our interests for
its decision. Our appearance before it would always be voluntary, for the purpose of
presenting a case which we had agreed might be presented. There is no more danger
that others might bring cases before the court involving our interests which we did not
wish to have brought, after we have adhered, and probably not so much, than there
would be of bringing such cases if we do not adhere. I think that we would have the
same legal or moral right to disregard such a finding in the one case that we would in
the other.
If we are going to support any court, it will not be one that we have set up alone or
which reflects only our ideals. Other nations have their customs and their institutions,
their thoughts and their methods of life. If a court is going to be international, its
composition will have to yield to what is good in all these various elements. Neither
will it be possible to support a court which is exactly perfect, or under which we
assume absolutely no obligations. If we are seeking that opportunity, we might as well
declare that we are opposed to supporting any court. If any agreement is made, it will
be because it undertakes to set up a tribunal which can do some of the things that other
nations wish to have done. We shall not find ourselves bearing a disproportionate share
of the world’s burdens by our adherence, and we may as well remember that there is
absolutely no escape for our country from bearing its share of the world’s burdens in
any case. We shall do far better service to ourselves and to others if we admit this and
discharge our duties voluntarily, than if we deny it and are forced to meet the same
obligations unwillingly.
It is difficult to imagine anything that would be more helpful to the world than stability,
tranquillity and international justice. We may say that we are contributing to these
factors independently, but others less fortunately located do not and can not make a like
contribution except through mutual cooperation. The old balance of power, mutual
