Afghanistan
555
196.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
Moscow, February 5, 1980, 1805Z
2027. Subject: Soviet Occupation of Afghanistan: Updated Assess-
ment and Policy Recommendations. Ref: Moscow 2026.2
1. (C—Entire text)
2. Begin summary. This cable updates the Embassy’s continuing
assessment of the current crisis in U.S.-Soviet relations and recommen-
dations for dealing with it.
My overall recommendation is to maintain a tough stance on the
sanctions already announced (without dribbling out minor new ones),
while leaving open the door for later redemption; to make clear by
our actions that we object only to Soviet behavior and do not seek to
overthrow the Soviet system; to proceed carefully in defending areas
of vital interest in order to avoid our having forced on us a choice
between defeat on the ground and nuclear war; and to explore ways
to maintain a dialogue.
Specifically, I recommend:
—continued freeze on most if not all new trade deals while allow-
ing, subject to more stringent strategic guidelines, the completion of
contracts already underway and continued delivery of spare parts;
—continued honoring of existing agreements at the government
level, including civil air and maritime (with good faith efforts to over-
come trade union resistance), Embassy construction, etc.;
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special
Advisor to the Secretary on Soviet Affairs, 1977–1981, Lot 81D109, untitled folder. Confi-
dential; Immediate; Nodis; Cherokee.
2 Telegram 2026 from Moscow, sent earlier in the day February 5, alerted the
Department to expect telegram 2027. Watson wrote: “The world is beginning to look
more dangerous to me. I am sure that everyone recognizes that an error in judgment on
either side could elevate finally to thermonuclear war. We are dealing with a monolithic
government with top leadership average age of 69. They have badly miscalculated in
Afghanistan. We have tried unsuccessfully to understand and predict this government
for nearly 50 years with notable lack of success. Furthermore, although Afghanistan is
unforgivable, we must recognize that our record does not look lily white to them.”
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P900077–1641) Watson’s character-
ization of Soviet miscalculation was corroborated in an intelligence memorandum pre-
pared in the Central Intelligence Agency, February 19, that noted that many leaders had
become “disturbed about the impact of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan on Soviet
foreign and domestic policy.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Mate-
rial, General Odom File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 1–2/80)
