International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1015
(e) Presidential Scholars in Global Health—The U.S. should establish
a program for “Presidential Scholars in Global Health”. Twenty Asso-
ciate Scholars, all in early stages of their careers, would be selected (by a
distinguished public/private panel of scientists) to study problems of
implementing change in International Health. In addition, four distin-
guished Senior Scholars would prepare scholarly papers on contempo-
rary International Health policy problems; they would work and lec-
ture at NIH, and be based at the Fogarty Center. Annual cost would be
$650,000, including personnel positions to run the program.
DECISION:
(f) Expanding Private Sector Involvement—The U.S. private sector,
i.e., academia, multinational corporations, labor, church-related orga-
nizations, private voluntary organizations foundations, and indi-
viduals, should be given wider opportunities to contribute to U.S. In-
ternational Health activities. Their efforts have been significant among
the contributions this nation has made in International Health. In many
cases they can be more effective, more innovative, and more acceptable
in many countries than direct U.S. Government efforts. Recent tax and
foreign policy decisions, as well as inflationary erosion of their pur-
chasing power, have reduced private sector capacity to expand or even
sustain their past activities. Reversing this trend could substantially re-
duce the burden on direct U.S. Government expenditures. The U.S.
Government should actively seek ways to capitalize on and expand the
involvement of the private sector. While the organizational paper being
prepared by Henry Owen will address this area within the broader
context of development assistance we believe certain specific steps
could be taken now to strengthen the role of private voluntary organi-
zations in the health area:
—Strengthen and formalize the PVO-grant making activities of
A.I.D. to increase PVO performance on A.I.D. projects.
—Establish an expanded PVO program which is centered in A.I.D.
(A.I.D. has recently set up an Office for Private Humanitarian As-
sistance). It would involve all agencies with significant International
Health programs who would assign a PVO liaison coordinator to work
with A.I.D.
—Consideration should be given to providing 5 year care support
($1 million per year) to create a consortium of PVOs including the es-
tablishment of an Information Clearinghouse for their activities to re-
solve the present lack of communication and collaboration.
DECISION:
The effectiveness of the new International Health initiative is tied
closely to working in a supporting and collaborative way with multi-
lateral organizations such as the World Bank, UNICEF, and the World
