International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
43
mission recommendations regarding color TV imports;3 the President
indicated he would like to avoid both import restrictions and increased
tariffs. But, he said, he regarded Japanese export levels of color TVs to
the United States in 1976 excessive, and would like a government-
to-government agreement limiting the number of such exports. Such an
export restraint agreement would enable him to take actions that
would not disrupt efforts to reach long term solutions to these
problems which we hope to resolve in the GATT. The President sug-
gested, if there were no objections, a level of about 2.5 million color TV
imports from Japan this year, and affirmed that he would be happy to
negotiate that level privately if the Japanese were agreeable.
Prime Minister Fukuda reiterated his belief that the high color TV
export figures for 1976 were an unusual phenomenon about which he
had expressed concern at the time. He said he had already asked the
electronics industry to exhibit self-restraint. He said that the Japanese
Government did not have the capacity to impose such restraints le-
gally, in view of Japan’s antitrust laws. But Fukuda emphasized that
export levels this year would not reach 2.7 million sets as they did last
year. The Prime Minister indicated that he fully appreciated the Presi-
dent’s concerns, and he expressed willingness to hold government-
to-government talks on the subject after the ITC report was in.
The President emphasized the fact that he did not have much time
on this issue. Having received ITC’s recommendations on color TV’s
and shoes, he would be compelled to reach decisions on shoes by April
9, and color TV’s a bit later.
Prime Minister Fukuda said that he hoped that the President’s ref-
erence to 2.5 million color TV sets as a ceiling for 1977 Japanese exports
would not get out of the room. If the matter became public, it would be-
come an obstacle to the negotiation of an agreement.
The President noted that he had gotten the figure from Fred
Bergsten of the Department of Treasury, who in turn had obtained it
from an official of the Ministry of International Trade and Industry in
Tokyo in late January. He added that he also would not like a figure
mentioned outside the room because 2.5 million TV sets is a large
figure and he would not like his people to know that he was such a
poor bargainer.
[Omitted here is discussion of China, civil aviation, a potential visit
by Carter to Japan, U.S.-Japanese relations, and a Japanese seat on the
UN Security Council.]
3 On March 14, the USITC found that imports of color televisions were causing in-
jury to U.S. producers. It recommended a 2-year tariff of 25 percent (up from 5 percent),
followed by 2 more years at 20 percent, concluding with a tariff of 10 percent. (Paul
Lewis, “Tariff is Urged for TV Imports by Trade Body,” The New York Times, March 15,
1977, p. 1)
