218
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
78.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
Kabul, October 28, 1979, 0728Z
7726. Subj: Meeting With President Amin. Ref: Kabul 7645.2
1. (C—Entire text)
2. Summary. Except for the expression of a strong interest in U.S.
development assistance, I did not succeed in soliciting from President
Amin any specific suggestions of steps the DRA or the USG might
take in the interest of improving our bilateral relationship. Amin did,
however, emphasize his personal desire for an improvement of U.S.-
Afghan relations and in this connection referred to the DRA’s fore-
bearance in not making any public criticism of the U.S. He claimed the
DRA’s foreign policy decisions, e.g., rupture of relations with South
Korea, had been taken completely on its own, without any consultation
with the Soviets; maintained that aid from the Soviet Union was given
without strings or preconditions; and disavowed any intention of
aggression against neighboring countries. Amin defended the DRA on
human rights grounds by attacking the record of the Zahir and Daoud
regimes. I left with the impression that Amin welcomed the current,
less confrontational relationship with the U.S.; that he was not seriously
pressing for any early concrete steps by the USG, as in economic assist-
ance; and that he would be content for the time being with a polite
but limited relationship which both countries would refrain from exac-
erbating by word or action. End summary.
3. U.S.-Afghan relations. I had forty minutes alone with President
Hafizullah Amin on the morning of Oct. 27. After the photographs
were taken, we got down speedily to business. Following the talking
points proposed in reftel, I mentioned those recent areas (Ariana DC–
10, narcotics control, etc.) where we had found we could work coopera-
tively with the DRA in our mutual interest and with a view to improv-
ing our bilateral relationship. Amin did not comment on any of the
examples I cited, but merely nodded his assent. He then went on,
with considerable eloquence, to stress his personal commitment to
improving U.S.-Afghan relations, expressing his affection for the U.S.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790493–0792.
Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. Archer Blood was serving as Acting Deputy Chief of
Mission.
2 In telegram 7645 from Kabul, October 23, the Embassy responded to guidance
from the Department on the topics to cover during Blood’s proposed meeting with
Amin. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790485–0511)
