796 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Option 2: Announce our intent to seek substantial increases in US aid over coming years. (Treasury, OMB, CEA, and Commerce support this option.)11 Decision Issue 4: Immediate Action on Additional Aid for the Poorest LDCs Issue: The European Community (EC) places great importance on its plan to propose at CIEC a $1 billion increase in industrial countries’ aid to low-income LDCs to be complemented by similar action from OPEC countries. What should be our response? Background: The EC believes that its proposal is critical to a successful CIEC outcome. We believe it is less important to the Ministerial, but would have serious coordination problems with the EC if we flatly refused to join in. Even if we did participate, however, we could not accept three features of the present EC plan: that the money come from 1978 appropriations, that it go to IDA, and that it be used for balance of payments support as opposed to specific projects. Compromises in these areas would have to be negotiated with the EC. The advantages of joining the EC plan would be to improve our stance on North-South issues, bolster the final CIEC package, and improve OECD coordination. The principal disadvantage is that your FY ’79 budget flexibility would be constrained. Moreover, it would be difficult to sell to the Congress, and as it now stands is of questionable substantive merit. Recommendation: That we inform the EC that we can participate in a special effort for the low income LDCs subject to the caveats noted above by declaring our intent to seek Congressional approval in FY ’79 for $300 million additional (over FY ’77) for these countries in our regular bilateral aid programs. (We would also cite our requested FY ’78 increase of $100 million for these countries.) State, Treasury, AID, NSC, Labor, HUD, and CEA support this recommendation. OMB believes a decision on FY ’79 aid requests for these countries should await our examination of the entire FY ’79 foreign assistance budget.12 11 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to either Option 1 or Option 2. 12 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.
