1248  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
through Ambassador Sparks’ running translation, asked who would 
judge when direct intervention was called for. 
The President reasserted his position. He would consult with 
Colombia and Argentina. He acknowledged that Mexico was strongly 
against any kind of intervention. If the OAS would not join Venezuela 
in expelling the Trujillo Government, then Venezuela would withdraw 
from the OAS. They would continue to adhere to the Río Treaty3 and 
the Caracas Resolution.4 He had favored our stand against Arbenz.5
The President said he had learned much in 10 years. Things were 
now different in Venezuela. He would no longer tolerate the constant 
insults against him personally and his country. Venezuela would take 
economic sanctions such as not allowing Pan American Airways to stop 
in Venezuela if it continued stopping in Ciudad Trujillo; the same with 
the Grace Line. He recalled Mr. Mann’s call on him 10 years ago to warn 
him of possible air attacks on Venezuela by Trujillo backed planes.6 He 
reminded me of the recent reports of possible bombing of Venezuelan 
oil fields by Dominican planes. He kept referring to the “aggressive” 
tone of the Dominican Republic reply to Venezuela’s invitation to his 
inauguration, sending Mrs. Betancourt upstairs to try to find a news-
paper with the text of the “offensive” document. (Her mission was 
unsuccessful but he promised to send me a copy to the Embassy.) The 
President said that he would tolerate no Dominican attempt against 
Venezuela, and would reply with force if attacked. On the other hand, 
he was categoric in stating that he would not permit any revolt against 
the Trujillo Government or any other to be staged from Venezuela. 
(Later I was informed that he had made a similar declaration to OAS 
Secretary General Mora.)
I reentered the discussion on a different tack. I told the President of 
Haiti’s problem which was really a hemisphere one but for which the 
United States was paying the cost. I asked him what he thought of the 
Haitian exiles’ open call from Habana for the overthrow of Duvalier 
3 Reference is to the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, opened for signa-
ture at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, on September 2, 1947, and entered into force on December 3, 
1948. For text of the Treaty, see 62 Stat. 1681.
4 A reference to Resolution XCIII, titled “Declaration of Solidarity for the Preservation 
of the Political Integrity of the American States Against the Intervention of International 
Communism,” approved on March 28, 1954, at the Tenth Inter-American Conference which 
met at Caracas, March 1–28, 1954. For the text of the resolution, see Tenth Inter-American 
Conference: Report of the Delegation of the United States of America with Related Documents 
(Department of State Publication 5692, Washington, 1955), pp. 156–158. For pertinent docu-
mentation regarding the resolution, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. IV, The American 
Republics.
5 For documentation on U.S. policy toward Guatemala during the presidency 
of Jacobo Arbenz Guzmán (1951–1954) see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. IV, The 
American Republics.
6 Documentation on the subject of Dominican revolutionary activity on Venezuela is 
printed on Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. VIII, The American Republics, Chapter 77.
