1956  753
Republic of Korea
Light newspaper editorial comment in the Republic of Korea has 
been skeptical of the value of the Geneva talks.
Austria, France, Belgium, Italy, Philippines, Cambodia, Laos, Australia, and 
New Zealand
No comment indicating concern by these governments over con­
tinuance of the Geneva talks has been received recently by the respec­
tive desk officers.
In countries that have recognized Communist China no survey has 
been made of reactions to continuance of the Geneva talks.
487.	 Telegram 1619 to Geneva1
Washington, February 13, 1956, 7:10 p.m.
1619. For Johnson.
Guidance for February 18 meeting.
1. Refer to your statement at October 27 meeting, repeating reasons 
US believes Communists have information concerning 450 missing 
servicemen. Wang stated at November 3 meeting he did not consider 
this proper subject for discussion at Geneva. He said such information 
should be sought from MAC in Korea. US accepted this suggestion in 
good faith and presented list again at Panmunjom on November 26. 
Communist representative declared that individuals held outside 
Korea do not come under authority of MAC and therefore irrelevant 
to discuss them in MAC. Also declared MAC has no connection with 
POW’s disposed of by PRC. Communist representative accepted list 
but to date has provided no information. US is entitled to reply either 
from MAC or from Wang, for this is one of practical matters at issue 
which Ambassadorial talks were convened to consider.
2. Inform Wang that in reviewing record of past several meetings, 
we still do not understand Chinese Communist position on renunci­
ation of force. They agree neither side should go to war over its dif­
ferences with other. But it appears that if hostilities should break out, 
Chinese Communists would expect deprive US of natural right of 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/2–1356. Secret; Priority; Limited 
Distribution. Drafted by Phleger and McConaughy; cleared by Dulles in draft and by Sebald.
