Romania 1. I want to assure President Ceausescu of the willingness of my administration to develop mutually advantageous relations with Romania; we respect Romania’s position of independence and this is the basis on which we can continue, as in the past, with a beneficial relationship. 2. Trade is one of the main points in our relations, and we expect it to continue under the conditions worked out to comply with our laws on Most Favored Nation treatment. 3. As for the export of technology, we regard it as politically significant that Romania has turned to the West for the purchase of a nuclear reactor; we will not place obstacles in the way of dealing with Canada, but as our Ambassador has already told your President, we are determined not to permit the export of technologies that would facilitate weapons development. 4. I hope that President Ceausescu has an occasion to visit the US later in the year. International Issues Romania has developed an independent position on the Middle East question, breaking with the Soviet line in 1967 and refusing to denounce Israel. Subsequently, however, a more even-handed position has emerged, and occasionally the Romanians put themselves forward as possible intermediaries; for example, they might offer to carry messages to the PLO. In fact, we have used them as an indirect channel to get our views across on the assumption that whatever we say they will repeat to the Arabs. Somewhat similarly, the Romanians offer their services in relaying messages to the North Koreans, and even the Chinese, since they try to take a semi-independent stand on the Sino-Soviet dispute. Since Ceausescu is traveling in Africa, anything you may want to say about the situation in southern Africa may also be taken into account in his discussions there. Finally, of course, the Romanians are deeply concerned with the politics of the Soviet bloc, East-West issues such as the Helsinki agreements, MBFR, and disarmament issues in general; Romanian representatives are often helpful in giving us frank assessments and have cooperated in preparing for Helsinki. Romanian relations with Moscow have improved since Brezhnev’s visit in November. They are always fragile, however, and depend on Soviet restraint in not pressing for greater Romanian integration in the Warsaw Pact. 1. I would appreciate hearing your analysis of how you believe European security issues may develop. For our part we are serious
