326  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
without prejudice to detailed discussion of all measures. Bartholomew 
said the sides could discuss this in more detail in the subgroup, but it 
would be useful here if Nazarkin could expand on the Soviet concept of 
the relationship between agreement on these measures and the START 
Treaty itself and its duration.
16. Nazarkin said the agreement on principles would come first; 
signing it would help the delegations to work out verification and sta-
bility measures. Second, the strategic exercise agreement was ready 
to be signed at the ministerial; there was no problem. Concerning the 
other two documents (on non-­encryption of telemetry and STOF), if 
the U.S. side accepted the Soviet proposals that would lead to one situ-
ation; if not, the discussion could continue in Geneva. Regarding STOF, 
Nazarkin noted, the sides would need a document to sign; they did 
not have one. But after discussions in the subgroup, the sides could see 
where things stood.
Strategic Exercise Notification
17. In his opening remarks Nazarkin said he hoped the ministers 
would be able to sign the agreement on advance notification of strate-
gic exercises. The Soviet side had studied the U.S. draft handed over 
in Geneva, which was essentially based on the exchanges between 
defense ministers, and was ready to sign. The Soviet side would have 
some comments on the language of the Russian text handed over by 
the U.S. side, but Nazarkin did not feel these linguistic matters should 
present any obstacles to conclusion of the agreement.
18. Burt said the U.S. side also wanted to move forward on the 
specific verification and stability measures, and hoped the sides would 
be able to finalize the strategic exercise notification agreement. The U.S. 
understanding of its obligations under the strategic exercise notifica-
tion agreement was that the U.S. would notify the USSR of the global 
shield exercise if it were held in a calendar year; if global shield were 
not being held that year, then the U.S. would notify the USSR of a major 
exercise involving bomber aircraft during that year. There would be 
a notification of one exercise per year. Based on that understanding, 
which Burt said he thought was shared by Nazarkin, the sides could 
reach agreement. Burt said the U.S. side wanted to conclude the agree-
ment with Foreign Minister Shevardnadze this week, but would like 
to preserve the option for those who had done the work to sign it. He 
asked whether the two foreign ministers could announce publicly that 
they had achieved agreement, but leave the honor of signing the agree-
ment to the defense ministers.
19. Nazarkin said he thought a way out could be found so as not 
to take credit for something accomplished by another ministry; he 
thought the working group could resolve this.
