202 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV Intelligence Committees had been briefed on the President’s initiatives contained in PD–24. The Chairman noted the following: —An annual report is to be submitted by the subcommittee to the National Security Council through the SCC. The due date for this initial report to the SCC is December 14, 1978. Subcommittee members, and the Executive Agents in particular, shall be called upon to assist in the reports preparation. —That two Executive Agents have been designated: the Secretary of Defense for COMSEC to protect government-­derived classified information and government-­derived unclassified information which relates to national security. The Secretary of Commerce for communications protection for government-­derived unclassified information (excluding that relating to national security) and for dealing with the commercial and private sector to enhance their communications protection and privacy. The subcommittee shall resolve areas of departmental overlap, should they occur, on a case-­by-­case basis. —That Colonel Wayne Kay is the Subcommittee Executive Secretary and White House staff coordinator for PD–24. SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS Numbering herein refers to applicable paragraphs in the PD. —2.b. Unclassified information transmitted by and between government agencies and contractors that would be useful to an adversary should be protected. Tasking: The nature and extent of this type information needs to be defined. The Executive Agents will investigate this area jointly, distinguish between that related to national security and that which is not and advise the subcommittee of their findings. —2.c. Non-­governmental information that would be useful to an adversary shall be identified and the private sector informed of the problem and encouraged to take appropriate protective measures. Tasking: The Department of Commerce shall take steps to identify this type information, prepare a briefing for the private sector, review the briefing with the subcommittee prior to presentation to the private sector and review with the subcommittee their program to satisfy this requirement. The DOD shall assist as requested. —2.d. While the private conversations of U.S. citizens do not appear to be the targets for foreign intercept activity at this time, this judgment should be kept under close and continuous review and the American people informed of any change in this conclusion. As a precautionary measure; the responsible Agencies should work with the FCC and the common carriers to adopt system capabilities which protect the privacy of individual communications and to carry out changes in regulatory policy and draft legislation that may be required.
