1957  1353
that neither FE or EE have any objections. I do not know how Wang will 
take it, but the more I think about it I think that it might not be a bad 
idea from the standpoint of the talks themselves. In any event, I might 
come back with a somewhat more sprightly approach. Frankly, I feel 
run out of ideas at the moment.
Now for other business. Thanks very much for your letter of 
March 8, as well as for Ralph’s of March 11. [text not declassified]
I see that Taipei came up with about the same idea as the Secretary’s 
on the correspondents. It seems like a very good out to me and hope 
that it goes through.
I have gone over the ICRC list of Korean POW’s (your transmittal 
slip 2/28/57). While I have not had a chance to check it against our list, 
I am struck by some very odd aspects that appear to indicate it is in itself 
very incomplete. You will note that it is arranged alphabetically start­
ing off with “Chidester” an American and continues with Americans 
“no materials available” through “Smith” and then suddenly shifts to 
“Southworth” British through “Wylie” British “no materials available” 
and then again starts up with Americans running from “Adamo” through 
“Chavez”. It then starts out with “Macnair-raga” an American escapee 
and runs alphabetically through “Zawacki” later starting with “Alcorn” 
as an American escapee and running through “Levitski”. Subsequently 
it starts another alphabetical list of Americans “no materials available” 
with “Jensen” and running through “Ziemer”, but there does not appear 
to be any place that the first part of that alphabetical series is given. In 
any event I would appreciate knowing what Defense makes of it, and 
whether it adds anything to what we were given at Panmunjon.
With respect to Ralph’s inquiry on my views concerning a public 
“progress report” on this question, I certainly have no objection from my 
standpoint. I think that by all means we ought to use the new figure of 
383 with an explanation of the difference. I have no particular thoughts 
on what form it might take, but perhaps a letter to a Congressional 
committee pegged to Lane’s resolution might be the best. I have no 
objection, and, in fact think it ought to include what we have done here 
on the subject, keeping it entirely factual.
I notice that in the Secretary’s statement at Canberra he spoke of 
the Chinese Communist refusal to renounce war “as an instrument of 
its policy in relation to Taiwan and Penghu”, whereas we have previ­
ously been very careful to use the term “Taiwan area” so as to embrace 
the offshore islands. Does this have any significance? I am sure it will 
be noted in Peiping and Taipeh.
Has the “Wirin case” entirely subsided or is it going to raise its 
head again?
Tell Dave we have been moved out of our room because of the 
Hungarian hearings and are back where we were during the Foreign 
Ministers’ Conference.
