116 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 overwhelming support we now hold with world public opinion on the seizure of our Embassy and the treatment of our hostages. 5. We are dealing with a populace for whom demonstrations have become a way of life, a religious period (Moharram) that glorifies martyrdom, a revolutionary leadership that sees its success in overthrowing the Shah as assurance that mass demonstrations will again succeed, and a single leader whose whole life has been one of refusing to brook compromise. Regrettably, because of this mentality and because of the way Khomeini’s actions and statements have in themselves restricted Iran’s options, there may remain very few courses of action that he can take (and that would be tolerable for us) without risk of great loss of face for Iran internationally and for Khomeini domestically. It seems to us there are essentially only two broad options in terms of courses of action that Khomeini will or could take. 6. The first is that he may himself decide to hold the line in terms of further threats and actions until at least the constitutional referendum process is complete on December 2. With the overwhelming endorsement that the campaign against us helps assure him in that vote it is conceivable that he might then be prepared either a) simply to announce a full rupture of relations and an expulsion of the hostages (without trial) as spies or b) to continue holding at least some of the hostages while signaling a willingness to begin talks through some UN arrangement or third party intermediary. 7. The first of these is at least feasible, given Khomeini’s overwhelming authority, but it would not be easy given the heady talk of trials here. The second is also feasible but only if offered promise of meeting at least some of Iran’s demands vis à vis the Shah. 8. But more likely than either of these may well be that Khomeini will go ahead with trials of some sort, for all or a selected number of the hostages, followed by their total expulsion from Iran. The call by the student occupiers of the Embassy on November 21 for trials and Bani Sadr’s almost desperate appeal to the US via his telephonic interview with NBC’s Today program the same day not to be too afraid of the eventuality of trials, suggests that this option is under active consideration. 9. There is obviously great risk in such a course, both in practical terms and in terms of principle. There is the danger that the sentences handed down would go beyond mere expulsion. And for us to acquiesce in such trials would mean accepting a process that flies in the face of all international convention and practice and civilized behaviour and undermines the very principle on which we now stand. We believe our preferred course must remain that of strenuous opposition to such trials, while buying time to secure the hostages release (or simple expulsion) by diplomatic means.
