856
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
318.
Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, July 18, 1980
SUBJECT
Iran
The low profile policy2 which we have followed since late April
has yielded some benefits. Despite the intense in-fighting within Iran’s
leadership factions over the seating of the Parliament and selection of
a Prime Minister, the hostage issue had not been the political football
it was in the past. Khomeini has ceased referring to the hostages during
his speeches and attacks on the U.S. A consensus appears to be building
within Iranian political circles that the hostage issue has been milked
for all it is worth and that it is increasingly a political (and economic)
liability which must be resolved. Even Beheshti has been prepared to
refer publicly to the possibility of settling the hostage issue in accord-
ance with the “humanitarian tradition” of Islam. (C)
Unfortunately, none of these developments provides any assurance
that the Iranian leadership will be able to develop or carry out a rational
plan for getting themselves out of the hole they have dug for them-
selves. On the contrary, there is a significant risk that events may run
out of control in Tehran at some point in the coming months, confront-
ing us (and them) with a crisis neither side wants. There are several
ways this might occur:
—The Majlis has now completed its credential fight against possible
moderates who managed to get elected, and constitutional obstacles
to its operation have been removed. It should begin formal operations
in the immediate future, and a Prime Minister and Cabinet should be
selected by the end of this month. There is no indication, however,
that the hostage issue will be taken up much before September, and
some sources say it will be October before the issue is addressed.
Whatever the timing, the chances of prompt, sensible action by the
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,
Box 42, Subject File, Iran Papers 5/80–7/80. Secret; Sensitive; Outside the System. Sent
for information. A note at the top of the page reads: “ZB saw—rtnd Aug 18.”
2 An attached July 7 CIA paper, “Current Status of the Hostage Crisis and the
implications of U.S. Policy Options,“ assessed the current U.S. low profile policy as
contributing to reduced Iranian interest in the hostage issue, which allowed moderates
to work diplomatically. The paper was submitted to Brzezinski under a covering attached
but not printed July 7 memorandum from Turner. On this memorandum Brzezinski
wrote: “GS. Comment? ZB. 7/11/80.”
