706  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Washington Summit of December 1987 on being willing to explore the 
possibilities of verification. The only remaining SLCM issue is range, 
where there is a built-­in tradeoff in the works.” (Department of State, 
Central Foreign Policy File, N900003–0340)
“Following the Gorbachev meeting,” Baker went on to report, “it 
looked like we were on the verge of closing out ALCMs and SLCMs 
and the remaining START issues. Unfortunately, in another example of 
walking back after the fact—­in this case after Gorbachev had explicitly 
agreed—­we were told that the grandfathering of Tacit Rainbow was 
agreed, provided we accepted a number of constraints on the missile. I 
told Shevardnadze we had agreed to the ALCM range only on the con-
dition that Tacit Rainbow was exempted. Gorbachev had mentioned 
no conditions. He had simply agreed to exempt the missile. I said 
now the Soviets were jeopardizing the whole package if they let the 
military impose certain technical conditions after the agreement had 
already been reached. While I think we may still come to closure, we 
got another reminder of the military’s role in the process and what it’s 
like to do business now.” (Ibid.)
127.	 Notes of a Meeting1
Moscow, May 19, 1990, 1:40 p.m.
G—Summarize on arms control.
JB—Human rights
Arms Control
New proposals in Bonn. Disc. since arrived. Some progress—­not 
enuf. Not res. rem. issues in START GB hopeful we could reach agree. 
on ALCMs/SLCMs here Prog. on non-­circumvention. NTT ready. CW 
progress
ES—Most diff. in START—ALCMs/SLCMs # US heavy bomb-
ers w. ALCMs. US made import. accom. step—­in prin. allow limit. 
(1) #—180—­too high. Maybe here compromise (2) Dist. features on 
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, Brent Scowcroft 
Collection, Robert M. Gates Files, Memorandum of Conversation Files, OA/ID 91166–
007, I Bob Gates Memcons 1989–1992 [7]. No classification marking. Drafted by Gates, 
who handwrote the notes. No formal memorandum of conversation was found. The edi-
tor transcribed the portion of the text here specifically for this volume.
