Organized Reserves represent a strength of about 558,400 men. These forces are well
trained, well equipped, and high in morale.
A sound selective service act giving broad authority for the mobilization in time of
peril of all the resources of the country, both persons and materials, is needed to perfect
our defensive policy in accordance with our ideals of equality. The provision for more
suitable housing to be paid for out of funds derived from the sale of excess lands,
pending before the last Congress, ought to be brought forward and passed. Reasonable
replacements ought to be made to maintain a sufficient ammunition reserve.
The Navy has the full treaty tonnage of capital ships. Work is going forward in
modernizing the older ones, building aircraft carriers, additional fleet submarines, and
fast scout cruisers, but we are carefully avoiding anything that might be construed as a
competition in armaments with other nations. The joint Army and Navy maneuvers at
Hawaii, followed by the cruise of a full Battle Fleet to Australia and New Zealand,
were successfully carried out. These demonstrations revealed a most satisfactory
condition of the ships and the men engaged.
Last year at my suggestion the General Board of the Navy made an investigation and
report on the relation of aircraft to warships. As a result authorizations and
appropriations were made for more scout cruisers and fleet submarines and for
completing aircraft carriers and equipping them with necessary planes. Additional
training in aviation was begun at the Military and Naval Academies. A method of
coordination and cooperation of the Army and Navy and the principal aircraft builders
is being perfected. At the suggestion of the Secretaries of War and Navy I appointed a
special board to make a further study of the problem of aircraft.
The report of the Air Board ought to be reassuring to the country, gratifying to the
service and satisfactory to the Congress. It is thoroughly complete and represents the
mature thought of the best talent in the country. No radical change in organization of
the service seems necessary. The Departments of War, Navy, and Commerce should
each be provided with an additional assistant secretary, not necessarily with statutory
duties but who would be available under the direction of the Secretary to give especial
attention to air navigation. We must have an air strength worthy of America. Provision
should be made for two additional brigadier generals for the Army Air Service.
Temporary rank corresponding to their duties should be awarded to active flying
officers in both Army and Navy.
Aviation is of great importance both for national defense and commercial development.
We ought to proceed in its improvement by the necessary experiment and investigation.
Our country is not behind in this art. It has made records for speed and for the
excellence of its planes. It ought to go on maintaining its manufacturing plants capable
of rapid production, giving national assistance to the laying out of airways, equipping
