290 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV 65. Memorandum From the Military Assistant to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Odom) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, June 15, 1978 SUBJECT SAC/NORAD Trip My recent trip to SAC and NORAD turned up a menu of concerns too great for a single memorandum. Here is a selected number of items, that should become part of your awareness: —The C3 problem. —Secure Reserve Force planning. —Thinking about LNOs. —IVORY ITEM impact. —NORAD reorganization. The C3 Problem The latest RISOP–SIOP analysis (that is, a Soviet attack on the U.S. and a U.S. response at the SIOP level) has been reported to us largely as dynamic interaction between weapons inventories on both sides. Another aspect of the analysis has not been highlighted: Soviet doctrinal concern with attacking C3 with a higher priority than attack on U.S. nuclear delivery systems. I have generally been aware that our C3 is designed to get off a retaliatory response [11 lines not declassified]. This, of course, raises doubts about our ability to ride out an attack and then retaliate. Paul Nitze’s scenario,2 where we lose our ICBM force to a Soviet first strike and then would not want to retaliate because the Soviets could then attack our cities, [5 lines not declassified]. To put it in a different way, it is usually argued that “stability” exists when neither side can expect to attack and greatly limit damage to itself. [5 lines not declassified] Secure Reserve Force Planning The SAC staff is fairly candid about its lack of attention to and its long neglect of how to plan and use a reserve force. Attention has been so fully concentrated on the SIOP spasm response that little planning 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 52, SAC and NORAD 8/20–21/78 Brzezinski Trip: 7–9/78. Top Secret; Sensitive. Outside the System. Sent for information. Brzezinski wrote at the top of the memorandum: “pp 2, 3. ZB.” 2 See Document 1.
