314
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
proceeding along its suicidal course. Furthermore, even if, as result of
future developments, including shifts in policies of UK and US, Mo-
sadeq shld personally become convinced that energies shld be concen-
trated on saving country from internatl communism rather than on at-
tacks upon West, there no guarantee that he might not at any time
become incapacitated by illness or assassination. Elimination Mosadeq
likely result in struggle for power among various elements of Front
which wld give Tudeh chance further to strengthen self at Front’s
expense.
(7) Copy of above has been given to Brit Emb which in general
agreement altho Middleton says there may be certain minor differences
of emphasis.
Henderson
113.
Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of
State1
Tehran, August 11, 1952.
614. No distribution personal for Byroade NEA and Richards GTI.
1. It will be recalled that shortly after collapse Qavam Govt
Kashani sent message to me alleging that he had proof that Brit and
Shah had agreed to bring Qavam into power and that American Govt
had subsequently approved plan and that I sent message to Kashani
denying that US was involved in any way in accession of Qavam to
power. Kashani sent back reply that despite my statements he knew
that Brit and American Embassies and Shah had conspired to make
Qavam PriMin. In discussing this matter with Ala I told latter that if
Mosadeq and other members of Govt shld choose to believe Kashani
rather than myself I saw no alternative other than for me to tell my
Govt that it wld be preferable for it to recall me. Ala, considerably dis-
turbed, without my authority repeated what I had said to Mosadeq and
Mosadeq sent back message thru Ala that in no circumstances shld I be-
come discouraged and ask for my recall.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 84, Tehran Embassy Files, 1950–1952, classified
general records, Box 25. Secret; Security Information. Drafted by Henderson. The tele-
gram is the Embassy copy as approved and has no time of transmission.
