February 1951–February 1952 161 steps to effect change of govt. If we both brought pressure on Shah and change was successfully effected, National Front opposition to new government would probably be both anti-American and anti-British. It might be able in cooperation with Communist sympathizers to block efforts our military and civilian aid missions to accomplish their purposes and might even make it difficult for such missions remain in country. It might also succeed in stirring up even more anti-Western sentiment than now exists. If under pressure from us Shah should make attempt and should fail, Crown as stabilizing element might be eliminated from Iran public life and National Front government would be just as bitter against Americans as British and any moderating influence we might have now would be destroyed. I also was not (rpt not) happy at idea of throwing support to Qavam, whose past record created certain doubts as to what he might do when once in power. 5. Middleton said idea was not (rpt not) to suggest to Shah that he exceed his constitutional powers. It was rather suggest to him that he inform Hekmat, Pres of Majlis privately that he thought time had come for Mosadeq to go and that if Hekmat cld obtain petition addressed to him signed by majority members Majlis asking that Mosadeq be replaced he wld take appropriate steps immed. Middleton said he thought there was good chance that Hekmat cld obtain requisite number of signatures if he cld tell members Majlis whom he approached Shah wld be willing to act. Middleton said perhaps it wld be possible persuade Hekmat rather than Qavam to try organize govt. I said I certainly thought that Hekmat from point of view world opinion wld be better replacement for Mosadeq than Qavam. I did not (rpt not) know, however, whether Hekmat wld be willing to undertake such difficult task or whether he cld, on such short notice, set up kind of organization necessary effectively to govern country in face of opposition which he wld be sure to encounter. Middleton said he also did not (rpt not) know whether Hekmat wld be willing and ready to undertake to head govt, that was matter which cld be settled between Shah and Hekmat. What Middleton wld like to know, however, was whether if Brit wld undertake to persuade Shah to effect change of govt Americans wld go along or at least not (rpt not) oppose. 6. I said my tentative position was somewhat as fols: “If Brit shld make suggestion to Shah along lines suggested and Shah or Ala wld ask my opinion in matter I wld not (rpt not) wet-blanket idea, neither wld I urge Shah to take such action. In talking over matter with Ala I might remind him of our conversation of some weeks ago during which he told me the Shah had decided that if Mosadeq after returning Iran shld refuse to change his advisers and policies and shld insist on new elections under his auspices, Shah wld feel that no (rpt no) matter what consequences might be he must take steps to remove Mosadeq
