Venezuela 1253 just a few years ago. As Betancourt said, others like himself “discover” anti-­imperialism at an early age and then grow away from it. In reply to Ambassador Sparks’ observation that Arévalo had a great deal to do with Arbenz’ accession to the Presidency of Guatemala, Betancourt expressed his doubt that this was true. He referred to a conversation he had with Arévalo in 1953 in Chile at which time Arévalo made clear his lack of admiration for Arbenz. As a further development of the early conversation on United States Embassy relations with the Venezuelan press, President Betancourt devoted considerable attention to the importance of United States and Venezuela pursuing vigorously a closer cultural and exchange program. He spoke specifically of the contribution which could be made to United States-Venezuelan relations by increased travel on the part of students, professors, labor leaders, etc. He suggested that groups of U.S. students and labor leaders visit Venezuela, with their Venezuelan counterparts visiting the United States. He said that if the United States would sponsor the visits of such groups to the extent of paying their transportation, Venezuela would cooperate by declaring them guests of the nation and handling their maintenance expenses while they are in Venezuela. He suggested that perhaps the same thing could be done with reference to Venezuelan students and labor leaders who might visit the United States. Turning to his suggestion that American professors come to Venezuela to visit the University, Betancourt said he has many professor-­friends in California, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas and Columbia University who speak Spanish and who know Latin America and who could perform a fine service during brief visits to Venezuela, In this connection he mentioned specifically Ronald Hilton in Stanford University.5 He said “don’t be afraid” with reference to both students’ visits and workers’ visits to Venezuela—­making clear that he had in mind the experience of Vice President Nixon last year. He said that U.S. students could visit the University here with no trouble and could have a very good effect on the situation here. He said he would see that any workers who came were taken to the Casa Sindical and that here again any contact they had with Venezuelans could be very productive. President Betancourt suggested that the Embassy explore the possibility of organizing some kind of a cultural exchange committee of younger pro-American professional people, with the emphasis on middle class rather than wealthy good families, to be composed in large part of doctors, lawyers and businessmen who may have studied in the United States and who are friendly to the United States. He said there are many of these people, and he mentioned Dr. Marcel Roche6 5 Professor of Romance Languages and Director of Hispanic-American Studies. 6 An atomic scientist.
