723.2515/1659: Telegram
[Document 238]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
LIMA, October 27, 1925—11 a.m.
[Received October 28—10 a.m.]
75. President Leguía and people of Peru are confident that General Pershing holding
deciding vote on the Plebiscitary Commission will proceed to hold the plebiscite under
fair conditions, as he has recently set forth, with complete protection of all voters.
Suggestion of compromise coming from our Government at this time, either
independently or acting as intermediary submitting propositions made by Chile, would
be distinct shock to Peru, would be misunderstood, and would cause much resentment.
Proper channel for such suggestions seems to be from Edwards to Freyre, between
whom, I assume, good personal relations exist. In my opinion there need not be any
difficulty in people of the two provinces living under one government justly
administered.
The universal interest of the Peruvians in the question is based on principle and
sentiment rather than on the intrinsic value of the provinces; and a division of the
provinces such as that reported as proposed by Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs
would not solve question, and I do not believe that Peruvian Government would
consider it. The Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs is quoted in Chilean papers as
repeating the statement he had made heretofore that article III of Treaty of Ancon was
merely intended as a “stipulated cession” of the provinces to Chile. It is this attitude of
Chilean Government which is resented in Peru, and which it is believed governs
Chile’s attitude towards the plebiscite.
I am of opinion that reports on remarks General Pershing as well as other members of
the Commission are alleged to have made, should be received with caution. The award
provides that it may be implied that exercise by Chile of legislative, executive, and
judicial power should not go to extent of frustrating provision for a plebiscite and that
the Plebiscitary Commission have been placed in general in complete control over
plebiscite. Should one member of Commission withdraw, award provides for filling the
vacancy. Any suggestion from our Government at this time which could be construed
as seeking to evade this responsibility practically vested in the President of the United
States would greatly injure prestige of our Government in Peru and, I believe, in other
countries as well. On the other hand, to adopt such measures as may be necessary to
