384
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
discuss the crisis with Panama. There was no indication who this
might be.
I asked Cottam whether the Panama track seemed an essential part
of Ghotbzadeh’s plan. He said it clearly was but it did not seem to be
linked in timing or substance to the UN activity. There plainly had to
be some movement in Panama, possibly for an extradition trial, for
Ghotbzadeh to succeed.
Cottam asked Ghotbzadeh about the linkage between Afghanistan
and the hostages and whether an argument could be made to Khomeini
that once the hostage issue was over, Iran could assume a world role
in opposing the Soviets. Ghotbzadeh said Afghanistan was still im-
portant to him and others on the Revolutionary Council but it was
not an effective argument with Khomeini. Ghotbzadeh had gotten into
some trouble within the “party” because of his strong statement on
Afghanistan.
In closing, Ghotbzadeh reemphasized that he was very positive on
Waldheim who he thought was handling the crisis well. It could be
ended in ten days if we relaxed on sanctions.
146.
Letter from the Chairman of the Senate Select Committee
on Intelligence (Bayh) and the Vice Chairman of the
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (Goldwater) to
President Carter1
Washington, January 14, 1980
Dear Mr. President:
On January 9, the Select Committee on Intelligence met to discuss
with the Deputy Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, Mr. Frank
Carlucci, the purposes and details of two covert action programs for
Iran and Afghanistan which you had approved on December 27 and
28, 1979.2 This extraordinary meeting of the Committee was convened
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,
Box 98, Meetings File, 1/14/80 SCC re Iran. Top Secret; Sensitive. In the upper right
corner of the letter, Carter wrote: “Not their role to make policy. J.”
2 For the finding on Iran, see Document 110. For the finding on Afghanistan, see
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XII, Afghanistan, Document 107, footnote 6.
