Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 13. If we are going to have influence in this region, it is because we are relevant to its interests and because we are presumed to share some of its deepest concerns. Part of our problem with Pakistan, even before the Kabul coup, has been this perception of relevance. We press them hard on nuclear non-proliferation, as we must; we express concern over their human rights record; we expect them to make changes for the better in their administration of aid projects [garble—and in their] handling of the economy. At the same time, we deny them access to new and replacement military equipment in some critical areas, and we refuse to commit new assistance or to sign agreements for which funds have already been obligated. If, now, we prolong these largely self-imposed shut-downs, Pakistan (and its neighbors) will draw their own conclusions. If, on the other hand, we can be more responsive to their concerns, we may—in fact—use this period to repair some of the damage in our relationship while at the same time exercising greater influence on the GOP to set its own affairs aright. 14. We are waiting, and must no doubt continue to wait for answers and for events: —A solution to the reprocessing plant problem; —the settling of Bhutto’s fate; —the formation of a civilian government; —clarification of Afghan intentions. But let us not postpone all action until all of these and other questions are settled to our satisfaction. To do so will further undermine, perhaps fatally, our ability to influence events and achieve our policy goals. We would like to see a stable, civilian government here, but in present circumstances there is very little we can do to promote that result, and we are losing the capability to have meaningful influence on human rights, narcotics control, and economic development. All of these are high on our list of goals and objectives, but unless we can soon find some areas of middle ground between our hopes and the realities of the situation, it is hard to see how we can make any progress toward our goals. Hummel
