Comprehensive Test Ban
615
since each such test provides some additional understanding of design
physics even partial completion of the program will be useful.
[Omitted here are the specifics of the Augmented Nuclear Test
Program.]
250.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the United Kingdom1
Washington, May 6, 1980, 1638Z
119590. Exdis, USNATO for PM Director Bartholomew. Subject:
CTB: Approach to UK on NSS Numbers.
1. Secret—Entire text
2. As prelude to visit of Lord Carrington, PM Director Bartho-
lomew called in British DCM Fretwell May 2 to inform the UK officially
of the President’s decision on UK NSS issue.
—Fretwell was accompanied by UK Embassy POL/MIL Coun-
selor Weston. Bartholomew delivered points in paragraph 3.
3. Begin text:
A. The President believes that as we move together to meet the
challenge posed by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan,2 we should con-
tinue to pursue Western security interests through balanced and verifi-
able arms control agreements, including CTB.
—It is clear that the trilateral CTB negotiations have been bogged
down for well over a year.
—We have received some indications that the Soviets might make
the case to other States, in connection with the upcoming NPT review
conference, that the US and UK are responsible for the continuing stale-
mate in the talks.
—While we do not accept the Soviet contention, we must naturally
try to ensure that the two Western partners are seen in the most advan-
tageous possible light at the review conference in order to protect our
mutual non-proliferation objectives.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800224–1231. Se-
cret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Immediate to Moscow, the Mission in Ge-
neva, and USNATO. Drafted by Steven Steiner (PM/DCA); cleared by Robert Einhorn
(ACDA), John Marcum (NSC), Neil Michaud (EUR/NE), and Jane Becker (S/S–O); and
approved by Mark Palmer (PM/DCA).
2 The Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan on December 25, 1979.
