Bulgaria about MFN “discrimination”) gave positive or soft responses to all points which required responses. He did not, for instance, in connection with CSCE Basket III discussion, refer to RFE. 2. In discussing bilateral relations I began with positive comments on family unification authorized ref A, remarking I would return to that subject in connection with CSCE. I noted recent positive developments such as Zhivkova visit, opening of Thracian exhibit in New York, and prospects for agricultural cooperation exemplified by Shopov visit. Then I referred pointedly to Puerto Rico issue (ref B and F), noting that within its possibilities Bulgaria had tried to be helpful last year on a subject we regard as internal US matter, and therefore one which could have disturbing effect on our relations. I also referred in positive terms to Bulgarian willingness to enter into early negotiations with Bondholders Protective Council. 3. Next I took occasion to follow up on the demarche with Vice Minister Tsvetkov (ref C) on subject of authentication of documents, explaining (when Mladenov said he “had not seen my note”) that we had not yet made any formal representations because we simply could not believe that Bulgaria would place itself deliberately in violation of our consular agreement. I had to bring this matter to Mladenov’s attention because my friendly demarche to Tsvetkov June 9 had been without effect and recently some affidavit authentications by our Consul had again been refused. It would be unfortunate if my successor as one of his first items of business had to charge Bulgaria with breach of an international agreement. Mladenov undertook to look into matter immediately, saying Bulgaria always scrupulously fulfills its international obligations. 4. Next I presented verbatim the remarks on CSCE as per para 2 ref E, with one change: Instead of saying “We believe further implementation efforts on your part will contribute towards creation of a more positive atmosphere at the main meeting” I said “We believe further implementation on your part and our part”, to remove note of sanctimoniousness and possible impression of arrogance contained in the original phrase, and particularly because there are further positive steps which we intend to take and to which I was later able to refer. Mladenov clearly took in the link between our desire for “constructive and non-polemical” meeting and need for more Bulgarian efforts at implementation. 5. Going into specifics I said on divided families that while great strides had been made, there remain some cases of urgent humanitarian concern (ref D) where delay or inaction must be due to misunderstandings or administrative mix-ups. I then handed Mladenov two lists, one containing seven “approved” cases from the 1975 list which for various reasons are stymied, the other containing fourteen new cases. I singled
