794 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Bartholomew: Perhaps if I could make a suggestion. The first paragraph of the second section would be as we gave it to you. The end of this paragraph would speak of “reducing the concentration of warheads on strategic delivery vehicles, and on giving priority to highly survivable systems.” Shevardnadze: We need a text. Baker: There is agreement now to a new time of 6:00 for signing the final joint statements. Let us work to see if we can conclude this by 6:00. p.m. (Bartholomew gives Shevardnaze a text,4 the interpreter reads aloud in Russian) Shevardnadze: What do you mean by “measures to resolve the problem of heavy missiles and MIRVed ICBMs as a whole?” Burt: This is designed to get around problems the Soviet side had with earlier language that was discussed with Karpov yesterday. Akhromeyev: There is an additional phrase—“that resolve the problem of heavy missiles and MIRVed ICBMs as a whole.” We should instead say “that resolve the problem of strategic offensive arms and heavy missiles, including MIRVed ICBMs as a whole.” The problem to be solved is strategic offensive arms, not just heavy missiles. We should be talking about strategic offensive arms as a whole, including heavy missiles and MIRVed ICBMs. We should not talk about the problem of heavy missiles but the problem of strategic offensive arms. We could talk about resolving the problem of strategic offensive arms as a whole, including heavy missiles and MIRVed missiles. As the minister said, we should remove “capability” rather than “incentives.” Burt: I don’t understand why we can’t just have a reference to heavy missiles and MIRVed ICBMs. Akhromeyev: There are other things that concern us that are not referred to. Bartholomew: I have a sentence: “the two sides will seek measures that reduce the concentration of warheads on strategic offensive arms”—­this is the whole you spoke of—“including measures that resolve the problem of heavy missiles and MIRVed ICBMs as a whole.” Akhromeyev: I accept your concerns, you should accept our concerns. What bothers us is other things that are left out here. Baker: I have just talked to the White House, the signing is still on for 6:00. We need to wrap this up and get over there. 4 Not found.
