Afghanistan
829
less important northern part of the province has been untouched by
Soviet or government forces.
Laghman
Much of the fighting in Laghman province has been a spillover
from other provinces. For example, during the Soviet sweeps in the
Konar Valley, there were parallel operations by Afghan and Soviet
forces in Laghman. Although the government controls the provincial
capital and most main towns, the bulk of the province is in rebel
hands. Rebel fortunes have fluctuated there, depending on the degree
of government pressure. The main significance of the province has
been its use by the insurgents as both a base and a supply route for
operations in the Kabul area. The Alisang Valley has been particularly
important as a route for insurgents moving to the Panjshir Valley, from
which they can threaten important installations—the main road to the
USSR and Bagram air base—in the northern Kabul basin.
Parvan
The Soviets have been able to maintain control over the most impor-
tant areas of Parvan province—the northern part of the Kabul basin
and the Salang tunnel on the road from Kabul to the USSR. The insur-
gents have failed to block or destroy the tunnel, the most vulnerable
part of the Soviet supply line, and their attacks on Bagram air base as
well as mutinies by Afghan airmen there have not seriously interfered
with Soviet operations.
Elsewhere in the province, the insurgents have more than held
their own. According to one Afghan official, they control nine of the
province’s 10 districts. Several Afghan and Soviet efforts to clear the
road running west into Bamian province have brought no lasting bene-
fits. Attempts to eliminate the threat to the Kabul basin posed by
insurgents at the Panjshir Valley in the eastern part of the province
have been unsuccessful. In April, [less than 1 line not declassified] the
insurgents—perhaps for the only time since the invasion—were able
to force Soviet troops to retreat.
Kabul
Insurgents have been active in the mountains around the Kabul
basin, but the basin itself has been under firm control of Soviet and
government forces. Clearing operations in the mountains in June
seemed to have removed the threat of an insurgent attack on the
nation’s capital, if any such threat ever existed. The Soviets may have
reacted quickly and forcefully because they feared that increased raids
from the mountains would inspire new outbreaks in the city.
The capital was fairly calm before the Soviet invasion, although
the first stages of an insurgent assassination campaign had already
