VIII  Preface
agency, rather than the time of transmission; memoranda of conver-
sation are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, 
rather than the date the memorandum was drafted.
The document’s source and original classification are contained in 
the editorial headings at the beginning of each document. Distribution 
and drafting information, information on the background of import-
ant documents and policies, and indications if the President and/or his 
major policy advisers read the document are in the first footnote.
Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent 
material not included, indicate the location of additional documentary 
sources, provide references to important related documents printed in 
other volumes, describe key events, and summarize and provide cita-
tions to public statements that supplement and elucidate the documents. 
Information derived from memoirs and other first-­hand accounts has 
been used when applicable to supplement the official record.
Declassification Review Procedures
Declassification review of the documents selected for publica-
tion was conducted by the Division of Historical Documents Review, 
Bureau of Diplomatic Security, Department of State. The review was 
made in accordance with the Freedom of Information Act, the Privacy 
Act, and the criteria established in Executive Order 12356 regarding:
1)	military plans, weapons, or operations;
2)	the vulnerabilities or capabilities of systems, installations, proj-
ects, or plans relating to the national security;
3)	foreign government information;
4)	intelligence activities (including special activities) or intelli-
gence sources or methods,
5)	foreign relations or foreign activities of the United States;
6)	scientific, technological, or economic matters relating to 
national security;
7)	U.S. Government programs for safeguarding nuclear materials 
or facilities;
8)	cryptology; and
9)	a confidential source.
Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate 
geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State, other 
concerned agencies of the U.S. Government, and appropriate foreign 
governments regarding documents of those governments. The princi-
ple guiding declassification review is to release as much information as 
is consistent with contemporary requirements of national security and 
sound foreign relations.
