Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III change rate stability on countries with widely different inflation and external positions could well do more harm than good. What are current views on fixed vs. floating rates? • There is very little support in the United States for moving back to a fixed rate regime. Such a move would put a straitjacket on domestic economic policies. As in the late 1960s, we would have to weigh the balance-of-payments consequences of every major government transaction. (As Director of the Bureau of the Budget in the mid-1960s, I literally had two sets of books: one for dollars spent in the U.S., and another for dollars spent abroad.) Ultimately, we might be forced into raising unemployment to cure a trade deficit. • The view from Europe is different. Countries that are smaller and more open than the United States, and have close economic ties with one another, have sound reasons for pursuing economic integration, including monetary unification. About one-fourth of the E.C. GNP moves in world trade, as compared with 7 percent of U.S. GNP. Moreover, half of E.C. trade is within the E.C. Unnecessary exchange rate fluctuations are disruptive of trade and investment. By joining together, these countries hope to reduce unnecessary fluctuations. (But inevitably this must involve harmonizing domestic policies as well as providing for monetary union.) II. Proposals for a European Monetary System (EMS) The heads of government in Bremen decided that competent E.C. groups would study the German-French “scheme” with an eye to adopting an EMS in December. It should be emphasized that no agreement was reached in Bremen on the substantive scheme. The main features of the German-French scheme are: —Setting limits on movements of E.C. currencies relative to each other; —The establishment of a pool of reserves, consisting of dollars, E.C. currencies, and gold to support these rates; —There would be “conditionality” on borrowing of pooled reserves, i.e., countries in deficit would have to institute policies to eliminate their deficits. (Note: The Bremen scheme states that responsibilities apply to “deficit and surplus countries alike.” I am very skeptical whether surplus countries will be subject to effective pressures for adjustment.) —The adoption of a European Currency Unit (ECU) whose value would be based on a basket of EC currencies as “the center of the system;” —The ultimate establishment of a European Monetary Fund to hold the pooled reserves and oversee the system. These arrangements would be phased in over two or more years beginning in early 1979. At least during the transitional period they would be superimposed on the existing Snake arrangements. Cur-
