204
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
81.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, December 4, 1979
The Iranian Crisis: International Economic Fallout
[portion marking not declassified]
The US decision to block official Iranian monetary assets in US
banks here and abroad coupled with Iran’s technical default on several
loans and its threat to blacklist the use of the US dollar have sent shock
waves reverberating throughout the international community.2 These
measures have: (a) created confusion in the international banking sys-
tem in its dealings with Iran, impeding Tehran’s ability to import;
(b) drawn the West Europeans, Japanese, and other allies reluctantly
into the financial dispute and sent a few of them scurrying to capitalize
on the situation; (c) raised concern among OPEC members over the
security of their foreign assets; (d) led Iran and Libya to demand that
OPEC unsheathe the oil weapon; and (e) raised questions about the
future role of the dollar as an international reserve currency. [portion
marking not declassified]
While much of the confusion in international economic circles
would abate quickly once the crisis between Iran and the United States
were resolved, the dispute has longer term implications for all parties
involved. For Iran, the protracted hiatus in its international economic
affairs will mean a downturn in coming months from an already
depressed level of economic activity. Hence, while the crisis will not
change the Ayatollah’s mind set in the short run, over time it will have
substantial political repercussions. Although OPEC members recognize
the special circumstances of the US actions, the United States will find
that OPEC members will intensify their efforts to diversify their foreign
investment portfolios; if other countries block Iranian assets before the
dispute is resolved, OPEC members will feel even more strongly that
keeping their oil in the ground is the most prudent policy. As for the
Japanese and the West Germans, they will have to deal with growing
pressures to internationalize their currencies. A reduced role for the
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 30, Iran 12/5/79–12/9/79. Top Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. Sent
to Carter, Mondale, Vance, Brzezinski, Brown, Miller, and Duncan under a December
5 covering memorandum from Turner.
2 The New York Times reported from London on November 16 that Bani-Sadr was
quoted in Le Monde as saying that Iran would no longer accept payment for its oil in
dollars but would insist that payments be made in a basket of currencies consisting of
the German mark, Swiss franc, and French franc. (Robert D. Hershey, Jr., “Reports on
Freeze and Oil Hurt Dollar,” New York Times, November 17, 1979, p. 6)
