El Salvador  621
ES–28.	
Memorandum for the President by the Secretary of State.1
 
Washington, November 1, 1960.
SUBJECT
Recognition of the New Regime in El Salvador
The six-­man Junta which assumed power in El Salvador on October 
26 is pressing for recognition by the United States.
There is some evidence that this is a government somewhat to 
the left of that of former President Lemus and that a majority of the 
members of the Junta and Cabinet are anti-Communist, although a 
small minority are not particularly desirable from our point of view. 
Moreover, there is a report that a counter-­coup may be attempted.
Nevertheless, the weight of evidence is that the majority of the Army 
and the conservative oligarchy support the present government. It is 
generally believed that the most prominent, if not the dominant, figure 
in this movement is former President Oscar Osorio, President Lemus’ 
predecessor, who has a long record of cooperation with the United 
States and of opposition to communist domination of El Salvador’s 
political life. The Embassy of El Salvador in Washington has issued a 
press release saying in part that the “Members of the Civic-Military 
Junta had emphatically declared in a press conference that the revolu-
tionary movement they represent is strictly national and authentically 
democratic, consistent with the basic principles of Western democracy 
without any ties, whatsoever, with foreign powers or ideologies.”
The Governments of Guatemala, Honduras, Panama, Ecuador, 
Uruguay, Argentina, Spain and Mexico have already recognized, and it 
is probable that other recognitions will follow swiftly. All the elements 
required for recognition are present, and I recommend that we recog-
nize the new regime promptly in order better to enable us to cultivate 
good relations with it and to influence it in the right direction.2
Christian A. Herter
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 716.02/11–260. Secret. Drafted by 
William T. Pryce, Staff Aide, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs. It was transmitted to 
Secretary Herter by covering memorandum from Assistant Secretary Mann, November 
1, 1960. In his memorandum, Mann elaborated the points made above in favor of recogni-
tion and recommended that the Secretary sign the present memorandum to the President. 
(716.02/11–160)
2 President Eisenhower noted his approval on the source text.
