1256 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 2. Following is a summary report on Mobarak’s discussions here on autonomy negotiations.2 Mobarak met alone with the President3 for 20 minutes May 23; had lunch with the Secretary (this was mostly a social occasion with no business of importance transpiring); and then met with Ambassador Linowitz later the same day for more than an hour. 3. In meeting with the President, Mobarak in essence sought the President’s views as to whether a quick resumption of the negotiations was desirable or, alternatively, whether it would be better to have a more extended pause. The President later directed that Mobarak be asked to convey back to Sadat a brief message that (a) he would prefer that the talks be started again as soon as possible and (b) we would try to get an appropriate statement on Jerusalem. 4. On the way to the airport upon departure, Mobarak indicated some personal disappointment with the message, pointing out that Sadat’s suspension of the talks had been favorably received in the Arab world, and this was important to Egypt. 5. In conversations with Ambassador Linowitz,4 Mobarak and former Prime Minister Khalil,5 whose visit overlapped with the Vice President’s, made it clear that they do not expect the negotiations to register much progress before the U.S. elections in November. Both stressed Egyptian willingness to continue the talks provided we can get assurances from the Israelis that the Cohen Bill6 on Jerusalem will not be voted into law. Khalil agreed that either a letter from Burg to Linowitz or Burg’s confirmation of Linowitz’s understanding of the situation would permit Egypt to resume the talks.7 Mobarak said he be- 2 In addition to the discussions on the status of the autonomy negotiations noted here, Mubarak met with Brown on May 23 on the supply of parts and munitions to the Egyptian military, the progress of the F–4 fighter program for the Egyptian Air Force, and the planned temporary deployment of U.S. F–4 fighter aircraft to Cairo West airbase in support of that program. The memorandum of conversation of this meeting is in the
