Yugoslavia greater reliance on market mechanisms and less meddling by local political interests in investment decisions; left an ambivalent LCY with little alternative other than to endorse this approach at the December 15th CC LCY plenum and to accept more open debate and criticism as necessary and healthy; and argued with apparent success for a policy of differentiation between a “loyal” and a “disloyal” opposition. With events on their side, the “reformers” have thus emerged on the offensive and the State apparatus has proven itself more effective than the Party in developing coherent and convincing responses to the powerful and broadly based currents for change. 7. The battle is hardly over, though, and the “conservatives”—a mixture of generally older, more orthodox elements in the Party hierarchy as well as local and Republican elements motivated more by pragmatic considerations of power than by ideology—can be expected to fight back hard. Thus, these conservatives, with LCY Presidency members Dragosavac and Mikulic in the fore, have consistently pressed for a tougher line against “dissidents” and have continued to issue periodic warnings about dangerous “new tendencies,” attempts to change “fundamentals of the (Titoist) system,” ideological backsliding, and reliance on “bourgeois” economic methods. 8. These same forces no doubt were also instrumental in getting the December Plenum to take a stand—calling for “uncompromising rejections” of anti-Socialist and anti-self-management trends—on a process which seemed bent on moving ahead with or without Party consent. Whether this attempt to reassert Party control over the debate will have the desired effect remains to be seen, since the real issue— where to draw the line between acceptable and unacceptable “reformist” criticism—was not clarified. In any case, since the Plenum, Party organs have noticeably stepped up public criticism of opposition elements (Djilas, Mihaljov, and the backers of “Javnost”—proposed magazine of social criticism); the Party faithful have been exhorted to struggle harder against ideologically alien ideas and those who ascribe all present economic ills to the self-management system; and there have been attempts to intimidate the signers of the various petitions for greater political freedom (without, however, noticeable success so far). 9. In a way, the emerging atmosphere of criticism and debate is reminiscent of the political-intellectual ferment of 1970–71 in Yugoslavia— but without the acute nationalistic content present then—but also without Tito in the wings to ensure the debate is kept within bounds. This process has not yet gone very far and the outcome is not all clear. For now, the debate remains relatively restrained, responsible, and focused on reform, “democratization,” and “liberalization” within the Socialist self-management system.Itsmainprotagonists havebeen inthe political mainstream rather than the fringe forces which seek to destroy Tito’s
