1138  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
274.	 Memorandum From Kistiakowsky to Eisenhower1
Washington, November 25, 1960
Carrying out your directive to report to you on the methodology 
used in the preparation of the Optimized Strategic Target List and the 
Single Integrated Operational Plan (SIOP), my associates (Dr. H.E. 
Scoville and Dr. George Rathjens) and I studied the relevant aspects 
of the activities of the Joint Strategic Planning Staff (JSPS), and I have 
come to the following conclusions:
1. The staff is following the directives received from the JCS which, 
in turn, are based on your approval of the NSC action following the 
presentation of “Study 2009” by General Hickey. The JSPS is making 
effective use of available intelligence information. I believe that the 
presently developed SIOP is the best that could be expected under the 
circumstances and that it should be put into effect.
2. I recommend that an effort be initiated now to review the direc­
tive to, and the procedures used by, the JSPS in anticipation of the 
preparation of subsequent SIOPs for the following reasons:
(a) [text not declassified]
(b) [text not declassified]
(c) The staff is making extensive use of computers, but I believe 
that their programming could be improved and that the most compe­
tent people (such as available in WSEG, for instance) should become 
involved. This refinement, the revision of damage criteria, and possi­
bly a re-evaluation of the importance of “counter force” strikes, will 
become especially important when operational plans are developed 
for less than our total alert force (the force that may survive a surprise 
attack by the enemy).
(d) [text not declassified]
I attach herewith a summary of our detailed observations, made 
on the basis of briefings from the Joint Strategic Planning Staff.
Attachment
Comments on Briefings by the Joint Strategic Planning Staff, 
November 3–5, 1960
The JSPS staff is following quite closely the so-called “Study 
2009”—General Hickey’s presentation to NSC—as regards criteria for 
1 Source: Comments on Joint Strategic Planning Staff work on targeting and SIOP. 
Top Secret. 6 pp. Eisenhower Library, Papers, Whitman File, DDE Diaries.
