38
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
8.
Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State
for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Berry) to
the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Matthews)1
Washington, March 15, 1951.
SUBJECT
CIA Proposals for the Iranian Crisis
Problem
To consider possible courses of covert action by CIA represent-
atives in relation to the Iranian crisis.
Discussion
At the request of CIA, and accompanied by other representatives
of NEA, I visited Messrs. Allen Dulles, Frank Wisner and Kermit Roo-
sevelt on March 14 to discuss the current Iranian crisis. CIA, concerned
over the turn of events in that country, had prepared the attached
paper on the situation, setting forth possible courses of action which
might be carried out covertly.2 It was emphasized that the paper is no
more than a draft hurriedly prepared and that the program would be
refined on the basis of subsequent discussions with the Department.
I undertook to discuss in general terms the CIA proposals with the
appropriate Departmental officers before pursuing the matter further
with CIA. The real importance of the paper is, I think, that CIA is pre-
pared to move ahead rapidly with an action program requiring sup-
plies, money, and personnel if, in the opinion of the Department, it will
be useful in the attainment of our objectives in Iran.
I feel that we certainly must not under-estimate the dangers in-
volved in the Iranian situation, although Razmara’s assassination ap-
pears in fact to have been accomplished by a representative of a small
fanatical nationalist sect. The lack of drastic subsequent developments
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.00/3–1551. Top Se-
cret. Drafted by Rountree. Attached is a handwritten note apparently written by Berry. In
this note Berry poses a number of questions, such as, “Is there the material from which to
build ‘a strong coalition government in Iran?’ (as suggested by CIA)”; “Is this the mo-
ment to bring out ‘a rigorous overt U.S. program to strengthen Iran’ or is it the moment to
let the dust settle while we act correctly?”; and “It is generally assumed that Ala and his
government are a temporary expedient. If so what do we expect to follow, what groups
and what leaders? Are we now working, educationally and otherwise, on such?”
2 Document 5.
