930  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
 The US has come a long way to meet your needs and concerns. 
All of these constraints on long-­range nuclear ALCMs, and in partic-
ular our agreement to the 600 km range threshold, were accepted by 
the US on the understanding that non-­nuclear ALCMs would not be 
constrained. This was the explicit understanding of the US.
 More than once, we have left a ministerial meeting with agreed 
elements of common ground that we thought resolved the ALCM 
issues. Then new issues are raised.
 The US has made a package proposal in Geneva to settle all of the 
ALCM issues. The US would accept a number of Soviet positions, and 
the Soviet Union would accept a number of ours.
 If we are to meet our Presidents’ objective of concluding a START 
treaty soon, I suggest you join us now to make a concerted effort to 
close all the ALCM issues, once and for all.
(If he raises B–2 inspection:)
 The B–2 has never been tested with long-­range nuclear ALCMs.
 The purpose of inspections is to determine whether a heavy 
bomber of a type that has been tested with long-­range nuclear ALCMs 
is in fact equipped for long-­range nuclear ALCMs. Therefore, we accept 
inspection of B–1 and B–52, both of which have been tested with long-­
range nuclear ALCMs.
 If at some point in the future we should test the B–2 with long-­
range nuclear ALCMs, then this aircraft type would become subject to 
inspection.
 The absence of testing should provide confidence that long-­range 
nuclear ALCMs are not deployed on bombers of that type. This is the 
fundamental point.
(If he says all B–1s should counted as ALCM heavy bombers:)
 The US is prepared to take steps to assure you that the B–1 is not 
equipped for long-­range nuclear ALCMs.
 Amb. Bartholomew and Gen. Graves can give your people the 
details on this.
(If he proposes to limit nuclear weapons and nuclear ALCMs to 
[number not declassified] on US bombers and to 16 on Soviet bombers:)
 The nuclear weapon limit would reopen the Reykjavik counting 
rule, and the new ALCM numbers would reopen the ALCM counting 
rule. These are central limits, agreed to at the highest levels, after pro-
tracted negotiations.
 At this point we should not be reopening issues, we should be 
closing them.
PPCM
US position:	
PPCM at solid rocket motor plants producing the 
first stage motor of MIRVed ICBMs with mobile 
variants (SS–24, M–X).
