1112  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
237.	 Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks 
in Geneva to the Department of State1
Geneva, July 18, 1991, 1247Z
7939. Subject: START: The Mother of All Endgames
1. Secret—Entire Text.
Endgame
2. Congratulations to everyone who was involved in the dramatic 
breakthroughs on START which were made in Washington last week. 
Lint described this as the “greatest four days in the history of arms 
control.” While I might not go quite that far, it was clearly a magnifi-
cent achievement. With yesterday’s summit announcement,2 the path 
is finally clear. I have been saying for quite some time that we needed 
a minimum of four weeks advance notice of the specific signing date 
in order to finish the treaty properly. Since we have been given only 
half that time, we will finish the treaty improperly. This will probably 
involve jettisoning certain material now in the inspection protocol and 
dropping it onto the JCIC, along with shortcuts of various kinds.
3. The U.S. delegation is enthusiastic about the next two weeks, 
though with some misgivings among the fainthearted. One alarming 
problem we have had here this week is that we are hearing what Jeff 
Garrison described as “the sound of one hand clapping.” Ambassador 
Obukhov and Colonel Koltunov, the two key actors on the Soviet side, 
have still not returned to Geneva. The Soviet delegation has no new 
instructions and no information on what was agreed in Washington 
beyond what we have told them. Thus it has been a frustrating and 
one-sided endgame thus far (presumably this will change dramati-
cally in the next day or so). Nevertheless, it is clear that the Soviet 
delegation is seriously understaffed and may have problems with the 
sheer volume of mechanical work that will be required. They have 
been showing up for meetings without Soviet interpreters for several 
days now.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, 
D910686–0672. Secret; Immediate.
2 In an evening news conference at the London Economic Summit on July 17, 
following a joint news conference with Gorbachev earlier in the day, President Bush 
declared that “We’ve today concluded with the Soviet Union a nuclear arms treaty that 
will begin the reduction of long-range nuclear weapons,” and that he intended to meet 
with Gorbachev in Moscow from July 30–31. (Public Papers: Bush, 1991, p. 907)
