National Security Policy 939 3. Paragraph 16–­a. Support the views of the Department of Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. REASON: Airlift should only be diverted to certificated air carri­ ers as procurement policies and small business interests permit. Also, there may be instances where it would not be feasible from a military viewpoint to divert traffic even though possible, to certified air carriers as such carriers may not be able to provide the desired or economic service required to meet military requirements. 4. Paragraph 16–­a. Recommend deletion of parenthetical expression “(e.g, the DC–7F and the L–1049H)” from the first sentence. REASON: Same as for paragraph 1 above. 5. Paragraph 16–­c–­(1). Support the views of the Department of State, Department of Defense, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. REASON: If the MATS operation and capability is adjusted toward meeting its wartime “hard-­core” mission considerable airlift no doubt will be transferred to commercial air carriers. The peacetime airlift capability of MATS generated during peacetime should be fully uti­ lized by the Services. It is considered unsound and uneconomical to procure airlift from commercial sources and at the same time not utilize that airlift capability generated in realistic training of the military air transport forces. 6. Paragraph 16–­c–­(2). Recommend paragraph be amended (changes indicated in usual manner): “(2) Assure, by appropriate contracts and agreements backed by nec­ essary legislation, that the civil aircraft handling the cargo transferred to the civil air cargo fleet pursuant to a and b above will be immedi­ ately available to meet military and mobilization requirements when necessary.” REASON: To indicate that written contracts with civil carriers and additional legislation are required to assure the availability of civil car­ riers at all times. 7. Paragraph 17. Recommend paragraph be amended (changes indicated in usual manner): “17. Review the present arrangements under which the Civil Reserve Air Fleet is on call by the Government to assure that the civil-­ cargo-­air fleet is immediately available to meet military and mobiliza­ tion requirements.” REASON: The Civil Reserve Air Fleet is composed of both civil passenger and cargo aircraft. To conduct a realistic review of present arrangements under which the Civil Reserve Air Fleet is on call by the Government it should be examined from the viewpoint of the entire fleet.
