1955  559
30. I said I wished bring up humanitarian matter in regard to 
implementation agreed announcement on release civilians that hoped 
he would present to his government. On November 17, his government 
had announced Mrs. Bradshaw being released from custody and free 
to depart. Mrs. Lau who had been caring for her asked that Mrs. Brad­
shaw be permitted depart with her. Permission not granted in time.
31. I said we understood from Mrs. Lau that Mrs. Bradshaw’s 
health was very bad. She is extremely weak and we understand she 
has to be fed artificially at times. She is unable move or travel without 
assist­ance. Mental state also unstable apparently attempted commit 
suicide several times. I was sure Wang agreed with me it would be most 
unfortunate if she did not promptly and safely arrive in US.
32. I said it seemed to me best answer to problem would be for 
Mrs. Bradshaw’s, husband, Dr. Bradshaw, who is physician to be 
promptly released so he could travel with her and take her out. Would 
be in interest of both of us. I hoped he would present suggestion to his 
government.
33. I said I also noted that no further Americans had returned since 
November 17 and that British Charge had not seen additional Ameri­
cans or received further communications beyond one he received some 
time ago.
34. Wang said he had noted my statement. Regarding question of 
British Charge being unable communicate with imprisoned people as 
believed by me, he had already expressed his position. His side has all 
along been lenient in treatment imprisoned Americans in accordance 
agreed announcement, so that they should be able effect their return 
smoothly. Of course Americans who have committed offenses must 
necessarily undergo and complete legal procedure in China. Their cases 
must be examined and dealt with in accordance Chinese legal proce­
dures. Before these are completed, question of return was not possible.
35. Wang said there was even less point in alleging delay or 
obstruction. If any American who has committed offenses has any 
communication to British Charge to make, PRC all along has helped 
them do so. If it were so, I asked that British Charge should have ability 
of communicating with Americans in question on own initiative, then 
Indian Embassy should enjoy same right in US of communicating with 
Chinese residents on its own initiative. PRC has learned from Indian 
Embassy that US not assisting Indian Embassy communicate with Chi­
nese. Moreover, US has failed provide lists of Chinese in US. Indian 
Embassy thus has encountered difficulty in communicating with Chi­
nese residents in US on initiative of Indian Embassy. PRC side not sat­
isfied with failure US Government assist Indian Embassy communicate 
with Chinese residents in accordance agreed announcement.
