Arms Control and Disarmament 1523 a) Love-­Rayleigh wave amplitude ratio. A preliminary study of ampli­ tude ratio of Love waves to Rayleigh waves for periods greater than about 10 sec. from earthquakes and underground explosions has been conducted at the Lamont Geological Observatory at Palisades, New York. The results indicate that in the equivalent magnitude range 5 KT–23 KT a single station at a distance of 3500 km or less can iden­ tify about 10% of seismic events as natural earthquakes. Data from sta­ tions in appreciable different azimuths are relatively independent and so increase the probability of identification significantly but not above some as yet undetermined limit. b) Spectra of surface waves recorded on long period, horizontal compo­ nent seismographs. Data from Palisades, Pasadena, and Berkley indicate a systematic difference in the long period spectra of earthquakes and underground nuclear explosions. Although the effect is striking, it is not possible to quote the capability of this method at this time except to estimate that identification of earthquakes from a network of stations is no worse than 10% and the upper limit is open. The possibility exists that further results can be obtained in the immediate future by additional studies of the amplitude ratio for Love-­ Rayleigh waves and its aximuthal dependence for earthquakes. This will provide additional data to verify the estimate of 10% identification of earthquakes and examine the possibility of increasing this figure. II. Network of Unmanned Auxiliary Seismic Stations Interpolation of unmanned automatic seismic stations into the grid of control posts of the Geneva plan gives promise of providing significantly greater information on weak seismic events, correspond­ ing in intensity to one kiloton. A triangular network of such unmanned stations is suggested, spaced 170 km apart between the stations of the 1000 km grid proposed in Geneva for the seismic regions of the world. In such a network, a one kiloton shot coupled seismically to the same degree as Rainier, Logan, and Blanca would give 50 millimicron ampli­ tudes or higher for first motion of P-­waves at nine stations on the aver­ age. Thus data from single vertical-­component seismometers disposed in such a network would suffice to detect first motion with reasonable certainty. The practical problems of installing such a network may be esti­ mated by noting that the spacings mentioned above imply having 35 auxiliary stations per main station and that the maximum communi­ cation distance between a main and auxiliary station is 600 km. Each auxiliary station would require a seismometer, a recording device (for providing a permanent record), a clock, a radio transmitter, a source of electric power, and probably a data storage device which will per­ mit compressed data transmission as required. The cost of the technical
