general and so sweeping in character that until there has been some discussion it is impossible to determine what definite proposals can most profitably be advanced. Consequently this Government has indicated certain limitations beyond which you should not go. These limitations have been laid down as a matter of prudence and merely for your guidance in estimating the practical value of suggestions which may be presented from time to time. Quite apart, however, from the instructions which it has been possible at this time to reduce to written form the President desires to impress upon you his deep interest in any sincere effort to deal with the problem of armaments. He is confident that with mutual good-will progress can be made and it will be a matter of gratification to him if the American representation can in some measure contribute to this progress. As the discussion develops and brings out the nature of the questions which can effectively be considered the President trusts that it will be possible to send you further instructions to present proposals in regard to specific problems and for your further guidance in exercising a helpful influence in bringing about agreement among the interested powers. In connection with each proposal as it arises you should bear in mind the sincere desire of this Government to cooperate, within the limits of its traditional policy, in any serious effort toward the further reduction of the burden of armaments. I am [etc.] FRANK B. KELLOGG 86 Ante, p. 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]. 87 Ante, p. 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 35]. 88 Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, pp. VII, XII. * By the phrase “peace strength” is meant that armament which is maintained in time of peace, that is, in the absence of a declared state of war between two or more powers or the actual carrying on of hostilities against a recognized belligerent. [Footnote in the original.] ** The terms “land armament” and “naval armament” as used in this instruction include the aviation units which form a part of the land and naval forces of the United States. [Footnote in the original.] 89 For text of treaty, see Foreign Relations, 1922, vol. I, p. 247.
