Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976 53 I was struck by the great expectations that the Europeans seem to have regarding your prospective Presidency. There is a striking sense of anticipation as well as curiosity. I was plied with endless questions about you personally as well as about your likely policies. (Needless to say, I made it very clear that I was not speaking for you). One important impression that I gained was that there may be in the foreseeable future real opportunity for a renewed and truly serious dialogue between the U.S. and France on both East-West and North- South problems. The French hinted that they would like to have serious discussions with us about their nuclear policies; this could involve some accommodation on their part with regards to their role in nuclear proliferation in return for some consideration on our part for their strategic concerns. I should add, in passing, that the new French foreign minister is de Guiringaud. You might remember that I placed him on your right when you were making your speech before the FPA in New York. He was enormously impressed by you and I strongly suspect that the fact that he got to know you somewhat and had a serious conversation with you may have had a bit to do with his recent selection to be the Foreign Minister. 11. Editorial Note In addition to Zbigniew Brzezinski’s September 27, 1976, memorandum concerning the second Presidential debate between President Gerald Ford and Democratic nominee Jimmy Carter, scheduled for October 6 (see Document 10), other members of the Carter-Mondale campaign staff drafted briefing memoranda and books for Carter to use in his debate preparation. Copies of the memoranda and briefing books for the second debate are in the Carter Library, 1976 Presidential Campaign, Issues Office, Issues Office—Stuart Eizenstat, Box 9, Debates— Briefing Material [2] and Carter Library, 1976 Presidential Campaign, Issues Office, Issues Office—David Rubenstein, Box 45, Briefing Book—September 24, 1976; ibid., Briefing Book—9/28/76 [1] and [2], and ibid., Debates—Reviewed [1] and [2]. Under a September 28 memorandum, adviser Stuart Eizenstat sent Carter the final briefing book, noting that advisers Richard Holbrooke, Robert Hunter, David Aaron, and Nicholas MacNeil had produced the content. Part I of the briefing book included the general comments and strategy section. In this part, the authors concluded: “You ‘win’ this de-
