358  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
feeding line cases being reviewed and “pressure” on CHICOMs release 
raises problem of face, making action difficult.
Gowen
Note: Mr. Waddell’s office (FE) notified 10/5/55 3:39 p.m. EMB (CWO)
267.	 Telegram 819 from Geneva1
Geneva, October 5, 1955, 10 p.m.
819. From Johnson.
1. At 19th meeting October 5, I asked Wang if he had some replies 
to questions I had asked him last meeting.
2. Wang read from long prepared statement. He said he believed 
both of us recognized our discussion agenda item two thus far had been 
unsatisfactory. It had been nearly a month since agreement on return of 
civilians from both sides concluded, but we were still spending time on 
details of implementation thus preventing us from proceeding to dis­
cussion agenda item two. At last meeting I had raised questions which 
went into details of implementation of agreement. Such questions 
might well be put to Chinese Government in accordance with terms of 
agreement by third state entrusted with functions. In our case it would 
be United Kingdom. Since both sides had entrusted respective third 
states perform functions, we should trust Embassy or office of Charge 
of third states to handle detailed questions on implementation of agree­
ment instead of interfering with our talks here.
3. Wang said he could not agree with way questions on implemen­
tation being used by me to prevent discussion substance of item two. 
He had suggested at last meeting that our assistants get together to 
discuss details of implementation and consider any reasonable sug­
gestions I might wish make. I had turned down proposal, however, so 
under circumstances he thought questions on implementation should 
be addressed to Chinese Government through UK Charge.
4. He said I had also put forward two subjects under agenda item 
two and had raised question of order of subjects. He had indicated he 
could not agree to removal any of his subjects nor to any fixed order 
for discussion. There was no necessity for carrying on prolonged 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/10–555. Confidential; Priority; 
Limited Distribution.
