Nicaragua  863
expedition led by Velasquez to strike at Honduras in order to remove 
threat of invasion from that country.
Philosophy behind General’s planning revolves around thought 
that Nicaragua would be unable resist undisturbed concerted onslaught 
assisted or engineered by enemy governments and that he and his 
brother in that event might as well at least go down fighting.
[illegible in the original] and MA both report overhearing 
General’s portion of telephone conversation with President from which 
it appeared latter does not subscribe to General’s views. It was also 
observed that apparently President’s counsel still prevails.
Embassy believes President’s moderation will continue over rule 
General’s impulsiveness as long as President feels there is some hope 
U.S. Government and OAS are not determined because of supposed 
unpopularity his regime to disregard availability evidences of foreign 
plotting and actions against GON. Should his remaining doubts be dis-
pelled that OAS and USA intend to give him no assistance it is very 
likely that President may authorize General to take some form of retal-
iatory action calculated to give GON at least temporary advantage of 
fighting outside Nicaragua.
In view Figueres, Marshall, Aguiluz insubordination to GOCR 
directed against GON and reasonable conclusion that Cuban, Honduran 
and Venezuelan elements closely associated with governments those 
countries are actively assisting and conspiring current anti-GON move-
ments Embassy believes only forthright statements by OAS and USA 
can now avert INTL hostilities the result of which would be disas-
trous regardless of winning side. In Embassy’s view U.S. Government 
would now be fully justified in urging OAS investigating committee 
in the interest of area peace to make speedy declaration that the case 
of Nicaragua clearly comes within the provisions of Article 6 of Rio 
Treaty. Following closely on such a declaration U.S. could announce its 
intention fully to support collective assistance to the attacked state in 
the event of an armed attack.
Urgently recommend action along foregoing lines before it is 
too late.
Whelan
