612
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Points to be Made:
—Note our belief that the Belgrade meeting at least provided a
firm basis for continuation of the CSCE process. Express satisfaction
with the close cooperation between the U.S. and Romanian sides.
—Ask Ceausescu how he believes the CSCE process should
develop in the period leading to the Madrid meeting.11 Note the impor-
tance of patient and persistent effort over the long term to ensure
concrete results.
—Point out that human rights issues require further scrutiny by
CSCE states. Express satisfaction that Ceausescu has been willing to
discuss human rights matters frankly and urge further progress in
Romanian human rights practices, including specific emigration cases,
under Basket 3.
7. US-China Relations
U.S. Objectives: To obtain Ceausescu’s insights into recent develop-
ments in Chinese relations.
Essential Factors: Since the late 1960’s, China has been an important
part of Ceausescu’s international balancing act. Ceausescu plans to
visit Peking in mid-May, and Hua Kuo-feng, who has not left China
since taking power, is expected to visit Bucharest later this year. The
Chinese understand the delicate game Ceausescu must play with the
USSR and are likely to moderate their attacks on the Soviets while
Ceausescu is in Peking.
We will want to be forthcoming in giving our views on US–PRC
relations but must assume that anything we say on China may reach
both the Chinese and the Soviets.12
Points to be Made:
—Note Ceausescu’s valuable role in helping the U.S. reestablish a
dialogue with Peking in 1970–1971 and that we will soon be visiting
Peking again. Express the hope that he will convey these points to the
leadership in Peking:
• You recognize the historic and strategic importance of our
relations with China. The goal of this Administration is normalization
within the framework of the Shangai Communique. (S)
• You agree with Premier Hua’s observation at the recently-
concluded National People’s Congress that the U.S. and China share
quite a few points in common in world affairs. You believe it is im-
11 The Madrid meeting of the CSCE was the second follow-up meeting on the
implementation of the Helsinki Accords; it opened on November 11, 1980, and adjourned
September 9, 1983.
12 Brzezinski highlighted this paragraph in the margin.
