German Democratic Republic 373 122. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, June 6, 1978, 11 a.m. SUBJECT US–GDR Relations PARTICIPANTS GDR Foreign Minister Oskar Fischer Ambassador Rolf Sieber Ambassador Harald Rose, MFA Manfred Niklas, MFA Paul Ringleb (interpreter) US The Secretary Assistant Secretary George Vest William M. Woessner, Director, EUR/CE Victor Gray, EUR/CE (notetaker) Harry Obst (interpreter) After initial pleasantries concerning the Dresden exhibit,2 the Secretary raised the subject of the consular convention, saying that without progress in this area, meaningful progress in our general relations would be very difficult. He reminded Fischer that, when the two last met in September, he (the Secretary) had proposed separate statements on the nationality question and was now puzzled by the lack of progress, given Fischer’s agreement to that proposal.3 Fischer replied that he too was puzzled. Separate statements were indeed a good idea but should not present the other party with a problem it could not digest. Fischer said that he had understood in September that each party would address its own problem. He had also understood that the U.S. had no treaties with other countries containing nationality clauses. Since then, he said, he had learned that the U.S. had such treaties with the U.K. and Japan. He then produced a text, 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Office of Analysis for the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Office Subject Files, 1967–1985, Lot 92D404, Box 8, GDR–US (Political) 1977–1978. Confidential. Drafted by Gray on June 8; cleared by Vest and Woessner; approved by Anderson on June 16. The meeting took place in the Secretary’s office. 2 Fischer was in New York for the UN Special Session on Disarmament and traveled to Washington to meet with Vance. On June 1, the Smithsonian’s National Gallery opened an exhibit entitled “The Splendor of Dresden: Five Centuries of Art Collecting.” (Telegram 3590 from East Berlin, May 26; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780223–0261) 3 See Document 119.
