896 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II lationship with the Vietnamese, in order to facilitate the provision of assistance to Kampuchea, and improved monitoring of the relief assistance our nation is providing to Kampuchea.15 The Commission further recommends that the United States continue to show sensitivity to the difficulties placed on Thailand by the influx of nearly one million refugees, and that the United States marshall international support for Thailand in order that the country not suffer unduly from the strain placed upon it.16 15 Tarnoff indicated that senior U.S. officials were engaged in direct contact with Hanoi on a variety of issues, including Khmer relief. (Memorandum from Tarnoff to Brzezinski, February 7; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P800052– 1803) 16 In recognition of the Government of Thailand’s position vis-a`-vis the Khmer refugee population, Tarnoff noted that the United States had “increased our monthly off-take of refugees from Thailand to more than one-half of the monthly total we resettle from all of the first-asylum countries in Southeast Asia.” Similarly, the United States had engaged with the UN, ASEAN countries, and other governments to “impress upon Hanoi and its Soviet backers the great importance we attach to Thailand’s territorial integrity and the continued safety and well-being of the over one-half million displaced Khmer now located along the Thai-Cambodian border.” (Ibid.) 267. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake) to the Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen)1 Washington, January 28, 1980 Subject Presidential Push on War on Hunger I like your idea of proposing to the President a meeting with religious leaders on a campaign against hunger.2 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Director, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 6, TL 1/16–31/80. No classification marking. 2 Reference is to a January 25 memorandum from Owen to Carter recommending that Carter publicly meet with religious leaders. Owen commented that such a meeting would “be a good way to remind people that even while you are devoting increased attention to the current national security crisis, you continue to be keenly interested in such global issues as world hunger.” (Ibid.) Owen repeated his proposal in a February 8 memorandum to Carter; see Document 268.
