498
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
i.e., to give the appearance of a more active investigatory effort. Appar-
ently the lawyers persuaded the Commission to split up and for sepa-
rate members to take different assignments.
—As we know, the Revolutionary Council two days ago approved
a visit by the Commission to the compound.4 Ghotbzadeh has experi-
enced trouble in dealing with the captors. They offered to allow the
Commission to see only some of the hostages. Ghotbzadeh today gave
them an ultimatum demanding that all of the hostages be seen. If the
captors refuse, the Revolutionary Council will send an open letter of
protest to the Imam. The lawyers suspect that possibly 20 of the hos-
tages are not being held in the compound.
—The Commission met with Bruce Laingen and his two colleagues
today secretly. We have confirmation of this from the British.
—The transfer of the hostages to a hospital or other place has
been approved “at the highest level.” Two intervening stages will be
necessary, i.e., a visit to the compound and a partial report by the
Commission (both steps envisaged in the scenario).
—Beheshti is described as making serious trouble for Bani-Sadr
(this is contradicted by the apparent support of Beheshti on the Revolu-
tionary Council for the scenario).
—Bani-Sadr is said to have persuaded Khomeini to give authority
over the hostages to the new Parliament because Bani-Sadr and Kho-
meini were upset that Waldheim jumped the gun in announcing the
Commission, and thus deprived Iran of the opportunity to declare a
diplomatic success.
—The two lawyers are fully aware of our concerns about the lack
of tangible progress. They continue to feel there is a strong commitment
in the Iranian leadership to the scenario and Bani-Sadr as having told
the Commission that he would adhere to the scenario “point by point.”
—Because of their role as intermediaries between the Iranians and
the Commission, the lawyers are hesitant to promise that they can
leave Iran for a meeting with us. They prefer to await developments
over the next 24 hours. They suggest that possibly one of them could
meet with one of us outside Iran.
The Lang telegram covers much of the same ground as the tele-
phone conversation. In the cable, Lang is asked by the lawyers to urge
4 As reported in telegram 50233 to all diplomatic and consular posts, February 25.
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800097–0838) In the February
27 telephone conversation referenced in footnotes 2 and 3 above, Villalon stated that a
“grave confrontation” existed between the Revolutionary Council and the students, but
the visit to the hostages was assured.
