World Hunger and Food Policy
769
—finally, the President is provided no pros and cons on which to
make judgements on the individual options.
We know that one of Tony’s concerns has been that State has been
quite negative in its responses without offering alternative approaches.
To ensure a timely, effective and constructive State reply to Bourne’s
memo you may wish to talk to Jules3 or Dick Cooper and suggest their
personal attention to this issue. You may also wish to see the State com-
ment before it is forwarded.
3 Reference is to Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and Business Affairs
Julius Katz.
241.
Memorandum From Guy Erb of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 17, 1978
SUBJECT
Draft Report of World Hunger Working Group
Some time ago Peter Bourne circulated a draft of the report of the
World Hunger Working Group,2 an inter-agency body staffed by pri-
vate experts and government officials. The report’s findings are critical
of many current US food and agricultural programs: the report cites the
lack of research priorities, inadequate implementation of development
goals, deficiencies in organization and management within the gov-
ernment, and a frequent conflict between U.S. foreign investment and
food and agricultural needs of developing countries. The report makes
a large number of proposals but does not set priorities. Most gov-
ernment agencies were not pleased by the report. Since a considerable
amount of line-by-line editing would have been required to pull the re-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 93, Food: 1978. Limited Official Use. Sent for informa-
tion. Copies were sent to Owen and Thornton. A handwritten notation on the memo-
randum indicates Brzezinski saw it. Inderfurth also initialed the memorandum. Another
copy is in the Carter Library, White House Central Files, Subject Files, Box HE–6, Confi-
dential, HE–3, 1/20/77–1/20/81. According to an NSC Correspondence Profile attached
to this copy of the memorandum, Brzezinski noted it on January 18.
2 See Docuemnt 231.
