834 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV As you are aware, the false indications that led to the precautionary measures taken at SAC on June 3 and 6 resulted from a computer malfunction. These false indications were immediately identified by duty officers, who exercised the planned safeguards designed for such a contingency. The corrective actions taken thus far include procedures to strengthen human safeguards as well as technical measures to repair the immediate problem in the computer. The following are specific actions which have been taken in these two categories: Operational and Procedural Actions Emergency action procedures have been modified so that any command center can request a Missile Display Conference (MDC). This is the lowest of three levels of conference: Missile Display; Threat Assessment; and Missile Attack. Any potentially threatening warning indication will result in an MDC, and MDCs will be conducted on dedicated secure voice circuits. If any delay occurs, non-­secure voice circuits will be used. Amendments have been made in SAC missile warning procedures on an interim basis pending a complete review of all relevant procedures. No posture change will be made in SAC forces unless confirmed by a NORAD system confidence of “medium” or “high,” or the receipt by SAC of sensor data indicating a potential missile attack directly from either our infrared-­sensing satellites or our new SLBM warning radar. The Chairman of the JCS has discussed with me, and then approved, a revised Situation Action display. The revision adds missile count information derived from directly-­connected sensor data. The display already has NORAD summary data for each sensor system. Thus, both the NORAD summary (which comes through the computer) and direct (though less detailed) data from the sensors can be compared on one display. Software program development and checkout testing will take approximately three weeks at SAC. Installation at NMCC and ANMCC will require an additional four days. Since NORAD does not have the Situation Action display, installation at NORAD will take significantly longer. The Chairman of the JCS visited SAC Headquarters and NORAD Headquarters yesterday and today to discuss new procedures and follow-­on actions. Technical/Equipment Actions The technical problem that generated the false displays occurred in a NOVA 840 minicomputer manufactured by Data General. The specific minicomputer that introduced the problem is four years old and is used in the Communications System Segment (CSS) at NORAD.
