180 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III I regard this as a successful outcome. The total amount is adequate, and the balance between the industrial country group and the OPEC is reasonable. I believe Congress will react favorably to the rough equality between OPEC and industrial country participation—OPEC is providing almost half—since the lack of OPEC participation was one of the major objections to the financing proposal put forward by the previous Administration. The U.S. share (approximately $1.7 billion) is reasonable, and in line with that of other participants (for example, Saudi Arabia’s share is $2.5 billion; Germany’s share is $1.2 billion). Also, the interest rate is fair—we will receive the amount it costs Treasury to borrow for comparable maturities, which is an adequate return without being too severe on the borrowers. And the facility will help strengthen the international monetary system by encouraging those countries with large balance of payments problems to adopt the needed adjustment programs. Tony Solomon, my Under Secretary for Monetary Affairs, did most of the ground work in putting this arrangement together. Assuming no further hitches develop, the IMF Executive Board will finalize the facility in the weeks ahead. We are planning to submit the necessary authorizing legislation to the Congress in the present session. W. Michael Blumenthal4 4 Blumenthal signed “Mike” above this typed signature. 51. Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to President Carter1 Washington, August 12, 1977 SUBJECT Highlights of Treasury Activities 1. GERMANY As I indicated in my report on my discussions with Finance Minister Apel last weekend,2 the Germans are now convinced that additional 1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential File, Box 44, 8/15/77 [1]. Confidential. Marked “F.Y.I.” A stamped notation reads: “The President has seen,” and Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Mike. J.” 2 See Document 50.
