812 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII stand behind Pakistan. There will be too many “good reasons” to renege on whatever commitments we make. (S) This is related to an issue that Muskie did not directly raise: How much effort do we want to put into our relationship with Pakistan? This is something that the PRC should address, especially as regards economic assistance. You probably have a greater sense of urgency in this matter than anybody else around the table and will have to articulate it if the message is to be gotten through. (The issue is not so much substantive as overcoming bureaucratic inertia.)3 (C) The following are some more specific questions that arose from the Thursday meeting and will probably recur. (The list draws, in part, on the internal State briefing memo for this meeting.) (U) 1. What steps can we take to signal our concern to the Soviets and encourage Pakistani support of the insurgents? (Arms sales is the only item on the horizon.) (S) 2. Should the US be more openly involved with the insurgents? (Muskie asked this several times; the answer is that our role is limited by Pakistani sensitivities.) (S) 3. How can we ensure that we do not get out front too far and that we keep the Muslims in the lead? (Or, put another way, how do we keep this in the East-South, rather than East-West context?) (C) 4. When (and how) will we know that the Soviets have overstepped acceptable bounds in their dealings with Pakistan? (S) 5. How can we best consult on these matters with the Paks? Agha Shahi-Muskie this week? Hummel-Zia while Shahi is out of the country? Intelligence channels? (Probably all three in varying degrees but I like the Hummel-Zia channel best if Zia is willing to commit himself without Shahi. This also raises the question of what Hummel is supposed to tell Zia. You should urge State to produce some instructions to Hummel for our clearance.) (C) 6. Related to this, what should Muskie tell Agha Shahi when they meet?4 State will probably brief him to stick to Afghanistan and third country issues; should he raise the bilateral relationship? If so, in what terms? (C) 7. If Muskie consults with Byrd, what should he say? State will point out to Muskie that the conversations could soon get off into War Powers considerations and the like. I am concerned that this is likely to scare off any but the most intrepid supporter of Pakistan. If it is the case, however, we had better face it now. Incidentally, in the Thursday 3 Thornton placed a star in the left margin beside this paragraph. 4 Thornton placed a star in the left margin beside this sentence.
