December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
621
180.
Summary Prepared in the National Security Council1
Washington, February 21, 1979
First Day of Camp David Talks
The talks got off to a good start today, although no real negotiating
was done. Khalil and Dayan get along quite well and are able to carry
on a strategic discussion of developments in the Middle East in a very
impressive manner. They work well together and with Secretary
Vance. The real test will come in the next few days when we see if the
good personal and intellectual relationship that exists between the two
negotiators can be translated into agreements.
Khalil has come with broad authority to negotiate and he seems
genuinely anxious to conclude the talks as soon as possible. At the
same time, he is deeply worried about the risks inherent in any agree-
ment which appears to be a separate peace. He is trying hard to de-
velop a regional strategic context in which the negotiations can be con-
cluded. His main point to Dayan is that it is not in Israel’s interest to see
Egypt isolated from other Arab countries, particularly in light of the de-
velopments in Iran. Dayan acknowledges the point, but asks what price
Israel is being asked to pay.
In contrast to Khalil, Dayan is under more constraints as a negoti-
ator. He says that he has authority to negotiate and to recommend but
ultimately the Cabinet must approve any agreement. He is worried
about the regional situation and talks about this as the last opportunity
to reach a peace agreement, but as usual he gives no indication of opti-
mism. He is clearly anxious to see draft proposals on the specific points
we have discussed, and in particular on the West Bank-Gaza side letter.
The “Gaza First” option has been discussed in some detail, without
any specific agreement in sight. It is not clear that a detailed under-
standing can be achieved in these talks, but each side seems to feel that
a new element is in play and that creates the impression of some posi-
tive movement. I personally doubt that any agreement that can now be
reached on Gaza will have sufficient credibility to provide Sadat with
the political cover in the Arab world that he feels he needs. None-
theless, this is an idea which will get a full hearing in the next few days.
By Friday or Saturday, it is likely that the talks will have gone
about as far as possible, given Dayan’s limited authority. At that point,
he will want to return to Israel to talk to Begin and to get Cabinet ap-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-
ject File, Box 16, Egypt-Israel Negotiations: 2/79. Secret; Eyes Only. No memoranda of
conversation for the day’s meetings have been found. Carter initialed “C” at the top of
the memorandum, indicating that he saw the document.
