1102 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Our unsuccessful efforts at dissuading the Peruvians from purchasing the British cruisers have already aroused in certain Peruvian Government and military circles a resentment over alleged U.S. interference in a sovereign Peruvian decision. Although rational elements (including Prime Minister Beltran) agree with our position, the cruiser acquisition has been nationalistically applauded in the Peruvian Congress and press. Our hopes that the purchase of the second cruiser could be forestalled by advance assurance as the destroyer loan have likewise proved fruitless. (We hear from Peruvian and UK sources that both cruisers were purchased in one deal.) To withdraw the destroyer would jeopardize our over-­all foreign policy objectives by increasing existing resentment within the Peruvian Government and military, as well as in the Congress, press, public, etc. We already have reports that the Peruvian Navy might terminate our Naval Mission, withdraw Peruvian naval personnel in the U.S. and remove pro-American naval officers from positions of influence in the Peruvian Navy. (Our Navy Department is most anxious to avoid these possibilities and therefore is in wholehearted agreement with our position on the destroyers.) It is also possible that Prime Minister Beltran, whose pro-American views and whose opposition to excessive military expenditures are well known, might find his position untenable is the face of aroused nationalistic, anti-American feelings. The U.S. would then lose a good friend and Peru would lose a man who is providing positive leadership in developing a forward-­looking economic-­ financial-­social program. There is reason to believe that the downfall of Beltran would be a severe blow to Peruvian prospects of maintaining economic and political stability. I believe that our unilateral attempts to discourage excessive arms purchases, as in the Peruvian ease, are severely limited by present conditions and that we must try to develop an effective general Inter- American approach to the problem. Recommendations4 I recommend that U/MSC take necessary action as soon as possible to: (1) Advise the Budget Bureau (See Appendix, para. 1), either directly or through the Defense Department, that it will be necessary for foreign policy reasons to implement the Peruvian Ship Loan Program as originally planned. 4 There is no indication on the source text of Bell’s action on the recommendation. In airgram A–135 to Lima, January 15, the Department of State asked the Embassy to offer Peru one destroyer and two converted minesweepers on a five-­year renewable loan. (723.5621/1–1560) For further information, see the editorial note, Document PE–14.
