1102ŌĆā Foreign Relations, 1958ŌĆō1960, Volume V, Supplement
Our unsuccessful efforts at dissuading the Peruvians from pur-
chasing the British cruisers have already aroused in certain Peruvian 
Government and military circles a resentment over alleged U.S. inter-
ference in a sovereign Peruvian decision. Although rational elements 
(including Prime Minister Beltran) agree with our position, the cruiser 
acquisition has been nationalistically applauded in the Peruvian 
Congress and press. Our hopes that the purchase of the second cruiser 
could be forestalled by advance assurance as the destroyer loan have 
likewise proved fruitless. (We hear from Peruvian and UK sources that 
both cruisers were purchased in one deal.)
To withdraw the destroyer would jeopardize our over-┬Łall foreign 
policy objectives by increasing existing resentment within the Peruvian 
Government and military, as well as in the Congress, press, public, etc. 
We already have reports that the Peruvian Navy might terminate our 
Naval Mission, withdraw Peruvian naval personnel in the U.S. and 
remove pro-American naval officers from positions of influence in the 
Peruvian Navy. (Our Navy Department is most anxious to avoid these 
possibilities and therefore is in wholehearted agreement with our posi-
tion on the destroyers.) It is also possible that Prime Minister Beltran, 
whose pro-American views and whose opposition to excessive military 
expenditures are well known, might find his position untenable is the 
face of aroused nationalistic, anti-American feelings. The U.S. would 
then lose a good friend and Peru would lose a man who is provid-
ing positive leadership in developing a forward-┬Łlooking economic-┬Ł
financial-┬Łsocial program. There is reason to believe that the downfall of 
Beltran would be a severe blow to Peruvian prospects of maintaining 
economic and political stability.
I believe that our unilateral attempts to discourage excessive arms 
purchases, as in the Peruvian ease, are severely limited by present 
conditions and that we must try to develop an effective general Inter-
American approach to the problem.
Recommendations4
I recommend that U/MSC take necessary action as soon as possi-
ble to:
(1) Advise the Budget Bureau (See Appendix, para. 1), either directly 
or through the Defense Department, that it will be necessary for foreign 
policy reasons to implement the Peruvian Ship Loan Program as origi-
nally planned.
4 There is no indication on the source text of BellŌĆÖs action on the recommendation. 
In airgram AŌĆō135 to Lima, January 15, the Department of State asked the Embassy to 
offer Peru one destroyer and two converted minesweepers on a five-┬Łyear renewable loan. 
(723.5621/1ŌĆō1560) For further information, see the editorial note, Document PEŌĆō14.
