North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 803 264. Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter1 Washington, May 20, 1977 SUBJECT Aid Assessment During the campaign, you pledged an outside assessment of U.S. foreign aid. I believe that the time is at hand to carry out this pledge. We need a concerted foreign aid strategy and efficient means of carrying it out. This requires rigorous analysis of U.S. aid purposes and programs, to see how they should be reshaped in the coming period. That analysis should focus on both bilateral and multilateral aid; it should include capital assistance, technical assistance, P.L. 480, and guarantees of private investment. It should address not only development aid but also security assistance, insofar as it affects our development objectives. It should take into account broad political and security factors, including our concern for human rights, as well as economic considerations. The assessment should be carried out by persons outside the executive branch not only because of your campaign pledge but also because this would ensure—and would make clear to the Congress and the public—that the assessment was not shaped by executive branch preconceptions. The study should, however, take account of on-going studies of aid in the executive branch, including the study of multilateral aid now underway in the Treasury Department. There are various ways of commissioning an outside assessment. One individual might be asked to take on the job; I doubt any single person could accomplish such a large task. A commission of distinguished citizens might be created; the trouble is that there have been too many of these in the aid field in the past, and one more might not be well received. I would suggest, therefore, that an independent research institution be asked to take on the task. Brookings is a natural candidate, in view of its strength and experience in this field. There is a precedent of sorts: In 1948, when President Truman proposed the Marshall Plan to Congress, Senator Vandenberg, as Chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, asked Brookings to study the question and the resulting study played a significant role in decisions as to how to organize the European Recovery Program. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, Box 17, State: 6/77. No classification marking.
