North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
803
264.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, May 20, 1977
SUBJECT
Aid Assessment
During the campaign, you pledged an outside assessment of U.S.
foreign aid. I believe that the time is at hand to carry out this pledge.
We need a concerted foreign aid strategy and efficient means of car-
rying it out. This requires rigorous analysis of U.S. aid purposes and
programs, to see how they should be reshaped in the coming period.
That analysis should focus on both bilateral and multilateral aid; it
should include capital assistance, technical assistance, P.L. 480, and
guarantees of private investment. It should address not only develop-
ment aid but also security assistance, insofar as it affects our develop-
ment objectives. It should take into account broad political and security
factors, including our concern for human rights, as well as economic
considerations.
The assessment should be carried out by persons outside the exec-
utive branch not only because of your campaign pledge but also be-
cause this would ensure—and would make clear to the Congress and
the public—that the assessment was not shaped by executive branch
preconceptions. The study should, however, take account of on-going
studies of aid in the executive branch, including the study of multi-
lateral aid now underway in the Treasury Department.
There are various ways of commissioning an outside assessment.
One individual might be asked to take on the job; I doubt any single
person could accomplish such a large task. A commission of distin-
guished citizens might be created; the trouble is that there have been
too many of these in the aid field in the past, and one more might not be
well received. I would suggest, therefore, that an independent research
institution be asked to take on the task. Brookings is a natural candi-
date, in view of its strength and experience in this field. There is a prec-
edent of sorts: In 1948, when President Truman proposed the Marshall
Plan to Congress, Senator Vandenberg, as Chairman of the Foreign Re-
lations Committee, asked Brookings to study the question and the re-
sulting study played a significant role in decisions as to how to orga-
nize the European Recovery Program.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency
File, Box 17, State: 6/77. No classification marking.
