226
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
—Israeli military occupation ends. In both the West Bank and
Gaza, Prime Minister Begin has committed Israel in principle to with-
draw in accordance with Resolution 242.
—For the first time ever, a self-governing Palestinian authority
will be created during the transitional period. This will take place in the
West Bank/Gaza as the Israeli military government is withdrawn. We
believe that if responsibly conducted, this should set in motion an
evolutionary process which will enable the Palestinians to govern
themselves.
—Once started, we believe that this process will become irrevers-
ible so that at the end of the five year transitional period an outcome
which meets basic Arab requirements will be almost inevitable. A
major advantage of this approach is that it deals with the West Bank
and Gaza in their totality, rather than talking about some form of parti-
tioning of the West Bank—e.g. along the lines of the Allon Plan,10 or
other forms of partition.
—Next, the Israelis have recognized the “legitimate rights” of the
Palestinians. The implications of the acceptance of this principle are
very important. They should enable a political, economic, and social re-
lationship to develop between the Palestinians and their neighbors
which will, we hope, promote political stability and economic develop-
ment in the area.
—The document states that the Palestinians are recognized as a
party to negotiations with Egypt, Israel, and, we hope, Jordan. They
will have a real voice in determining their own future.
—The settlements on the West Bank will be brought under agreed
limitations. I might comment on what other documents say on issues
not covered in the Camp David framework. In an exchange of letters
we said that after the signing of the framework and during the negotia-
tions there would be no new settlements in the area. The issue of future
settlements would be decided by negotiations. There would be a freeze
on new Israeli settlements. During these negotiations the future of the
settlements would be agreed to among the four negotiating parties.
—There is an Israeli commitment to work out procedures
promptly on persons displaced in 1967, which have been such a great
burden on themselves and on Jordan’s resources.
10 The Allon Plan, initially presented in July 1967 by then Israeli Minister of Labor
Yigal Allon, would have returned approximately two-thirds of the West Bank to a
“Jordanian-Palestinian state” while Israel retained control of the Jordan Rift Valley and
mountain ridges to the west from Nablus to Hebron with Israeli military outposts along
the Jordan River and the remainder of the West Bank demilitarized. The Palestinians
were to have self-administration in an autonomous or semi-autonomous region, and Is-
rael would remain in full control of a united Jerusalem with a possible Jordanian status in
the Muslim quarter of the old city.
