that the Chinese Government was not privileged to utilize surplus customs
revenues until “released” by the Powers. Requests from the Government for
such releases have been made repeatedly, the last one as recently as July 14,
1926. (See Diplomatic Circular No. 174, of July 20, 1926, a copy of which
is attached hereto.30 ) On occasion these requests have been refused, and
sometimes on grounds not connected with the service of the specified
obligations secured on the customs revenue—e. g., the identic note to the
Chinese Foreign Office of November 5, 1918, in which the reason given for
refusing the release was the continuance of civil war. (See the Legation’s
despatch D. No. 2318, November 6 [8], 1918.30 It was this irregularity of
procedure, of course, which caused the Department to observe in its
telegraphic instruction No. 3, January 5, 1921,31 that it welcomed “the
opportunity to revert to a more regular procedure”.
I do not understand that the Chinese Government itself has interposed any
sustained or strong objection to the manner in which, in practice, the
Powers have thus extended their quasi-control of the customs revenue under
the 1912 arrangement. This control, or trusteeship, has necessarily been
exercised through Sir Francis Aglen, Inspector-General of Customs, since in
the 1912 arrangement the Powers secured the consent of the Chinese
Government that all Maritime Customs revenues should be deposited to his
credit. This arrangement has given the Inspector-General an almost despotic
power over this revenue—a power which he wields solely by virtue of the
support he receives from the interested foreign Legations. The Chinese
Government feels itself powerless to dispense with Sir Francis so long as
the British Legation and the other Legations support him. As a general
thing, I am convinced, the Government appreciates to the full the
unimpeachable integrity and devotion to Chinese interests of the present
Inspector-General, but there have been times when a harassed Minister of
Finance has been highly incensed at the point blank refusal of the foreign
Inspector-General to release funds to his order.
 
Until 1921 Sir Francis always met demands from the Government for
customs funds with the statement that the Government must first secure the
consent of the interested Legations. After the mandates of March, 1921,
