Human Rights
271
would be the Inter-American Foundation.5 Such an organization and
location would insure the independence of the agency and would pro-
mote its sustained commitment to its original goals. It would also, how-
ever, tend to separate it from other executive branch agencies con-
cerned with human rights and would probably reduce its ability to
influence US policy more generally.
Each of these possible organizational locations thus has its advan-
tages and disadvantages. Any one could provide an acceptable format
for the performance of the new programmatic functions related to
human rights. The alternatives do, however, have different implica-
tions for the extent to which existing offices and functions concerned
with human rights would be absorbed in the new agency or would re-
main separate. At present, for instance, in the State Department human
rights matters are handled by the Coordinator for Human Rights and
Humanitarian Affairs in the Office of the Deputy Secretary, by the
Counselor’s office, and by the Assistant Legal Advisor for Human
Rights in the Office of the Legal Advisor. If the second alternative were
adopted, presumably some of the positions and functions now in the
State Department would be moved to the new agency in the Executive
Office, but some would also probably remain in the Department. If the
third alternative were adopted, the changes in the existing offices and
functions in the Department would probably be relatively minor.6
VI. Creating a Human Rights Agency
A proposal for the creation of a human rights agency would be an
appropriate part of the President’s legislative program for the 1978 ses-
sion of Congress. Congressional interest in and support for such a pro-
posal would probably be extensive. In addition, there is a growing and
increasingly self-conscious and articulate human rights constituency,
involving, in a variety of ways and degrees, groups which are both cen-
trally concerned with the issue, such as Freedom House or Amnesty In-
ternational, but also larger and more politically influential groups, in-
cluding labor, church organizations, the press, Jewish groups, and
others. As a result of the broad constituency for human rights, the Ad-
ministration is now cross-pressured by liberals who want action
against one set of countries and conservatives who want action against
another. Creation of a human rights agency would be one cause which
both liberals and conservatives could support.
5 The Foreign Assistance Act of 1969 (H.R. 14580; P.L. 91–175; 83 Stat. 805) estab-
lished the IAF as an independent foreign assistance agency of the United States Govern-
ment that provides grants for development programs.
6 An unknown hand wrote “uncorrected” in the margin next to the end of this
paragraph.
