Peru  1045
being granted an increase for their products?” I said no; that first it was 
forcing a 15 ­per cent wage increase on them4 and then not allowing them 
to increase the price on their products. I explained that IPC was partially 
owned by Standard Oil of New Jersey which was not only influential in 
the U. S. financial circles but also has holdings throughout the world; 
therefore, any adverse decisions affecting the company is quickly known 
throughout the world and carries great influence in financial circles.
Gallo Porras said that I had seen what the local effect of an 
increase in price granted to the retailers of gasoline had been. He 
said he didn’t see how an increase could be granted to IPC at this 
time. I said the company was making no money. Gallo Porras acted 
rather surprised and said, “No?” I said, “Very little, if any.” As a 
result I felt certain it would be necessary for IPC to curtail activities 
(Mr. Ashworth, the manager of IPC, had already informed me that he 
was closing six of his eleven drilling rigs and laying off 560 workers 
but that IPC had not yet informed the Government.) and cut person-
nel. Gallo Porras said, “Well, they have too many workers anyway.” I 
said I didn’t know, but laying off personnel would cause a problem—
which Gallo Porras admitted.
I told the Minister I was leaving him copies of two notes which we 
had sent to the Foreign Office regarding taxes which affected Americans.5
The “foreigners tax” was causing us a great amount of difficulties 
and was a source of constant complaint by American citizens. I said we 
felt the tax unjust and discriminatory and that it should be repealed, I 
showed him the Foreign Office reply6 received today saying our Note 
had been referred to Congress for appropriate committee handling. I 
stated that was not satisfactory since time was a factor and Americans 
would have to pay the tax before July 1. I stated what we desired was 
an immediate suspension of the law until Congress could repeal it. I 
said we would appreciate a decree by the President or if proper, one by 
him as Minister of Treasury.
Gallo Porras said he didn’t know anything about this but would 
look into it.7
The other note we wore leaving with him concerned the increase 
in taxes on American firms - the complementary-­tax. I pointed out to 
4 In despatch 808 from Lima, April 24, the Embassy reported that the Peruvian 
Government on April 11 decreed a 15 percent wage increase for petroleum workers for 
the 18-­month period beginning February 19 in order to settle a strike. (823.062/4–2458)
5 The two notes under reference were not found in Department of State files.
6 Not found in Department of State files.
7 In airgram G–132 from Lima, December 31, the Embassy stated that President 
Prado signed on that day the new Foreigners’ Tax Bill, which provided for payment by 
foreign residents of a nominal fee beginning in 1959 rather than a foreigners’ tax based 
on income. (823.11/12–3158)
