Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks 667 5. Employment of U.S. Citizens on Overseas Defense Contracts RECOMMENDATION: The question of the extensive use of U.S. citizens to support overseas military projects will be a factor in arms transfer decisions. 6. Third Party Transfers RECOMMENDATION: That a policy recommendation be made to terminate assistance in cases of substantial violations; Additionally, as a condition of sale for certain categories of equipment and certain countries, require agreement between the United States and the recipient that the equipment will not be transferred. Additionally, in cases where there is a serious risk of future unauthorized third party transfer or the quantity of items appears to exceed military needs, deny the original sales request or reduce the quantity requested. 7. Arms Transfers to Low-Income Countries RECOMMENDATION: Obtain an interagency assessment of the economic impact of proposed transfers of major defense equipment to those LDCs receiving United States economic assistance. Consider denying arms requests when the economic impact is substantial. 8. Restricting Arms Transfers to Government-to-Government Transactions RECOMMENDATION: Maintain a mix of government-to-government and commercial sales. Review present categories of commercial transfers to identify those items which might be shifted to government channels. Remove civilian-type items from the Munitions List. 9. Commercial and Government Incentives to Stimulate Arms Transfers RECOMMENDATION: Policy level approval by the Department of State is required before authorizing: (a) licenses for sales promotion or technical data transmission by private firms; (b) U.S. military or civilian briefings, site surveys, transmission of technical information, or any similar activity which might promote the sale of defense articles or services. Additionally, U.S. embassies and military elements will not promote nor assist in the promotion of arms sales without specific authorization. Additionally, the Defense Department will continue its review of Government procedures which may promote sale of arms, reporting the results of this review to the President within 60 days.
