March 1952–February 1953
421
that they were not activated by reason but by emotion. The British did
not seem to understand this. They thought that by putting economic
pressure on Iranians they would act as reasonable people might under
the same circumstances. The result had been the opposite. They were
more concerned with freeing the oil of British control than they were in
the economic benefits which might come to them from the oil industry.
This had already led to very grave disintegration both within the Gov-
ernment and within the social structure within Iran, in economic diffi-
culties, and a political break with the British, who had been expelled
from Iran.
We were informed by our Ambassador that if the Iranians man-
aged their affairs reasonably they might survive for as long as a year
without selling oil and without major external help. However, they
would not act in this way. They would act emotionally, perhaps break
altogether their relations with the United States in various stages, dis-
charge large numbers of public employees, who would add to the un-
rest of that country, and in a very short time might have the country in
a state of chaos.
We were deeply disturbed at this prospect. The British seemed
more concerned about the consequences of a settlement which differed
from their desires as affecting British investments in other parts of the
world. This had led to a fundamental difference of view. Although we
had been working with the British for months, it seemed unlikely to us
that persuasion would result in any workable solution in time.
The Secretary said that we were also going forward under the
President’s authority to consider what the United States alone might do
to solve this problem. It seemed unlikely to us that it ever could be
solved in the face of determined British opposition. Without going into
detail, the reason for this conclusion was that Iran could only sell its oil
in volume in markets which would bring American distributors into vi-
olent competition and conflict with British distributors. Therefore,
some degree of British cooperation was necessary. It seemed to him
likely—although here he was speculating—that this could only be done
by a series of steps in which apparent American unilateral action was
started and thereupon stimulated some degree of British cooperation.
He thought we would probably proceed by jerks in this way, with alter-
nating periods of considerable bitterness.
It seemed to Secretary Acheson most important that the new Ad-
ministration should be closely in touch with this situation, because con-
siderable difficulties were likely to arise from it.
[Omitted here is discussion of matters unrelated to Iran.]
