450
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
155.
Article in the National Intelligence Daily1
[article number not declassified]
Washington, January 10, 1980
SPECIAL ANALYSIS
PAKISTAN: Reaction to Afghanistan
[less than 1 line not declassified] CIA
The Pakistani Government sees itself today as weak, isolated, and clearly
threatened by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Pakistani officials believe
that Soviet combat troops will soon be operating in Afghan border regions
and that action against the insurgents will spill over into Pakistan. Despite
their fears, Pakistan’s military leaders are cautious about openly seeking US
support. (S [handling restriction not declassified])
Pakistani officials fear that once Afghanistan has been pacified,
Moscow and Kabul will turn their attention to Pakistan. They see a
possibility of an Afghan incursion into Pakistani areas along the border
where Afghan refugees are concentrated, but they have a much greater
fear of attempts to assist dissident tribesmen in Pakistan’s border prov-
inces. (S [handling restriction not declassified])
Pakistan’s sense of isolation has been increased by Indira Gandhi’s
victory in India, which will rekindle the Pakistanis’ fear of a Moscow—
New Delhi alliance bent on destroying their nation.2 (S [handling restric-
tion not declassified])
Caution Toward US, USSR
In deciding whether to embrace US support, Pakistan’s military
leaders must take into account anti-US sentiment in Pakistan that they
fear may be turned against the government by opposition political
leaders. Pakistani leaders, moreover, view the US as undependable
because of its termination of military assistance during Pakistan’s wars
with India and its opposition to Pakistan’s nuclear policy.3 (S [handling
restriction not declassified])
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81),
Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—January 1980, NIDs. Top Secret; [codeword, handling restriction,
and text not declassified]. The full version of this National Intelligence Daily was not filed
with this collection. The article printed here was found in this form.
2 Indira Gandhi was sworn in as Prime Minister of India on January 14.
3 President Lyndon B. Johnson suspended military aid to Pakistan in September
1965. See Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XXV, South Asia, Document 190. Carter again
suspended aid to Pakistan in April 1979 pursuant to the Symington Amendment. See
Document 102.
