Chapter 4, February–April 1990  507
if one missile is defeated, both will probably fall in a kind of “mutual 
fratricide” sequence. I supported the “two-­missile” package last year 
because I thought I had implicit assurances the United States was going 
to propose a mobile MIRVed ban, but I cannot support the package this 
year absent this change.
I am, of course, not alone in advocating a ban on mobile MIRVed 
ICBMs. The idea is widely supported on the Hill and has been endorsed 
by three former JCS Chairmen, Harold Brown, Bud McFarlane, Jim 
Woolsey, and Brent Scowcroft, among others. I have attached a paper 
containing representative statements in support of this proposal, as 
well as quotations by some who do not favor it.
Secretary Cheney has strongly opposed the idea. His main objec-
tion seems to be that since Midgetman will not be available until 1997, 
the Soviets would have a mobile ICBM (the single-­warhead SS–25) and 
we would have none for a number of years if the Rail Garrison MX is 
traded for the SS–24. There are two problems with that argument. First, 
we have been living with, and will continue to do so for a few more 
years, a situation where the Soviets have two mobile ICBMs (the SS–25 
and SS–24) and we have none, yet no one is suggesting that our deter-
rent has been undermined. Second, the reason the Midgetman will not 
be ready until the late 1990’s is because the Administration decided 
to deploy the Rail Garrison MX first. We could probably move up the 
Midgetman timetable up by a year or so if we increased the funding for 
Fiscal Years 1991 and 1992.
Secretary Baker has not supported the idea either, apparently 
because he is worried that it might delay START. However, the two 
most influential military arms control advisors in the Soviet Union, 
Marshal Akhromeyev and General Chervov, have made public state-
ments indicating that the Soviets might be receptive to the proposal. 
START will not be delayed if the Soviets see the proposal as being in 
our mutual interest.
Some Air Force leaders have argued that leaving the MX in silos 
will make them more vulnerable. But unless the United States receives 
and acts on strategic warning, the missiles will be far more vulnera-
ble sitting in their garrisons in frail boxcars than they are now in their 
hardened shelters. And as each side begins to acquire near real-­time 
capabilities to detect, track and target mobile ICBMs (a capability 
General Chain recently touted in a press interview), the advantages of 
rail-­basing will dissipate, even if we did disperse the trains on strategic 
warning. The main point, though, is that banning the mobile MIRVs is 
just a stage on the road to a genuinely more stable strategic balance in 
which all land-­based MIRVs are banned.
I think the strategic arguments for this idea are sound. But the 
issue cannot be debated in a political vacuum. With a U.S. proposal
