Human Rights
97
33.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, April 13, 1977
SUBJECT
Proposed Administration Position on Human Rights Amendments to
International Financial Institution Legislation
Summary: Recent Congressional actions have placed the Adminis-
tration in a difficult position on human rights. The House has taken a
strong position, adopting the inflexible language of the Badillo Amend-
ment by voice vote on April 62 despite Administration support of the
more flexible Reuss Amendment.3 History could repeat itself in the
Senate unless the Administration voices its strong support for the more
flexible Humphrey language4 and its clear opposition to inflexible
Badillo-Harkin language.
We face a real dilemma: while we do not like any of the amend-
ments, we must voice support for the more flexible amendments
(Humphrey, Reuss) or we will appear to be weakening our strong
human rights position.
In the House we did voice our support for the Reuss Amendment.
However, we did not at the same time voice our opposition to the in-
flexible language of the Harkin and Badillo Amendments. (The Harkin
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Counsel’s Office, Robert J. Lipshutz Files,
1977–1979, Box 19, Human Rights (Re International Financial Institution Legislation),
4–8/77. Confidential. Sent for action. Brzezinski did not initial the memorandum.
2 In March, Badillo had offered an amendment to the Reuss-sponsored H.R. 5262,
based upon Harkin’s language, requiring the U.S. representatives to the IFIs to vote
against loans to countries designated as human rights violators. The House Banking, Fi-
nance, and Urban Affairs Committee rejected the amendment and reported the bill to the
House on March 31. (Congress and the Nation, Volume V, 1977–1980, p. 43) In an April 6
briefing memorandum to Vance, Bennet noted that the “human rights forces, led this
time by Congressman Badillo, managed to attach Harkin-type amendments to all interna-
tional financial institutions as the bill passed the House today.” (National Archives, RG
59, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Chron and Official Records of
the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Lot 85D366,
Harkin)
3 Presumable reference to H.R. 5262; see footnote 35, Document 29. Although the
Department initially resisted Reuss’ approach (see Document 20), Vance, in his March 23
testimony before Humphrey’s subcommittee, endorsed Reuss’ bill calling for the United
States to use its “voice and vote” in the IFIs. (Bernard Gwertzman, “U.S. Backs a Move
For a Rights Curb On Overseas Loans,” The New York Times, March 24, 1977, p. A–5)
4 A copy of Humphrey’s amendment is attached to an April 13 memorandum from
Lamb to Christopher. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records
of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 17, Human Rights Interagency
Group I)
