463.00 R 29/177: Telegram
[Document 146]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 30, 1925—7 p.m.
245. Embassy’s 326, June 12, 2 p.m., final paragraph. Question of disposition of the
liberation bonds is one between the Governments of the United States of America, the
British Empire, France, and Italy, named in agreements of September 10 and December
8, 1919; these agreements are separate and distinct from the treaties of peace both in
purpose and in subject matter, and, unlike the treaties, they do not require ratification.
They impose certain duties and confer certain rights upon the Government of the
United States, and the latter can neither be relieved of its duties nor deprived of its
rights without its consent.
Question at issue is not one to be determined among Allied Governments alone. It is
specifically one for determination between Governments named in articles 4 and 5 of
the agreements. Conference of Ambassadors as such has no competency to deal with
question unless specifically authorized by the interested Governments, of which the
Government of the United States is one. In event that Conference of Ambassadors
should be so authorized, it may be looked upon as a Conference ad hoc of
representatives of the Governments concerned. Moreover, as the decision rests with the
four Governments named in the agreements, the Government of Japan, although it has
a permanent representation on the Conference of Ambassadors, has no voice in the
decision.
The fact that you sit as an observer on the Conference and do not vote on matters which
are of no direct interest to this Government is wholly immaterial. When questions such
as the present one arise in which the Government of the United States has a definite
and direct interest, you, as the representative of this Government, have every right to be
heard, to record views of your Government, and, if necessary, to vote.
You may make use of the foregoing statements when question of liberation bonds again
is brought before Conference, and you should repeat with emphasis statement
contained in Department’s No. 99, February 24, 4 p.m., adding that if agreement cannot
be reached by you with representatives of the British, French, and Italian Governments
in Paris, the Government of the United States requests that any further discussion of
matter be deferred until it has had opportunity to take up question directly with
Governments of France, Great Britain, and Italy.
