512 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 210. The Soviet leaders are probably pleased with what they regard as their success to date with this policy and will almost certainly inten­ sify their efforts in this field. The USSR has the economic resources for a considerable expansion in its trade and aid campaign, while its exten­ sive stocks of obsolescent arms will permit it to capitalize further on the desires of many underdeveloped countries to strengthen themselves vis-­a-­vis their neighbors. In areas where they expect local governments to be receptive, as in the Middle East and South Asia, the Soviets will probably continue to supply arms as a means of exacerbating local ten­ sions and creating opportunities for the expansion of Soviet influence. 211. Relations with Free World Communist Parties. Soviet policy toward the Communist parties in Free World countries has been adjusted to the requirements of the “peaceful co-­existence” line. Moscow continues to allow them somewhat greater autonomy and local tactical flexibil­ ity than was permitted under Stalin, though it has sought to retain its essential control. The over-­all tactic set down for the Free World par­ ties, as reiterated at the XXth Party Congress, remains that of advancing Communist interests primarily by parliamentary means, if possible in collaboration with non-Communist parties, rather than through violent struggle. 212. Such developments as the denigration of Stalin, the Hungarian revolt, and ostensible Soviet acceptance of “many paths to Socialism” (as in Poland and Yugoslavia) have caused confusion and division in many foreign Communist parties and led to some defections. To date, however, these parties apparently continue to accept Moscow’s leader­ ship and will probably continue to do so for some time to come. Some foreign Communist parties may adopt more of a national Communist character than is considered desirable by Moscow, but the essential sol­ idarity of the international Communist movement appears unlikely to be seriously shaken, at least in the short run. 213. Soviet Policy on Disarmament. Active exploitation of the disar­ mament issue is one of the key aspects of present Soviet external policy. The USSR clearly regards this issue not only as an essential part of its pose of “peaceful co-­existence” but, even more important, as a possi­ ble means of neutralizing Western nuclear striking power and inducing its withdrawal from around the periphery of the Bloc. It is probably also concerned over the potential threat to its position in the Satellites from US and NATO power in Europe. For these reasons the USSR has tended to concentrate on such disarmament proposals as nuclear test suspension, a ban on use of nuclear weapons, liquidation of foreign bases, and troop withdrawals from Europe. By its maneuvers on such issues the USSR clearly hopes to encourage the relaxation of Western defense efforts, help undermine NATO and create divisions among its partners, and above all create a climate inhibiting Western use of
