attacks in Congress. The Under Secretary said that Alessandri was shown the memorandum of Barros Jarpa yesterday and instantly apologized to Mathieu for some attacks he had made upon him and declared he was coming to the Embassy to apologize to me. He came this morning bringing with him a copy of my note which the Minister of Foreign Affairs had given him. He … said he had come to express his regret that he had questioned the motives of the United States; that he had been entirely ignorant of the memorandum and that he appreciated now that the United States had acted only at the request of Chile. He also said that Mathieu had admitted to him yesterday that he (the former) had urged shortly prior to March 25th that the United States put pressure on Peru to make her accept good offices. Alessandri said that he still believed in the plebiscite but no longer would question the purity of your motives in offering good offices. The Under Secretary showed the note to the President of the Republic who expressed astonishment but also great relief upon learning that the unpopular good offices movement was started in time of Barros Borgoña, Acting President. The Under Secretary said the President wished to publish the note but he advised against it. It would be a revelation that might break the opposition to good offices. [Paraphrase.] You may think it proper to publish text of the memorandum, as the subsequent memorandum of offer and acceptance have been published here and in Washington. [End paraphrase.] I shall not give any publicity to the matter at all but I am confident it will soon leak out … When our motives are no longer questioned they will listen to your advice. To illustrate how nothing can be kept secret here, the resolutions and speeches of the secret sessions of Congress have been published and newspapers have boasted of this as a scoop. The Under Secretary of State tells me almost every Senator and Deputy who has spoken has arraigned Edwards. Although this is prompted by the feeling that at one time he was ready to abandon the plebiscite and although it indicates the strength of the present demand for the plebiscite, I think it means eventual disintegration of the opposition to good offices. The health of the Minister of Foreign Affairs continues very bad; and notwithstanding that he seems, upon the whole, to have the confidence of
