494 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III (b) understood that Secretary Blumenthal and Chairman Miller would be negotiating about financial steps;5 (c) directed Secretary Blumenthal to submit to him by mid- Thursday a paper outlining options regarding fundamental measures;6 (d) directed that appropriate steps be taken regarding Congressional consultation. 5. It was agreed that all this should be handled in a way reflecting the highly sensitive nature of the issues involved. 5 In an August 17 note to Brzezinski on the actions taken in response to the August 15 NSC meeting on the dollar, Owen reported that “Treasury’s discussions about a swap with the Japanese (which is the most important and difficult of the financial measures) are not sufficiently advanced to permit a useful progress report.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 92, Finance/International: 7/78–1980) 6 In his August 17 note to Brzezinski on the actions taken in response to this meeting, Owen reported that he expected agency recommendations on energy policy by the end of the day. On inflation, he noted that Schultze and Blumenthal were “still arguing about whether anything useful can be recommended to the President about inflation now. They will meet to settle the argument in early afternoon. My guess is that Charlie will win, and he will then give us the memo of which I spoke to you yesterday: saying that there won’t be any recommendations on inflation to the President for a few weeks.” (Ibid.) No record of a meeting between Schultze and Blumenthal was found. 157. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Japan1 Washington, August 18, 1978, 2236Z 211040. Eyes only for the Ambassador. Subject: US–Japan Swap. 1. Action: You should call on Prime Minister and indicate to him that Under Secretary Solomon, in recent phone talks with Matsukawa, was reflecting views of administration at the highest level: We are prepared to activate a U.S.–Japan swap provided the technical conditions can be worked out, if the GOJ will take effective measures to reduce Japan’s surplus—i.e., propose a 4 trillion yen stimulus to Diet and reduce discount rate to 2.5 percent, while also following constructive policies in MTN. Please stress to Fukuda that Solomon’s statement to Mat- 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840140–2350. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Solomon, cleared by Special Assistant to Secretary Vance Arthur Houghton, Owen, and Sydney Goldsmith (S/S), and approved by Cooper. Sent for information Immediate to the White House.
