International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
603
March 31) will be $7.5 billion, still huge, but roughly half of what it was
last year.
The frictions and pressures attending the embarrassing size of the
Japanese surplus have encouraged the Japanese to be more cooperative
on a wide variety of other issues. During the 18 months in question, for
example, the Japanese have:
—Taken the initiative to increase their contribution to United
States military base costs in Japan from roughly $500 million to $700
million a year. Some of this reflects yen appreciation, but most is in the
form of increased payments for military housing, labor, and adminis-
trative costs.
—Placed orders to purchase and coproduce over the next several
years $6.5 billion worth of U.S. aircraft, including F–15’s and P3C’s,
strengthening air defenses and anti-submarine warfare capability and
improving interoperability with U.S. forces.
—Responded to our requests for contributions to politically re-
lated aid programs, such as those for Egypt.
—Become, after us, the second largest donor to the UN High Com-
missioner for Refugees.
—Cooperated in working out joint energy R&D projects.
—Undertaken half the costs of the Fulbright program.
What More Do We Want?
A lot. We are still pressing the Japanese for measures to open their
markets wider and further reduce their general account surplus. We
want them to:
—Abolish agricultural quotas altogether.
—Import more manufactures from us.
—Simplify import procedures.
—Permit government procurement of American equipment, par-
ticularly computers and telecommunications gear.
—Provide improved reciprocal access for American banks and
insurance companies.
—Speed up tariff cuts.
—Encourage direct investment in the United States.
—Contribute more to U.S. base costs in Japan and to refugee
programs.
—Increase aid to Egypt and Turkey.
—Effect structural changes in their economy to ensure that the
trends begun through current policies will last.
We will continue to push for these actions as long as our econ-
omies are out of balance, and some beyond that.
What Do They Want?
The Japanese want us to:
—Keep our markets open to their products.
—Maintain the strength of the dollar.
—Curb our voracious oil appetite.
—Control inflation.
—Above all, leave them alone on economic issues.
