August 8–September 17, 1978 77 important to keep the number of people at Camp David as small as possible and to avoid contacts with the press during the talks. 25. Memorandum From the President’s Senior Adviser (Sanders) to President Carter1 Washington, September 4, 1978 SUBJECT Camp David Summit The following is a summary of the points we discussed this morning:2 (1) The most significant questions3 that I hear raised frequently are: —if agreement in principle regarding the West Bank is achieved and Jordan still refuses to join the negotiations, will Egypt be under an obligation to proceed bilaterally with Israel? —will Israel be expected to agree at Camp David to withdraw from the West Bank? If so, what does this mean? Partial withdrawal? Partition? —will Israel be allowed to maintain a security presence on the West Bank after five years? —how can a Palestinian Administrative Council or other body be prevented from turning the West Bank into a threatening independent Palestinian state if Israel has no security presence there? —what are the security measures Israel will accept in terms of territory, rights, and guarantees from the United States? (2) The following are thoughts that I mentioned during the meeting: —Israelis will respond most positively to statements which indicate that we clearly understand and agree with their security concerns. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 52, Middle East: Camp David Cables and Memos, 9/78. No classification marking. 2 Carter met with Sanders on September 4 from 10:30 a.m. until 10:54 a.m. in the Oval Office. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) 3 In his memoirs, Carter indicated that Sanders is referring here to the views of American Jewish community leaders, liaison with whom Sanders was primarily responsible. Carter wrote that these views were “more restrained than we had expected, and this encouraged me greatly in my later arguments with Begin.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, p. 322)
