Afghanistan 95 10. At about 1015 Sergei Bakhturin, the Soviet Embassy security officer, arrived on the scene. He assured the Americans of a strong Soviet interest in the Ambassador’s safety.3 At the same time, Taroon’s aide also assured us that all possible precautions were being taken to prevent any harm from coming to the Ambassador, and he promised that he would personally defend the Ambassador with his own life. It was at this time that we gained additional details about the entry into the hotel. The Afghan police said that the kidnappers had moved Ambassador Dubs through a crowded lobby and up the stairs to the second floor (second top) to room 117. One of the three kidnappers had returned to the lobby to ask the desk for the key to the room. Not recognizing him as a hotel guest, the hotel people were suspicious and sent a hotel employee up to the room with him. At the door to the room, he ordered the employee at gunpoint to unlock the door. The other kidnappers entered the room with the Ambassador and the third returned downstairs with the employee and at gunpoint ordered the hotel desk personnel not to allow anyone to go upstairs or to enter the hotel. It is not clear to us how he subsequently was overcome. From the nature of the 0900 police rush on the office near the desk where the terrorist presumably was, it is possible that he was disarmed and subdued at that time. 11. At 1115 a Ministry of Interior official asked RSO Boles if we had a security plan for this type of situation. Boles replied that to this point we had left the situation in charge of the Afghan police and the Soviet advisors, but that we felt that taking precipitous action would 3 In telegram 3716 from Moscow, February 14, the Embassy reported a conversation between Toon and Gromyko regarding Dubs’s death. Gromyko expressed his regret, pledged Soviet cooperation, and identified the perpetrators as agents of a “right extremist reactionary provocative group.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special Advisor to the Secretary on Soviet Affairs, 1977–1981, Lot 81D109, Communications with Soviet Union Re: Death of Dubs) A memorandum from Bowdler to Christopher, February 14, relayed INR’s conclusion that “the Soviets share responsibility with the Afghans in precipitating the assault on the kidnappers which produced the death of Ambassador Dubs.” INR based its conclusion on two analyses of Soviet behavior during the incident: 1) “failure to adequately inform official Americans on the scene of the terrorist terms (conditions and deadline) and about the Afghan plans to assault the room where Dubs was being held;” and 2) “disregard of repeated U.S. pleas for patience and restraint.” (Ibid.) In telegram 38921 to Kabul, February 15, the Department stated that Vance called Dobrynin to inform him that “highly reliable” eyewitness reports indicated “Soviet advisers were intimately involved in carrying out the ill-advised assault which resulted in Ambassador Dubs’s death,” and that “this incident may well cause serious damage to our relations.” (Ibid.; printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 171) Telegram 3933 from Moscow, February 16, relayed Gromyko’s categorical refusal to accept blame for Dubs’s death. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840176–1026) In a condolence message from Taraki to Carter, transmitted in telegram 39443/Tosec 10033, February 15, Taraki emphasized that “every effort” was made by Afghan security authorities to save Dubs’s life. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790073–0061)
