62 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement by the emergence of a semi-­independent Poland, and by the growing power and influence of Communist China. 27. These changing relations have created problems for Moscow. They have released forces of instability in Eastern Europe and in sat­ ellite relations with the USSR. They have added to Peiping’s stature and given the Chinese Communists a greater latitude for independ­ ent action, especially in the Far East. But they have also created the appearance of a more flexible and less monolithic group of states with which other states might think they could associate themselves without wholly losing national independence. 28. Recent Soviet successes in pulling together the Communist world have not resolved the problem, but they have stabilized a situa­ tion which for a time threatened to become disastrous. A full return to Stalinist police-­state methods and enforced conformity would not only be difficult, but would be inconsistent with the more flexible approach which dominates present Soviet policy. The Soviet leaders apparently believe that they can gradually and judiciously accede to the national sensitivities of their bloc partners and still retain sufficient authority and influence to preserve Communist solidarity. 29. We see little chance that during the next several years, short of major changes within the Soviet regime itself, any of the Communist states will alienate themselves from the USSR to an extent which would damage the Soviet world position. Indeed, if the USSR grants some greater autonomy for Communist states, this might even add to Soviet stature by contributing to the Soviet pose of flexibility and respect for national aspirations. Nevertheless, we cannot overlook the possibility that some popular uprisings, perhaps on a local scale, might occur. 30. The Western alliance system. This system, consisting essentially of a group of multilateral and bilateral arrangements built around the US and UK, was developed largely upon three basic propositions: (a) that there was a danger of Soviet bloc external and internal aggres­ sion, (b) that alliance with the US was an effective way to deter, or if necessary to counter, such aggression, and (c) that because of Soviet bloc intransigence and determination, there was no acceptable alter­ native to creation of a counter-­bloc. We believe that the fundamental validity of the three propositions is still generally accepted, but that the force and impact of each of them has diminished since the alli­ ances were created. Thus, while the possibility of Soviet bloc mili­ tary aggression continues to be recognized, such aggression has for some time appeared to most of the NATO partners to be much less imminent than when NATO was formed. Accordingly, NATO has lost much of the impetus which was initially supplied by an urgent sense of immediate danger, though it is still valued by its members as the chief counterbalance to bloc military power.
