he would give to him a memorandum along these lines and the Secretary replied that he had no objection to doing that. He instructed Mr. Johnson to revise the note which had already been drafted as it contained these statements. N[ELSON] T. J[OHNSON]

[Enclosure 1] Telegram From the Chinese Foreign Office to the Chinese Minister in Washington (Sze) PEKING, February 8, 1926. Please assure Secretary Kellogg China always most appreciative of American friendship and entertains no doubt of American intention to help us every way possible even if viewpoints happen to differ. China is sincerely desirous of accommodating American view as far as possible. She feels, however, that exclusion of any particular Power from adhering to Nine Power Treaty on principles and policies can not in any way prejudice rights and interests of any signatory power as in Article three thereof. China has undertaken to be guided by principles of open door or equality of opportunity in dealing with all countries irrespective of whether they are parties to the treaty or not from which policy she has no intention to deviate at all. On the other hand and under new conventions based upon principles of equality and reciprocity more recently concluded with some foreign powers China’s sovereignty, independence and integrity have been more fully and effectively vindicated than in Nine Power Treaty so that adherence by any such power to the treaty which is admittedly a very useful and effective instrument for protection and recovery of sovereign rights of China would in particular cases bear [the appearance of a?] retrogressive step for China. Moreover, it does not enhance prestige of China to have Powers which have little interests in China like Persia and Switzerland pledge their respect for China’s sovereignty and independence. She sincerely believes that her interpretation of article eight is more correct and more consonant with the spirit of the said treaty. So if out of special deference to American Government China does not insist upon withdrawal
