100 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement and this would result in downgrading IIAA directives in controversial fields, and (3) Mann’s proposal would inevitably lead to a new super-structure of personnel in IIAA. These arguments had some effect on Dillon. Finally what Dillon decided should be done and which Mann and Saccio agreed to was this: IIAA should be reactivated and funds appropriated under the new program should be granted to it. This would place firm control in State. ICA in Latin America should be the field-­arm of IIAA in Washington. A small (about four to six) staff should be set up in ARA, headed by a Deputy Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs, to run the IIAA and to marry ARA-ICA (Latin America) to the closest extent possible. (Dillon said he wanted this worked out in the other bureaus and areas also, once ICA and State got together under one roof.) ICA, in turn, would keep its Latin American program more or less separated from its other programs. The purpose would be to compartmentalize Latin America and put the whole special assistance, technical assistance and “social infrastructure” program under the IIAA umbrella. This would be without prejudice to other programs which DLF, Ex-Im Bank or the IRDB or IMF now participate in. Role of DLF DLF came off rather badly. Dillon had some rather sharp things to say about its inability to come to the rescue in the past in building roads because of the local costs and “Buy-America” problems.7 I gathered that Dillon did not feel that DLF had much of a role to play in the social infrastructure field. Amount of fund: Authorization or Appropriation Dillon bought the $500 million figure (Mann pleaded unsuccessfully for $1 billion) as a no-­year fund exclusive of what might be asked for Chilean reconstruction. He laid down two conditions. It should be explained to Congress that $500 million would be a starter and that we would come back for more after we had studied the matter further. We would, for instance, know more after Bogotá. We would leave the question of Chilean reconstruction open for the moment (Some thought we should go to Congress on this matter in August, others that we should wait until next year). 7 “Buy American” provisions in U.S. legislation required U.S. Government agencies in securing supplies for public use or for construction of public works within the United States to purchase only domestic materials unless they were commercially unavailable, their purchase would be inconsistent with the public interest, or their cost was unreasonable.
