Non-Proliferation
807
• What interim export standards should we apply pending renegoti-
ation of existing agreements and consultations with other suppliers.
• Should we favor, as part of our comprehensive legislative pro-
posal, the application of new stricter export standards either automatically or
subject to a Presidential determination, after a specified period of time.
If these new stricter standards (e.g., full-scope safeguards require-
ments) are applied to exports under existing agreements, this would re-
quire modification of all agreements. Depending on the nature of the
increased safeguards conditions, these could be particularly difficult in
the case of some key non-NPT parties such as India, South Africa and
Spain. US reprocessing controls are also likely to raise bilateral tensions
with both NPT and non-parties. While US leverage alone may suffice in
many cases, whether other suppliers adopt similar policies will have an
important bearing on the success of such a US policy.
It should be noted that current bills in Congress which have strong
bipartisan support, go much further in tightening the criteria for both
agreements and licensing, particularly in seeking to foreclose foreign
reprocessing.
Options and recommendations on nuclear export policy are on
pages 31–41.
4. How far-reaching a policy should we pursue alone and with others to
strengthen sanctions against violations on non-proliferation obligations?
There is a consensus supporting the October 28 statement to at
least cut off nuclear cooperation with states who may in the future vio-
late a US safeguards agreement. The issues now are:
—whether to extend this policy to include a clearly stated intention
to cut off supplies in the event any international safeguards agreement
is violated or if a US customer hereafter explodes a nuclear device (useful,
perhaps, in the case of India);
—whether and how to strengthen the operation of the sanctions
provision of the IAEA Statute;
—whether to expand sanctions into non-nuclear areas, such as au-
tomatic suspension of eligibility to receive discretionary US economic,
military, or financial assistance;
—how much emphasis to place on obtaining agreement on
common sanctions policies from other suppliers before determining a
US position on the above measures?
Discussions and recommendations on these issues are addressed
on pages 29–30.
D. CONSIDERATIONS AFFECTING POLICY FORMULATION
In addressing and deciding on specific issues associated with the
above areas, four policy considerations must be factored in:
