720 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX the contract. This would help to strengthen and broaden the bilateral relationship. As far as Madrid was concerned, the United States wanted to see the follow-up conference on security and cooperation in Europe (CSCE) go forward and was planning to attend the Madrid session as scheduled. The Vice President regretted that it had been necessary to defer SALT II, noting that after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan there was no way we could have obtained ratification. He assured Minister Burtica, however, that as soon as it was politically feasible the Administration would try to get the SALT II Agreement ratified. (C) The Vice President then turned to the question of TNF, pointing out that for nearly fourteen years the question had been quiescent. However, recently the Soviets had begun deploying the SS–20, which was a MIRVed, mobile, highly accurate missile, at a rate of several a month. They had also begun deploying the BACKFIRE bomber which was a theater nuclear weapon. As a result, NATO had no choice but to take the decision which it took at the December 12th Ministerial. (C) The Vice President stressed that we continued to attach importance to MBFR and hoped to eventually see a Phase I Agreement. As far as Afghanistan was concerned, he noted that the U.S. position was well known and that there was no need to repeat it for Minister Burtica. Iran was a heart-breaking situation. The hostages were innocent victims and their captivity was a violation of international law. The United States had been patient and restrained. We had had repeated talks with Iran. The Iranian government had repeatedly been unwilling or unable to deliver on its commitments and the situation was becoming almost intolerable. As a consequence, we had asked our friends to join with us to impose sanctions under the UN Resolution. We were trying to force the Iranians to see the folly of their ways. However, it was becoming increasingly clear that the Iranians had no intention of letting the hostages go and were determined to humiliate the United States. He assured Deputy Prime Minister Burtica that he would report the Minister’s views to the President. He then asked the Minister to give his views on what would happen in Yugoslavia after Tito died. (C) Minister Burtica stressed that in the Romanian view there would be no major changes. The Yugoslavs had achieved a system that maintained a balance and satisfied the needs of the different republics. Sometimes the various nationalities quarreled among themselves, but they were united against any outside threat. The real problem in the long run would be whether a genuinely collective leadership would emerge or whether there would be a return to one-man rule. (C) The Vice President commented that it was hard to see how anyone could possibly replace Tito. (C) Minister Burtica agreed, but noted that in China people had thought that it would be hard to replace Mao. In Yugoslavia some personalities
