3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
106
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
Gromyko asked that the Secretary’s representatives at whatever
level was appropriate inform the Soviet Union when the time came.
ANTI-SATELLITE CAPABILITIES
The Secretary said that in this connection he wanted to raise the
issue of placing limits on the anti-satellite capabilities of both sides. We
had noted that such capabilities were in the process of being devel-
oped. We firmly believed that an attempt should be made to stabilize
the strategic situation by discussing such capabilities, and were pre-
pared to enter into discussions with the Soviet Union concerning their
limitation. In the interim, he would suggest that it would be useful to
exercise restraint in testing anti-satellite systems.
Gromyko said he could not say that no problem existed in this area.
He would be prepared to examine any proposal the United States could
submit.
The Secretary thought that was good, because he believed it impor-
tant that we do this.
CIVIL DEFENSE
The Secretary raised the question of civil defense preparations. As
Gromyko knew, there was concern in the United States over what ap-
peared to be a civil defense program in the Soviet Union. It would be
constructive to exchange information and see if we could not reach
agreement on mutual restraint in this area in the future. At SALT both
sides had acknowledged that limitation on active ABM defense of the
territory of a country was a substantial factor in curbing the race in stra-
tegic offensive arms and reducing the risk of nuclear war. The Secretary
thought that the same logic may apply to a broad expansion in the field
of civil defense. Therefore, we should discuss this question.
Gromyko asked whether Mr. Schlesinger,6 upon returning from
China, had not tried to scare public opinion in the United States on the
basis of a civil defense program in China?
The Secretary said that Schlesinger had not tried to do that, but that
he had seen the preparations there.
Gromyko asked if that meant the United States was afraid only of
the Soviet Union.
The Secretary said the United States had not expressed fear in the
sense in which Gromyko used that word, but we did believe this to be
an important aspect of strategic equality. We should not ignore such a
factor and discuss limitations that would be in our mutual interests.
6 Schlesinger traveled to China in September 1976 to meet with Chinese leaders.
