712 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI heavies in our minds have been resolved. They will be covered by the main provisions regarding the future treaty. As for future talks in the next phase of negotiations on strategic arms, the draft text on future talks that were worked out for the Summit could include a provision on our intentions with regard to the entire complex of issues, including the future limitations on heavies. If you want, that would also include a limits on flight tests. So this is what we would suggest on dealing with that question. Second, on non-­circumvention: I believe the main portion of this question has been prepared. We have in mind a draft text of Article 13 of the treaty and the draft unilateral statement of the US side as regards Trident II and Great Britain. We do have two questions. And I can’t really comment on your answer in great detail because they require some serious study but the unilateral statement that you have causes us some serious doubts in our minds. Particularly, because it becomes possible in this circumstance that you could transfer to Great Britain all kinds of strategic arms that are covered by the Treaty. Therefore, I think our experts need to do more work on this. Now we don’t have an argument on Trident II, but we are concerned about everything else. In any case, why don’t we think about this more and discuss it. Third, is the Backfire aircraft. We believe that you are suggesting additional unilateral obligations regarding this bomber and frankly they are not justified. The questions of these aircraft can be addressed in the Vienna talks as already stated. Such aircraft in this context that belong to naval air should not be included in the Vienna talks. Fourth, the next issue I see is that of mobile ICBMs. I think we are close to agreement on regulating the operation of the ICBM, but we do have some differences as regards the question of notification. There is no question that we’d like to find and need to find a mutually effective and simple solution to this problem, and we believe it is possible. Progress on this could be accompanied by a reduction in the sub-­limit on mobile warheads. I gave you a number of 1,200, but I do have some margin of flexibility on this. Fifth, the next issue is the duration of the treaty, and I think that issue is resolved. Sixth, the next issue is that of our substantive discussion on what goes into the statement on follow-­on talks—­talks on strategic arms and stability. We believe that this discussion can take place in Geneva and also at the Summit, and I think we should be able to work out something. Now, let me say a few words about the Vienna talks. Let me emphasize that we attach great important to an early completion of a CFE treaty and that we want to see that treaty signed at the CSCE Summit this year. As you know, our experts have made reciprocal
