872  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Strategic and Theater Nuclear Forces. These programs increase sub-
stantially, from $14.4 billion in 1981 to $18.0 billion in 1982, mainly for 
MX, cruise missiles and the Pershing II and GLCM theater nuclear 
forces. There are firm Administration commitments to all these pro-
grams and they will all be funded within the guidance. It is unlikely 
that the Defense program review will make any reductions in these 
forces. The primary budget threat would be a congressional add-­on for 
the B–1 derivative, which could add about $1 billion in 1982 and $16 
billion through 1986.
Modernization. The current service proposals for 1982 include over 
$40 billion in non-­strategic procurement programs. This includes all the 
major equipment and spare parts for our general purpose forces. About 
half of these acquisition funds are directed toward a variety of smaller 
hardware items and support equipment. In the past this area has been 
a primary source of “budget scrub” reductions to bring the Defense 
program in line with overall fiscal guidance.
The modernization programs for shipbuilding and tactical aircraft 
are of special concern in shaping the final budget.
• Navy Shipbuilding (GPF). Last January you approved a five year 
shipbuilding plan which provided for a long term force of about 550 
ships by 1990. That plan went a long way toward quieting public and 
congressional concerns over future naval force levels. Even so, the 1981 
Congressional Authorization will probably add at least 1 attack sub-
marine, 2 frigates and reactivation of a battleship and aircraft carrier to 
your budget request based primarily on the perception that additional 
ships are needed for Indian Ocean deployments. In their effort to stay 
within your fiscal guidance, Defense may reduce the shipbuilding pro-
gram. If they do, it will be highly visible. Defense is considering reduc-
tions to this plan now, including attack submarines, AEGIS cruisers, 
and frigates. Your approved plan included 9 combatant ships in 1982. 
The new Navy plan would reduce that to 6 by deleting 1 AEGIS cruiser 
and 2 frigates.
• Tactical Aircraft Acquisition. The Administration has placed con-
tinuing emphasis on modernization and expansion of the tactical air 
forces. The Air Force has acquired over 1300 new aircraft in the past 
four years to fill out its force expansion from 22 to 26 active wings. 
The Navy and Marines have concentrated on modernization and read-
iness improvements. To stay within guidance, there may be proposals 
to underfund both Navy and Air Force tactical aircraft procurement, 
which could translate into uneconomical rates of procurement and pro-
gram terminations (e.g. for the Air Force A–10 and the Navy/Marine 
AV–8B). Like the shipbuilding reductions, these will draw fire from 
Congress which is likely to add more aircraft in any case, as it is now 
doing in the 1981 Authorization Bill (although all of the adds may not 
survive the appropriation process).
