on January 12, 1926, but has not as yet been acted upon by the Senate.
There are being forwarded at this time, with a view to their transmission to
the Senate, certified copies of the other two, namely, the Convention
Relating to the Liquor Traffic in Africa, signed at St. Germain-en-Laye on
September 10, 1919,62 and a certified copy of the Slavery Convention,
signed at Geneva on September 25, 1926.63 The simultaneous acceptance
by the United States of these four Conventions will not only safeguard
American interests in important matters but will have a definitely helpful
moral influence upon the welfare of Central Africa in the matter of slavery,
the prohibition of alcoholic liquors and the suppression of the traffic in
arms. In respect of the traffic in arms and of slavery the provisions of the
conventions are, moreover, general in their scope.
(5) Finally, in view of the fact that the United States is a party to the
General Act of Brussels, which is revised by the Convention under
consideration, and since the Act of Brussels has been abrogated in respect
of Belgium, France, Great Britain, Japan and Portugal by virtue of their
acceptance of the Revising Convention, it is deemed highly desirable that
the United States, likewise, shall accept the Revising Convention and so
bring its position into line with the position of the other powers principally
interested, with consequent participation in the advantages which such
powers enjoy thereunder. For the United States to continue under
obligations arising from an instrument from which the parties of principal
interest have withdrawn, is deemed inexpedient. Hence the termination of
such obligations under the General Act of Brussels through becoming a
party to the Revising Convention is advisable for the United States. The
United States is not a party to the General Act of Berlin or to the
Declaration of Brussels.
It is necessary to call attention to the provisions of Article 12 of the
Revising Convention, relating to the arbitration of disputes arising under the
Convention. In view of the fact that the United States is not a member of
the League of Nations and the arbitral provisions presuppose reference to a
tribunal in conformity with the provisions of the Covenant, it seems
appropriate that this Government, in ratifying the Convention, should make
a reservation to the effect that it may submit disputes to some other arbitral
tribunal.
