As the Governments of Chile and Peru had not been able to agree upon the
conditions of a plebiscite, the Arbitrator was empowered, in case he found
that a plebiscite should be held, to establish these conditions. The purpose of
the submission to the Arbitrator of the conditions of the plebiscite was
manifestly to permit the establishment of conditions which would permit a
fair plebiscite and not merely to define the details of a plebiscite which by
reason of coercion, intimidation or fraud would be a plebiscite only in form
and not one in substance and truth as contemplated by the Treaty. While the
Arbitrator was not authorized to deprive Chile of her right under the Treaty to
continue her administrative authority pending a plebiscite, he was
empowered to require the use of that administrative authority for the proper
safeguarding of the plebiscite and so as to prevent coercion, intimidation and
fraud in connection with it. As Chile’s retention of the administrative
authority was conditioned by the Treaty upon the holding of a plebiscite her
exercise of administrative authority pending and during the plebiscite was
subject to the conditions established by the Arbitrator. With this in view, the
arbitration provided that Chile and Peru should enact appropriate legislation
for the protection of the members of the Plebiscitary Commission and the
Registration and Election Boards in the discharge of their functions and for
the apprehension, trial and punishment of persons guilty of intimidation,
bribery, fraud or other offenses in connection with registration or voting in
the plebiscite, or of interference with the Plebiscitary Commission or the
Boards or the members of the Commission, et cetera (Award P. 49).64 Thus
not only was Chile bound by her agreement for the plebiscite to use her
administrative authority to protect voters from intimidation, fraud and
oppression, but if the existing legislation of Chile was not adequate to
provide punishment for such offenses, Chile was required by the Award to
enact such additional legislation as might be needed to meet the exigency.
It has been the cause of great disappointment to the Secretary of State to
learn that the laws have not been administered in such a manner as to give
reasonable assurances to the Peruvian voters that they will be unmolested and
permitted the free exercise of their suffrage as provided in the Award. In
defining the conditions of the plebiscite the Arbitrator provided for the
constitution of the Plebiscitary Commission for the purpose of securing the
supervision of the plebiscite by competent and impartial authority. The
powers of the Plebiscitary Commission are derived from the Award. This
provides (p. 44)65 that the Plebiscitary Commission ‘shall have in general
complete control over the plebiscite.’ This general provision was not limited
by the subsequent particularization of certain questions which the
Commission was authorized to determine. It is the right and duty of the
Commission to deal with any questions which relate to the holding of the
