1406  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
30. Wang replied that the matter is quite clear. They had never 
mixed up these two groups of Americans—­ordinary American resi­
dents and American criminal offenders. This was quite clear and he 
presumed no such confusion will be consented in any other country.
31. I responded that he had not answered my question.
32. Wang replied that if I did not want to recognize a distinction 
between the two groups, that was unilateral thinking on the part of 
the U.S. If they had at that time settled on the basis that there was 
no distinction between ordinary Americans and American criminal 
offenders what would have been the use of entering into an agree­
ment. They could have simply released everybody.
33. I responded by asking what the purpose of the agreement was.
34. Wang replied that the purpose of agreement was that ordinary 
residents and nationals of both countries could return to their coun­
tries freely. As a matter of fact, many Chinese in the U.S. who desire to 
return have as yet not been able to do so. This is a matter to which the 
United States government must give attention and carry out the agree­
ment strictly. In addition to many Chinese imprisoned in the U.S., even 
innocent Chinese in the U.S. who have never offended against any law 
are still prevented from returning.
35. I replied that Wang said, before we ever entered into the agree­
ment, what he called ordinary Americans could leave his country. But 
what he now seemed to be saying was that the agreed announcement 
did not and was not intended by his government to bring about any 
change in the situation which existed prior to the agreed announce­
ment. All I could say was that this was flatly contradictory to my under­
standing and to the plain words of the announcement itself.
36. Wang replied that this was only an American statement. It was 
no use making such a statement. They always acted in accordance with 
the agreement. However, Americans who have offended against the 
laws of China must be dealt with in accordance with those laws.
37. As neither of us had anything further to say, I suggested 
September 5 for the next meeting. Wang countered by suggesting 
September 12 to which I agreed.
U. Alexis Johnson
American Ambassador
