Human Rights
197
2. Security Assistance
The Authorization Bill will be through both Houses by the end of
June, and the main shape of the Appropriation Bill has already been
drawn. This legislation came upon us too quickly this year and our ef-
forts to deal with it have been very much of a fire-fighting operation.3
Our policy guidelines on how we were to apply the 502(b) human
rights provision were unclear, especially in Latin America, and this,
coupled with the momentum for human rights in Congress, has caused
cuts in programs for Latin American countries. In Asia, however,
where our policy toward Korea, Philippines, and Indonesia is clearer,
we have been able to gain the Congress’ trust for the time being.
ACTION: We should start planning now for what we will be pre-
senting to Congress for FY 79. Human rights offender countries in
which we have no security interest will find themselves under heavy
attack not only on grant MAP but also on FMS credit and training next
year unless we can demonstrate that progress has been achieved in
human rights and we convince the Congress that our efforts bring re-
sults. The most vulnerable will be offenders in Latin America (in-
cluding Argentina, Brazil, etc.) and Indonesia and Thailand.
3. Economic Assistance
Congress this year, with AID’s agreement, has tightened the
human rights reporting requirements for bilateral economic aid. This is
our first concrete signal that Congress plans to pay far greater attention
to bilateral economic assistance in the future. To date, efforts to cut eco-
nomic aid have not been supported by the liberals as long as the aid is
for the needy.
ACTION: We can expect far greater attention next year, however,
to the needy criterion which AID has applied rather loosely. The
warning signs are also flying that for gross violators even economic
programs may not be exempt. AID’s review of the total U.S. AID effort,
due August 15, must deal thoroughly with human rights consider-
ations, particularly if the Administration is to achieve increases in total
U.S. assistance.
4. UN Covenants
The President has made four UN covenants an important part of
his overall human rights initiative. We are moving ahead energetically
on the Genocide Convention and would hope to see a vote on the meas-
ure prior to the end of this session. We are currently trying to ascertain
whether we have the votes to ratify the Convention and we expect to be
3 See footnote 9, Document 38.
