International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 275 8. Embassy had conveyed detailed USG views to FonOff early afternoon Dec. 20 (State 302527).3 Fukuda appeared not to have been briefed on them. Mansfield 3 Telegram 302527 to Tokyo, December 20, transmitted the U.S. response to Ushiba’s proposals. While welcoming Japan’s 7 percent growth rate target for the coming year, the United States urged Japan to issue a policy statement on its intention to reduce its current account surplus; to offer “deeper than formula cuts on products of specific interest to the US and other countries” in the MTN; to enact structural changes in its trade policy; and to take steps to encourage imports, including the liberalization of selected quotas. The telegram suggested that it would help “Japan’s image as a liberal trading nation” if Japanese decisions on ways to reduce its current account surplus were “announced, perhaps in conjunction with Ambassador Strauss’ visit, as part of a set of measures aimed at implementing Japan’s intent to move into a current account deficit position and to increase access to Japan’s domestic markets.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770473–0269) 88. Message From the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron) to President Carter1 Washington, December 23, 1977, 0128Z WH70679. Subject: Message From Helmut Schmidt. Attached is an urgent message from Chancellor Schmidt which seems to have no immediate operational implications. We will continue to monitor the international monetary situation and if there are any sudden developments will notify you immediately. We will also prepare an appropriate response to the Chancellor concerning his views on the timing of the upcoming summit. I will share the relevant portions of this message with Secretaries Blumenthal and Vance. Federal Republic of Germany The Federal Chancellor His Excellency Mr James Earl Carter, 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 6, Germany, Federal Republic of: Chancellor Helmut Schmidt, 5–12/77. Secret. Sent with the instruction to deliver to Philip Wise immediately. Carter, who initialed “C” at the top of the page, was in Plains, Georgia. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)
