220
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
70.
Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts1
Washington, July 29, 1977, 1943Z
178340. Subject: Communications on Human Rights Policies.
1. On July 5, 1977 the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Inter-
national Security Affairs sent the following message to the three
Commanders-in-Chief in Europe, the Pacific and Southern Command
and an identical memorandum to the Director of the Defense Intelli-
gence Agency: Quote The President has made clear the commitment of
this government to the support of human rights as enunciated in such
international instruments as the UN Universal Declaration on Human
Rights. Human rights concerns are a key element in our national pol-
icies, and it is important that our military personnel abroad have a thor-
ough knowledge of these policies. The State Department has been
asked to assure that its guidance to our diplomatic missions on the ad-
ministration’s policies regarding human rights is made available to the
unified commands and to US military personnel in attache or security
assistance offices, so that they will have the fullest possible personal
understanding of the government’s position on the issue as back-
ground in their work, and for their interchanges with host country of-
ficers. End of quote.
2. I heartily endorse this proposal. I have asked that outgoing De-
partment messages concerning general human rights policies and
issues be copied to all commands and that messages dealing with re-
gional or country specific human rights issues which may be of interest
be copied to the concerned commanders. Country Teams are requested
to do the same. Moreover, Chiefs of Mission are requested to discuss
appropriate ways of assuring that all members of Country Teams in-
cluding the military components have prompt access to general policy
pronouncements and discussions of human rights issues relevant to
their countries and regions, including those which are received
through United States Information Agency channels. All elements of
the Country Team should be informed on human rights policy in order
to be in a position to respond intelligently to questions on the subject
and to support US policy as appropriate subject to guidance from
the Ambassador. Addressees should also share messages concerning
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770274–0270. Un-
classified. Drafted by Jones; cleared by Leslie Brown, Holly, Ericson, ARA, Fuerth, Shurt-
leff, Martens, USIA/IOP, DOD/OSD, and Spiegel; approved by Derian. Also sent to
USCINCEUR, CINCPAC, USCINCSO. Sent to Harold Brown for information. Sent to
military addressees for POLAD.
