1980  901
civil. We have accomplished much along these lines in the past few 
years, but tapped only a portion of the potential.26
POL is a good case in point; we must insist that our Allies meet at 
least our initial wartime POL needs to the fullest extent possible out 
of their civil stockpiles (just as they plan to meet their own wartime 
needs). We must also get them to meet as much as possible of the local 
construction and support needs of our deployed peacetime forces. 
(Congress will increasingly insist on this).27
Greater European/Japanese military and economic aid to other 
threatened countries is another indirect way to get more rational bur-
densharing, which must be geared more directly to collective secu-
rity concerns.28 The FRG’s special relationship with Turkey must be 
exploited to fill a gap we are unable to fill. To the extent economic aid 
is fungible,29 it can be used to permit recipients to buy US military 
equipment (Japanese loans to S. Korea and China could be used for this 
purpose).
Our oil-­rich friends in the PG area must be called on to finance as 
much as feasible of the security umbrella which only we can provide 
them. To this end, we should seek direct contributions from them to 
finance the security needs of less wealthy Allies (e.g. revive Saudi aid 
to Egypt). We must ask them to finance the facilities we need and stock-
pile POL for us. Indirectly, they can help us by moderating oil price 
increases and keeping production high (e.g. Turkey’s likely 1980 oil 
import bill of $4B will dwarf total OECD aid of $1.6B).30
Issue #6—How can we best maintain both adequate modernization and 
a perceived technological edge? In Issue #1 we argued that greater risk 
of conflict in the 80s dictated greater emphasis on readiness. But over 
the last three decades our perceived technological superiority, mani-
fest not only in our strategic forces, has probably exerted even greater 
deterrent impact on Soviet thinking—­an advantage we must not lightly 
cast away. Moreover, defense investment today is what creates usable 
power tomorrow.31
DoD’s current guidelines deliberately place R&D and moderniza-
tion investment behind readiness. But we also must reduce the growing 
“defense investment gap” between the US and USSR. Instead, during 
the last three years (FY 79–81) our procurement budget each year has 
26 Brzezinski drew a checkmark in the right margin next to this sentence.
27 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this paragraph.
28 Brzezinski underlined “aid” in this sentence and drew a vertical line in the left 
margin next to it.
29 Brzezinski drew a checkmark in the right margin next to “fungible.”
30 Brzezinski drew a diagonal line at the end of this paragraph.
31 Brzezinski underlined “greater emphasis on readiness,” “probably exerted even 
greater,” and “creates usable power tomorrow” in this paragraph.
