Non-Proliferation
815
B. Antiproliferation Efforts
With a few exceptions, the policies adopted by the great powers to
slow the spread of nuclear weapons have focused primarily on limiting
the opportunities and capabilities of threshold states. Hence, apart
from a few international declarations of intent to resist nuclear aggres-
sion, such as Security Council Resolution 255,4 most nonproliferation
efforts have concentrated on creating institutional and legal arrange-
ments to embargo, monitor, or control international nuclear commerce.
The reluctance of the major nuclear powers to address the problem
of motivations directly is understandable. The costs in terms of the nec-
essary massive readjustment of foreign policy priorities, the risks and
the demands on limited resources that would flow from more active
engagement in local and regional affairs in various parts of the world,
and the loss of freedom of maneuver in areas ranging from superpower
competition and alliance politics to North-South disagreements over
the distribution of international wealth and power would be enormous.
Furthermore, the high degree of concern and cooperation among the
nuclear powers required for success in such an endeavor would be dif-
ficult to sustain.
The Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) of 1968 constitutes the central
legal instrument of the anti-proliferation effort. Some 100 nations have
adhered to the treaty since it was opened for signature. But a number of
nuclear weapon and key threshold states, including France, India, Is-
rael, Egypt, Pakistan, Brazil, and Argentina, have so far proved un-
willing to endorse the Treaty.
While it does require nonweapons adherents to forgo the acquisi-
tion of atomic arms, the NPT makes only a passing reference to the
major concerns which fuel the proliferation process. Addressing rela-
tively minor motivating factors, it obligates the five nuclear weapons
states to end their nuclear arms race and to supply peaceful nuclear
explosives to nonweapons states at reasonable cost and on a nondis-
criminatory basis. So far, however, neither of these pledges has been
fulfilled.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), under UN aegis,
has become the central organizational instrument of the nonprolifera-
tion regime. It administers the international “safeguards” agreements
governing proper use of peaceful nuclear materials and facilities.
4 UN Resolution 255, “Question Relating to Measures to Safeguard Non-Nuclear
Weapons States Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,” June
19, 1968, proclaimed that Non-Nuclear Weapons States threatened by “aggression with
nuclear weapons or the threat of such aggression” would receive aid from UN members,
in particular “nuclear-weapon State permanent members.” (http://www.un.org/en/
ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=S/RES/255(1968))
