893.5045/136: Telegram [Document 532] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of State LONDON, July 17, 1925—noon. [Received 9:13 p.m.] 217. My 216, July 14, 5 p.m.10 Chamberlain11 sent for me late yesterday afternoon and on coming to Foreign Office I found there also French and Japanese Ambassadors. Chamberlain stated he wished to limit conversation to the difficulties between the diplomatic corps at Peking and the Municipal Council at Shanghai. He made a statement of the facts as they had been presented to him and then stated that his Government was unwilling to accept the resignation of the chief of police believing a proper and judicial inquiry should be made into the affair especially since the Municipal Council had offered to accept and abide by any decision reached by such an inquiry. Chamberlain said he would like both to instruct British Chargé d’Affaires, Peking, advising him of British Government’s decision as above and also send an informal message to Municipal Council pointing out absurdity of their position and stating frankly that they could not regard themselves as responsible only to their own electors and at the same time rely upon foreign powers for protection. I asked if in view of public attitude of Municipal Council some retraction on their part would not be advisable before beginning inquiry. Chamberlain replied that any effort to discipline Council brought in Chinese and opened up a very wide subject for discussion and was believed therefore to be inadvisable. Chamberlain then read following proposed telegram of instruction to British Chargé d’Affaires, Peking, and expressed the hope that the Ambassadors present might recommend to their Governments that similar instructions be telegraphed their respective missions in Peking. Japanese Ambassador agreed with Chamberlain’s plan and said he would recommend it to his Government. French Ambassador stated that inasmuch as France had her own concessions and was therefore not directly interested he would leave the matter for decision by his Government. Upon leaving I informed Chamberlain I would make a personal recommendation to my Government that any action taken should be in concert with powers represented. Chamberlain will see Italian Ambassador today. I request instructions.
