Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
689
The response of the international community to the Soviet attempt
to crush Afghanistan must match the gravity of the Soviet action.
With the support of the American people and working with other
nations, we will deter aggression, we will protect our Nation’s secur-
ity, and we will preserve the peace. The United States will meet its
responsibilities.
Thank you very much.
137.
Editorial Note
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brze-
zinski took part in a briefing for non-Washington editorial page editors
and writers on January 8, 1980. The briefing took place from 11:36 a.m.
to 12:01 p.m. in the Old Executive Office Building. Brzezinski initiated
the session by stating:
“I thought that it might be most useful if I were to open with a few
little comments, and then perhaps respond to any questions that you
may wish to raise. We are obviously going through a very serious be-
ginning for the new decade. Perhaps, however, it is not only symbolic
that these events are taking place in the first year of the 1980s.
“We have entered the fifth decade of U.S.-Soviet competition. I
think it is useful to think about that, particularly for you, since you are
editorial writers, in an historical perspective. The decade of the ’40s
was the decade of U.S. entrance into world affairs, and of Soviet expan-
sion because of the vacuum that developed as a consequence of World
War Two.
“The decade of the ’50s brought the definition of clear lines in the
West and in the Far East; Berlin and Korea; and obviously I am over-
simplifying here. The decade of the ’60s was that premature global
competition, with the Soviets, under Khrushchev, moving out too
abruptly and without sufficient power base, resulting in the conflict in
Cuba and the respite for the United States, this shaken by the U.S. in-
volvement in Vietnam.
“The decade of the ’70s was the decade of Soviet build-up, but also
accommodation; the search for a more enduring cooperative relation-
ship. What will the decade of the ’80s be? That is the central issue now
confronting us. And that is the issue which is at stake in Afghanistan.
“It can also be a decade of cooperation, not only under arms con-
trol but over the wider issues that should concern too much U.S. global
