Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Thirty-two years ago, in the cold dawn of the Atomic Age, this organization came into being. Its first and its most urgent purpose has been to secure peace for an exhausted and ravaged world. Present conditions in some respects appear quite hopeful, yet the assurance of peace continues to elude us. Before the end of this century, a score of nations could possess nuclear weapons. If this should happen, the world that we leave our children will mock our own hopes for peace. The level of nuclear armaments could grow by tens of thousands, and the same situation could well occur with advanced conventional weapons. The temptation to use these weapons, for fear that someone else might do it first, would be almost irresistible. The ever-growing trade in conventional arms subverts international commerce from a force for peace to a caterer for war. Violence, terrorism, assassination, undeclared wars all threaten to destroy the restraint and the moderation that must become the dominant characteristic of our age. Unless we establish a code of international behavior in which the resort to violence becomes increasingly irrelevant to the pursuit of national interests, we will crush the world’s dreams for human development and the full flowering of human freedom. We have already become a global community, but only in the sense that we face common problems and we share for good or evil a common future. In this community, power to solve the world’s problems, particularly economic and political power, no longer lies solely in the hands of a few nations. Power is now widely shared among many nations with different cultures and different histories and different aspirations. The question is whether we will allow our differences to defeat us or whether we will work together to realize our common hopes for peace. Today I want to address the major dimensions of peace and the role the United States intends to play in limiting and reducing all armaments, controlling nuclear technology, restricting the arms trade, and settling disputes by peaceful means. When atomic weapons were used for the first time, Winston Churchill described the power of the atom as a revelation long, mercifully withheld from man. Since then we have learned in Du¨rrenmatt’s chilling words that “what has once been thought can never be unthought.”2 2 Reference is to Swiss author and playwright Friedrich Du¨rrenmatt. The line Carter quotes is from Du¨rrenmatt’s 1961 play entitled The Physicists.
