Colombia 321 limit acreage cannot do the job since farmers use fertilizer to increase the productivity per acre. In cotton they are putting 50 per cent more per acre. The Secretary said there was no question at all as to our objectives; we are agreed that a greater measure of stability is desirable at reasonable price levels. The only question is how to achieve that. Our experience has been disastrous. This is not to say that the job is impossible. All we can now say is that our own economic people will work closely and sympathetically with you, although we have a certain skepiticizm. He asked the Colombians to remember that there were certain legal restrictions on Americans against restraining trade but this does not apply to foreigners. President Lopez summarized the Colombian situation by saying that they had two problems: (1) an exchange problem, and (2) what could be done in cooperation with other coffee-­producing countries for price stabilization. The Secretary said that with respect to the dollar gap, the Colombians should see the Eximbank, which is a separate department of Government here. He could ensure the Colombians that they will get sympathetic consideration there, although they could expect no bail-­ out loan. At this point, Mr. Mann said that we had granted Colombia $60 million in Eximbank funds last year for a bail-­out loan. President Lopez said that the Colombians wanted an extension of time from the Eximbank on pending payments plus additional facilities. They also had need for additional agricultural machinery in order to increase agricultural production. In response to the Secretary’s inquiry, he said that the increase in agricultural production would not, of course, apply to coffee. Mr. Mann and Mr. Rubottom here observed that they had been much impressed by what Colombia had been doing day by day in the field of expanding its agricultural production. The Secretary asked how much of a military program they had and Senor Alvarez stated that it was about $280 million pesos or some 20 per cent of the budget. Santamaria then stated that the Military Junta had cut the military budget by about 100 million pesos and further cuts were prevented only because so much was owing on prior debt. The Provisional
