Colombia  321
limit acreage cannot do the job since farmers use fertilizer to increase 
the productivity per acre. In cotton they are putting 50 per cent more 
per acre.
The Secretary said there was no question at all as to our objectives; 
we are agreed that a greater measure of stability is desirable at reason-
able price levels. The only question is how to achieve that. Our expe-
rience has been disastrous. This is not to say that the job is impossible. 
All we can now say is that our own economic people will work closely 
and sympathetically with you, although we have a certain skepiticizm. 
He asked the Colombians to remember that there were certain legal 
restrictions on Americans against restraining trade but this does not 
apply to foreigners.
President Lopez summarized the Colombian situation by saying 
that they had two problems: (1) an exchange problem, and (2) what 
could be done in cooperation with other coffee-­producing countries for 
price stabilization.
The Secretary said that with respect to the dollar gap, the 
Colombians should see the Eximbank, which is a separate department 
of Government here. He could ensure the Colombians that they will get 
sympathetic consideration there, although they could expect no bail-­
out loan. At this point, Mr. Mann said that we had granted Colombia 
$60 million in Eximbank funds last year for a bail-­out loan.
President Lopez said that the Colombians wanted an extension of 
time from the Eximbank on pending payments plus additional facil-
ities. They also had need for additional agricultural machinery in 
order to increase agricultural production. In response to the Secretary’s 
inquiry, he said that the increase in agricultural production would not, 
of course, apply to coffee.
Mr. Mann and Mr. Rubottom here observed that they had been 
much impressed by what Colombia had been doing day by day in the 
field of expanding its agricultural production.
The Secretary asked how much of a military program they had 
and Senor Alvarez stated that it was about $280 million pesos or some 
20 per cent of the budget.
Santamaria then stated that the Military Junta had cut the mili-
tary budget by about 100 million pesos and further cuts were pre-
vented only because so much was owing on prior debt. The Provisional 
Government had dismissed 10,000 soldiers or 1/3 of its army. It has 
stopped all military construction; it has bought no armaments, only 
maintenance items. Finally, much of the 280 million pesos went for 
salaries.
Mr. Rubottom summarized by saying that there had been in 
Colombia a remarkable de-­emphasis on military activity. The Secretary
