Ecuador 561 Velasco has indicated privately that he would not take the initiative to establish diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union although he would give favorable consideration to any such Soviet request. These relations, according to Velasco, would be completely without commitments or strings and the Soviet Embassy would be drastically limited in its size and activities. The factors mentioned above, combined with the favorable reception in Ecuador of the recent U.S. affirmation of our respect for OAS treaty obligations to come to the defense of any American nation which suffers aggression,3 have reduced the probability that diplomatic relations will be established with the Soviet Union or that the Inter-American Conference will be cancelled. The decision as to whether, and if so, when, the XI Inter-American Conference will be held is now under consideration by President Velasco. His decision to attempt to hold the conference as scheduled, or to work for its postponement or cancellation, will be of major importance. Outright cancellation of the conference is reportedly favored by a majority of the cabinet and could imply Ecuadorean repudiation of the OAS. However, it is believed that Velasco is aware of the unfavorable impact that this would have on his economic development plans. Likewise, a further postponement of the Inter-American Conference would be a blow to Velasco’s prestige as he has severely chastised the preceding administration for the original delay. Holding the conference in Quito as scheduled, or even after some delay, could possibly reinforce Ecuador’s ties with the American system at a time when they are strained but also runs the risk of serious popular demonstrations against the OAS and the Rio Protocol guarantor powers. The situation is further complicated by the fact that the Minister of Government, Araujo, has authority over the police and conceivably could allow such demonstrations to wreck the conference. It has been reported that Velasco would like to remove Araujo from office prior to the date set for the conference. Yet, despite several opportunities, Velasco has failed to move against Araujo and Velasco may feel that he is unable to do so under the present conditions. In spite of the President’s assurances that adequate security measures would be taken should the conference be held, there remains a probability of serious demonstrations as a result of deliberate leftist agitation of the already emotionally charged boundary issue. Barring a previous determination concerning the conference by Velasco, the situation will be discussed further when Foreign Minister Chiriboga arrives for a Washington holiday about December 22.
