542
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
the militants seem to have won—as reflecting a decisive turn in the
tide against the militants, thereby setting the stage for transfer as part
of the consolidation of governmental authority. Finally, we believe
we now have reasonably firm indication that Metrinko is alive and
physically sound. End summary.
4. During conversations from roughly noon to 8 p.m. Wednesday
B and V appeared generally more optimistic than in our previous
meetings or than would appear to us to be justified by recent events.
While they are not willing to concede credit to Commission members,
it seems apparent that any change in the actual situation in Tehran
results from the continuing presence and pressure of the Commission
in Iran. B and V believe the public mood is definitely turning against
the militants and they cite recent statements by Ghotbzadeh, Bani-Sadr
and Khomeini’s elder brother, Ayatollah Pasandideh, as evidence that
the leadership is now willing to attack the militants with Khomeini’s
approval and to guide public opinion against them. They give a positive
interpretation to Khomeini’s statement of March 10,3 suggesting that
Khomeini was attempting to facilitate the work of the Commission—
but could not appear to be less anti-American than normal in doing so.
5. B and V expect popular feeling against the militants to rise
because of their attacks on respected revolutionary leaders, their efforts
to confront the government and the widespread belief only Commu-
nists benefit from militant attacks. Khomeini does not approve such
tactics and is bound to find ways to undercut the militants. B and V
think Bani-Sadr will do well in the March 14 voting and believe this
is the basis for his personal message to President Carter that the hos-
tages will be moved to government control within 15 days if not sooner
after the election.4 Last night Ghotbzadeh privately told B and V that
he believed—but was not absolutely sure—that the transfer would
probably take place within a week after March 14 vote. The margin of
doubt that this would not occur was very small. B and V think Ghotbza-
deh was completely honest and sincere in this statement.
6. We recognize that optimism may represent little more than the
hope of our deeply committed friends and Bani-Sadr and Ghotbzadeh.
Nevertheless, we shall be exploring ways to attempt to bind the Iranians
to the predictions in our conversations that follow. We shall attempt
to work out a step-by-step scenario covering the 7–14 days after the
elections as a basis for thinking about where we go from here in the
light of the new timetable.
3 See Document 203.
4 Jordan recalled in his memoir that Bourguet said to him “we bring you a message
from Bani-Sadr. He told us to tell you that the government will take control of the
hostages within fifteen days. That is a promise from him to you!” (Jordan, Crisis, p. 194)
