1956  1217
for agreement on an unconditional declaration which would remove 
the existing threat of the Chinese Communists to resort to force in the 
Taiwan area and agree that our differences will be settled by peaceful 
means only.
The U.S. continues to expect the Chinese Communists to carry out 
their commitment of September 10, 1955 and promptly to release the 
10 unfortunate Americans still held in their prisons in violation of that 
agreement.
I have informed Ambassador Wang that any communications can 
be transmitted through our respective consular offices here in Geneva.
734.	 Telegram 415 from Geneva1
Geneva, October 18, 1956, noon
415. From Johnson.
Two hour twenty minute meeting this morning. I opened with 
statement along lines para one Deptel 440 except that only stated prison 
authorities refused permit UK Charge representative see McCarthy, not 
mentioning prison official allegation McCarthy did not wish interview. 
(My thought was if Wang briefed on subject and made this statement 
would use it as point for counterattack. However during discussion it 
was obvious he not briefed on any details McCarthy case). He made 
no response my notification we were considering public statement and 
after extemporaneous rebuttal my opening statement along familiar 
lines, made prepared statement opening with sentence “talks have now 
come to stage where no progress can be made”. Reviewed negotiations 
along familiar lines and then alleged US has revealed “it deliberately 
blocking progress in Ambassadorial talks and is fearful of any improve­
ment in Sino-­American relations”. PRC has exerted “greatest efforts” 
which have not been rewarded and considers such “futile situation 
should not continue any longer”. PRC therefore formally proposes the 
holding of a Foreign Ministers conference “to discuss the questions of 
relaxing and eliminating tensions Taiwan area, as well as questions 
mutual renunciation force by China and US, lifting embargo, peoples 
contacts and cultural exchange, etc.” “What is at stake is the future of 
Sino-­American relations and indeed peace of Far East and world”.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/10–1856. Confidential; Priority; 
Limit Distribution.
