Afghanistan threaten to gain control over a province on the USSR’s border, may contribute to the making of such a decision at this particular moment. However, given the tens of thousands of Soviet troops who would be necessary to bring about broad pacification of the country as a whole, the present Soviet build-up seems likely to be an attempt to insure the security of the capital region and perhaps to improve the safety of land transport from the Soviet border to Kabul. There is also, however, the possibility that the newly introduced troops have a limited function for a limited time span. If the Soviets were to attempt to oust Amin and install a Parchamist government, they would have to contend with resistance from the present military leadership and the possibility that a Soviet-backed coup attempt could back-fire and become also directed against Soviet military advisory personnel. Thus preparations for such a move could consist of bringing in sufficient military force to guarantee its successful execution. The Internal Political Situation The Amin government is politically very insecure. Not only is it opposed by the population at large, which is conservative and fundamentally Islamic, but its enemies include former leftist collaborators, the Parchamists, and most recently the supporters of former President Taraki. Amin has arrested and/or removed from key positions many Taraki loyalists but, according to clandestine reports, many remain in the army in important positions. If given another secular and leftist choice, this group might well move against Amin. The top Parchamist leadership, headed by Babrak Karmal has been in exile (reportedly in Eastern Europe) since the fall of 1978. Recently several thousand Parchamists were, reportedly, arrested throughout Afghanistan and large numbers were executed. This followed rumors that the Soviets were planning to remove Amin and replace him with Parchamists. Earlier there were reports that Taraki had been in touch with the Parchamists and was planning, with Soviet support, to bring them back into the government, ousting Amin in the process. Rumors that the Soviets would like to replace the DRA leadership first surfaced in June 1979 and still persist. The Soviets are known to believe that Amin’s ruthless and hasty implementation of Marxist “reforms” in Afghanistan was a major mistake, provoking the country-wide insurgency. Most of these reform programs have been halted by the expediency of declaring them “completed.” Since the inauguration of the new Amin government, the emphasis has been on “legality, security and justice” and the drafting of a constitution. In this connection, Amin has tried to shift the blame to Taraki for the large numbers of political arrests and executions in
