husband or the wife is in this country, and granting more freedom for the
migration of the North American Indian tribes is desirable.
The United States Employment Service has enabled about 2,000,000 men
and women to gain paying positions in the last fiscal year. Particular
attention has been given to assisting men past middle life and in providing
field labor for harvesting agricultural crops. This has been made possible in
part through the service of the Federal Board for Vocational Education,
which is cooperating with the States in a program to increase the technical
knowledge and skill of the wage earner.
PUBLIC BUILDINGS
Construction is under way in the country and ground has been broken for
carrying out a public-building program for Washington. We have reached a
time when not only the conveniences but the architectural beauty of the
public buildings of the Capital City should be given much attention. It will
be necessary to purchase further land and provide the required continuing
appropriations.
HISTORICAL CELEBRATIONS
Provision is being made to commemorate the two hundredth anniversary of
the birth of George Washington. Suggestion has been made for the
construction of a memorial road leading from the Capital to Mount Vernon,
which may well have the consideration of the Congress, and the
commission intrusted with preparations for the celebration will undoubtedly
recommend publication of the complete writings of Washington and a series
of writings by different authors relating to him.
February 25, 1929, is the one hundred and fiftieth anniversary of the
capture of Fort Sackville, at Vincennes, in the State of Indiana. This
eventually brought into the Union what was known as the Northwest
Territory, embracing the region north of the Ohio River between the
Alleghenies and the Mississippi River. This expedition was led by George
Rogers Clark. His heroic character and the importance of his victory are too
little known and understood. They gave us not only this Northwest Territory
but by means of that the prospect of reaching the Pacific. The State of
