3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
808
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
led to the disruption of relations of which Gromyko had spoken. His
answer would be based on the reaction of not only President Carter and
the present Administration but also on the reaction of the Congress of
the United States and the country at large. He would try to put his an-
swer in as precise and clear terms as he could because he believed, as
Gromyko did, that the answer to this question was central to every-
thing else.
At the point of the events in Afghanistan, we were facing a very
difficult challenge in the Senate in connection with ratification of the
SALT agreement. If Gromyko could recall their meeting in Moscow in
1971 (and the Secretary felt that he had more reason to remember that
meeting than Gromyko), he had even then been a supporter of SALT.
He had to tell Gromyko that last year the prospects for ratification of
the SALT Treaty, which initially had been quite good, had deteriorated
during the summer, and the Administration faced the problem of
picking the right time to put the issue to the Senate. Senator Byrd,2 the
majority leader, had been for the Treaty, and Gromyko would recall
that Senator Byrd had told him so last summer; the Secretary, too, was a
supporter of the Treaty, and at that time a majority of senators, al-
though perhaps not two-thirds, were in favor of the Treaty. The Senate
leadership had decided that January of this year would be an appro-
priate time for consideration of SALT II and had cleared the Senate’s
calendar of all other business, disposing of domestic issues in order to
be ready to debate the Treaty in late January and early February, ex-
pecting that after several weeks of debate the Treaty would have a
fighting chance of being ratified. The events in Iran3 had set us back in
this respect, simply because Iran had stimulated and strengthened the
conservative elements in the U.S., those who in any event were already
opposing SALT. The events in Afghanistan destroyed any chance of
getting a two-thirds majority for this very reason. The Soviet interven-
tion with troops across the Afghan border had created doubts as to
whether detente had the same meaning for the Soviet Union as it did
for us. The belief became prevalent that the Soviet Union had changed
direction in its foreign policy, thereby creating new risks and chal-
lenges for us. Afghanistan was geographically close to the Persian Gulf
region, appeared to be a threat to the oil life line of the U.S. and the
West, and in addition the Soviet action looked like pointing a dagger at
the U.S. and the West. That was a real perception with which a politi-
cian simply had to deal.
The Secretary added that a lot of people in the U.S. still would like
to see the SALT Treaty proceed toward ratification, but could not see
2 Robert Byrd (D-West Virginia).
3 See footnote 2, Document 236.
