September 18–December 16, 1978 519 or goods.3 Individuals and groups will have an opportunity to know more about one another and learn to live together in peace and amity.4 You shall enjoy the benefits of the freedom of passage5 through the Suez Canal and the Gulf of Aqaba. Boycotts will be terminated.6 All of this is conceived with the understanding that neither party is to seek any special advantages or ask for the position of a favored nation. This can not be forced upon two sides which are terminating a state of war that lasted for over thirty years. It could not be achieved by ignoring the facts of our contemporary life. Only the natural development and growth of our relations in the future can lead to the intensification of exchange in the areas where the interests of both parties meet. It is much better to start on a solid basis and then proceed to add to the structure a brick every day. This operation of peace building will not be viewed or judged today or tomorrow, but several years after. It is still my conviction that the real peace process starts only after the signing. Thus, what is important is to start now and on the right foot. Once we started, the door will be wide open. We have not asked for any privileged position7 and I assume that this is reciprocated on your part. Let me make another point crystal clear to you in this respect. When we express our readiness to offer you all what I just mentioned, we are not doing so in return for your commitment to withdraw from our territory. We think that this is an obligation you bear under all accepted norms of international law and contemporary international relations. While we are changing the course of history, we must not attempt to tamper with the law of nations. I think I made it abundantly clear on every occasion that we do not accept any bargaining over our sovereignty or territory. Sooner or later, our land will be liberated. The proper return here must be a genuine acceptance on your part to coexist with your Arab neighbors. Your relations with them should not be viewed in terms of conquest or exploitation. Rather, it should be founded on mutual respect and a firm belief in the equality among nations. Coexistence with your Arab neighbors starts with coexistence with the Palestinian people.8 This is the message I have been trying to deliver to you since I arrived in Jerusalem on November 19, 1977. In Camp David, we reached agreement on a formula which we think can bring about an equitable solution to the Palestinian problem. If we value the ideal of peace highly, then we should not at all detract from 3 Carter underlined “free movement of people or goods.” 4 Carter underlined “live together in peace and amity.” 5 Carter underlined “freedom of passage.” 6 Carter underlined this sentence. 7 Carter underlined “not” and “privileged position” in this sentence. 8 Carter underlined “coexistence with the Palestinian people.”
