610 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I their posture just because we unilaterally want them to do so is fruitless and, I think, would cause a rejection of SALT treaty completely. “I think the treaty is to our great advantage and also to the Soviets’ great advantage. And I need not go into all the details of SALT II, but I think that it’s, at the very least, very fair, well-balanced, stable, verifiable, adequate, and a move in the right direction. It leads to SALT III, which will be even better. “Rejection of the treaty, however, will have the most devastating consequences to our country and, I think, to world peace. It will sever, to a substantial degree, the workable relationship between ourselves and the Soviets. It will shake the confidence of our own NATO Allies in our ability to get along reasonably well with the Soviets and leave them in an increasingly vulnerable position. It would make it almost impossible for us to pursue successfully the control of nuclear weapon development in countries like India, Pakistan, Iraq, Argentina, Brazil, Taiwan, South Korea, and other nations who have the technical ability to produce nuclear weapons, but have refrained from doing so because they saw an overall, worldwide restraint. “If we show that we are not willing to restrain our own nuclear arsenal, when it’s to our advantage and the Soviets’ both to do it—we would already have several thousand nuclear weapons—there’s no way that I could go to someone like Prime Minister Desai in India, with whom I have had long discussions on this, and say, ‘We have set a good example for you, now you restrain yourself and don’t ever develop another explosion in India.’ It would be almost impossible for me to do it. So, it would wipe out any real good opportunity for us to constrain nuclear weaponry. “And as you know, there are three ways that we can compete with the Soviet Union. One is militarily through a prospective or actual war, which we both want to avoid. The other is what we are doing. We are meeting them competitively in the political realm and also in the philosophical and moral and ethnic [ethical?] realm. And that’s where the competition goes on. “If the Soviets should sign SALT II and, in effect, ratify it—which is, I think, inevitable—and if we should sign it and then reject it, we would lose our competitive ability to reach effectively the hearts and minds of other people around the world who will be making a choice between us, on the one hand, and the Soviets, on the other, in the future for military, political, trade alliances; because the Soviets can put themselves through a massive propaganda effort, which would be inevitable, too, in their role of a powerful but fair and peace-loving nation. “We would be put in the role of a powerful nation that was, in effect, in their opinion, a warmonger who refused even to participate in an equitable restraint on the most destructive weapons on Earth. And
