Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III experts to come up with conclusions by the end of the year. The communique is, however, okay in draft. Andreotti: I am not proposing any changes, but I have two comments. It is important that in addition to concerning ourselves with the problems of the developed countries we also concern ourselves with the problems of the developing countries. I was impressed with what Prime Minister Fukuda said about the problems of the future, such as the water and arable land. We should study in the future our approach to the LDCs. It is important to remind people in the developed countries, particularly our young people, of the problems of the developing countries—to remind them that 1.5 billion people in this world earn less than $90 a year. Maybe it will make us more willing to sacrifice in our own countries if we do not forget world poverty. Carter: I would like to add on the common fund point in the communique that we should pursue negotiations to a successful conclusion. We should get going on the common fund and make clear that we are going to go ahead and wrap it up. Giscard: There is considerable emphasis on multilateral aid in this paper. It is also important that we give attention to bilateral aid for political reasons. We should highlight our own aid to indicate the progress we have made in dealing with the problems of the LDCs. Schmidt: I see no problem adding Carter’s four words. However, I support Giscard on aid. Most people in LDCs have no idea of where the aid they get comes from when it comes from the World Bank. It is also difficult to raise appreciation for foreign aid when LDCs criticize my country. LDCs should not see aid as coming out of the vaults of the World Bank. Aid depends on national legislatures. What Giscard said was important; not too much aid should be multilateral. We should make it clear to LDCs where the aid comes from. With respect to the Eastern countries, I do not agree that we should say “invite.” We invited them at London to provide more aid and nothing happened. Instead, they stepped up their deliveries of weapons and advisers to Africa—including military advisers from the GDR. Invite is meaningless. We should spell out that the 7 countries here reproach COMECON for not contributing substantially to LDCs. The last section of this declaration is meaningless on commodities. There are no direct German interests involved. There are no Germanophone countries. I am talking from a general economic point of view. I am concerned about and question whether the common fund is essential, as well as certain commodity agreements. To my mind, stability of export earnings is even more important for LDCs. A copper agreement would be good for the Soviet Union and give it a lot of profits. But a common fund should not enable the rich to get richer. A copper agreement would help Zaire, Zambia and Chile, but it would be better for
