Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX decentralization program that is giving the regions a greater say in national economic decisions. 13. During the 1980s, Yugoslavia is likely to face persistent foreign trade deficits as well as continued high domestic inflation and unemployment. Western demand for Yugoslav exports will probably remain slack, while competition in Western hard-currency markets will increase. Domestic energy supplies will tighten, and jumps in world oil prices (Yugoslavia currently imports 36 percent of its energy and 75 percent of its oil) will boost external deficits and domestic prices sharply. 14. Such strains will increase Yugoslav reliance on Western financing. Belgrade can probably continue to count on substantial support from official Western lenders. At present, however, over half of the $10 billion Yugoslav debt is held by private Western banks. Their loans have periodically fallen short of Yugoslav needs and could be considerably affected by heightened political uncertainty in a time without Tito. If private foreign lending should be curtailed for a lengthy period and the difference is not covered from official Western sources, post-Tito Yugoslavia could not avoid a significant economic slowdown. This, in turn, would aggravate the endemic cyclical pattern of growth and seriously increase the level of unemployment, which currently amounts to almost 7 percent of the national work force and about 20 percent of the urban work force in some of the country’s less developed regions. If the leadership proves incapable of designing and enforcing an austerity program appropriate to such circumstances, there could be a prolonged economic crisis with potentially disruptive political ramifications.3 D. Regional and Communal Tensions 15. Economic stringencies seem certain to lead to sharper conflicts of interest among Yugoslavia’s constituent republics and provinces.4 Such conflicts, in turn, could escalate into militant confrontations among the already antagonistic ethnonational communities whose “homelands” are competing for scarce material and financial resources. Such confrontations have been a recurrent feature of postwar Yugoslav history and have periodically forced even Tito onto the defensive. In 1968, for example, there were large riots by the country’s Albanians, who contended that their “homeland,” the province of Kosovo, was 3 For a more detailed assessment of Yugoslavia’s economic prospects and the economic issues that will confront Tito’s successors, see volume II, annex B, “The Economy.” [Footnote is in the original.] 4 For an analysis of the role of ethnic divisions in Yugoslav politics, see volume II, annex C, “Nationalism and Regionalism.” [Footnote is in the original.]
