1052  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
boundary dispute and the Development Loan Fund, which are the 
subjects of separate memoranda.)3
Much later, Mr. Rubottom reverted to the subject of lead and zinc, 
saying he wished to talk frankly about the matter, as was his custom. 
Mr. Rubottom pointed out that the U.S. Tariff Commission had found 
four years ago that the U.S. lead and zinc industry was being injured by 
foreign imports and had ratified this finding only this year. During all 
of this period, the U.S. had refrained from increasing tariffs or impos-
ing quotas. It had spent many millions to stockpile these minerals, as 
well as additional sums in bartering surplus agricultural commodities 
for them. It had presented a bill to Congress proposing subsidies as a 
means of assisting the domestic industry with a minimum of adverse 
effect on foreign producers, but the bill had failed. The Administration 
had engaged in discussions in Washington and London directed 
toward a multilateral solution, but such a solution had not been arrived 
at. Mr. Rubottom pointed out that, in a democracy, the Administration 
could not ignore the pressures of public and Congressional opinion. 
To do so would prejudice many other aspects of its international poli-
cies. The President had finally decided to take action very much along 
the lines of that which Peru and Mexico had favored at the London 
conference. The President had assured the Presidents of both countries 
that his decision was subject to review and that he hoped a multilateral 
solution could be arrived at.
Mr. Rubottom then expressed his regret that some of the forego-
ing explanations of the imposition of quotas by the U.S. had not been 
brought to the attention of the Peruvian people. He said he did not 
feel it fair for the press and public in Peru to talk as if this action by 
the U.S. marked the end of all U.S. efforts to cooperate with and assist 
Latin America. He added that he did not feel that the U.S. deserved to 
become the subject of threats because of its action on lead and zinc.4
Foreign Minister Porras said that he and the Peruvian Embassy 
in Washington were aware of the background and the political factors 
which Mr. Rubottom had outlined. He said that he personally would 
help to explain the U.S. action and to make it understood in Peru, but 
that he needed something to take home with him as a concrete demon-
stration of the fact that the U.S. was still cooperating with Peru.
3 The memorandum of conversation on the boundary dispute is in file 622.233/ 
9–2558; the memorandum of conversation on the Development Loan Fund is printed as 
Document PE–17.
4 According to a memorandum of conversation in Washington on October 15, 
Foreign Minister Porras mentioned to Assistant Secretary Rubottom a tentative Czech 
offer to buy Peruvian lead and zinc. In commenting on this offer, Rubottom pointed out 
that “the Soviet Bloc was a net exporter of lead and zinc and that any purchases would be 
for political purposes.” (411.236/10–1558)
