National Security Policy  451
22. Military Strength. Of outstanding significance has been the 
USSR’s progress in the development of advanced weapons and deliv­
ery systems:
a. The USSR is developing a variety of improved nuclear weap­
ons, particularly those employing thermonuclear principles; its present 
stockpile could include weapons with yields ranging from about 4 KT 
up into the megaton range. By 1958–59 the most powerful Soviet bombs 
could probably yield up to 20 MT, but missile warheads would still 
have yields considerably less than this. We also estimate a substantial 
Soviet program for expanding fissionable materials production, but the 
availability of such materials will continue through 1962 to be a limit­
ing factor on the size of many military as well as nonmilitary programs.
b. The USSR has probably tested an ICBM vehicle and we now 
tentatively estimate that it could have a few (say 10) prototype ICBMs 
available for operational use in 1959 or possibly even earlier, depend­
ing upon Soviet requirements for accuracy and reliability.3 The USSR 
could now have available ballistic missiles with maximum ranges of 75, 
175–200, 350, and 700 n.m.; by 1958 it could probably also begin to have 
available a 1000 n.m. IRBM.
23. Meanwhile, the USSR will probably continue to maintain a 
balanced and flexible structure of strong naval, air, and ground forces, 
supplementing these with new weapons. Nevertheless, the manpower 
strength of the Soviet forces appears to have been reduced considerably 
from Korean War peaks, and some further reductions and streamlining 
are likely, though not to a substantial degree.
a. We estimate that the Soviet long-­range bomber force has grown 
to some 1,500 bombers at present, though it includes a larger number of 
jet medium bombers and fewer heavy bombers than we had previously 
estimated. While we think that this force will not change significantly 
in size during the period of this estimate, we believe that it will be fur­
ther strengthened by the replacement of obsolete BULL piston medium 
bombers with jets, by the introduction of additional heavy bombers, and 
by further development of inflight refueling. However, any estimate of 
future strength must be highly tentative, especially for heavy bombers, 
since Soviet policy in these respects is still shrouded in doubt. Subject 
to such qualifications, we estimate that the Soviets may by mid-1960 
have about 400–600 heavy bombers and tankers of jet and turboprop 
types, in a long-­range air force totalling something between 1400 and 
1700 bombers. We also estimate that the number of heavy bombers and 
3 The estimate made in this paragraph must be considered tentative pending com­
pletion of SNIE 11–10–57: The Soviet ICBM Program. [Footnote is in the original.]
