United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 5 ETA–3. Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to the Acting Secretary of State1 Washington, January 31, 1958. SUBJECT Economic Policies—Latin America The following comments relate to the portion of the Secretary’s statement which was assigned to E in Mr. Howe’s memorandum of January 24.2 I. Latin American Exports. In our economic relations with Latin America, the most important problem facing us is the decline in demand and prices of Latin American exports which directly affect their budgetary and economic development plans. Related to this, is the growing protectionist sentiment in the United States, stimulated in part by the current fall off in our domestic economic activity, which threatens to restrict their access to the United States market. All of this makes it easier for Russia to increase its commercial relations with the area. This problem can best be attacked on a commodity by commodity, rather than on a general, basis. The most urgent facet of the general problem is what we can do if, as expected, the Tariff Commission recommends soon increased tariffs or quotas on lead and zinc. The Latin American countries most affected would be Mexico and Peru. We shall soon be faced with a similar problem regarding copper which is of great importance to Chile. My suggestion is that we consider at once the position we take with respect to lead and zinc. It would be best from a foreign relations standpoint if we were not to impose additional tariffs or restrictions on the import of lead and zinc, but it is possible that the President may consider himself committed to tariff action in response to a report by the Tariff Commission. On the assumption that the President will feel so committed, we should develop a program along the following lines: (1) Explore the feasibility of our participating in an international lead and zinc study or commodity group built around a competent secretariat which would make objective studies of trends in supply and demand and recommend measures by exporting countries to keep them in approximate balance. Our participation in such a group would be of great psychological and political advantage to us in the underdeveloped countries.
