ARTICLE 4 “Further, licences for the export to private individuals of component parts covered by Category 1 may be granted on the following conditions: “The said component parts must be exported direct to a recognized manufacturer of war material, duly authorized by his own Government, on a declaration from him to the effect that the said component parts are required by him. “The Government which grants the licence and the Government of the importer’s country shall take all adequate precautions to ensure that the said component parts are sent direct to their destination. “The licences granted in the terms of the present Article shall, so far as practicable, be drafted according to the form annexed to the present Convention, and shall conform to the provisions of the present Convention, and particularly to those of Article 8.” The provision that the exporting government shall “take all adequate precautions to insure that the said component parts are sent direct to their destination” is one which it would be difficult to carry out since the exporting country cannot control the shipment after it has left its territory. This provision should be modified or eliminated. With respect to the shipment of component parts, the following suggested redraft of Article 4, prepared by the War Department, is submitted to you for your consideration. “The export of items or component parts of items specified in Article 1, including samples for demonstration, may be permitted to recognized manufacturers, or to trade representatives of the exporter, on the following conditions: 1. The said items or component parts of items must be exported direct (a) to a recognized manufacturer of war material dulyauthorized by his own government; or (b) to a trade representative of the exporting manufacturer. The export declaration (or license) must show that said item or component part is required by the importer. 2. The government which permits the export and the government of the importer’s country, shall take all reasonable precautions to insure that the said
