World Hunger and Food Policy 817 tion, transfer or stockpiling of food, it was able for the second consecutive year to issue a coherent set of food policy recommendations. The developing countries continued to press the advanced countries for funds and technology, and the industrial countries continued to press LDCs to increase agricultural production. Although there was no sign of increased resource commitment on either side, there was an obvious desire to sustain a discussion. The WFC has proved to be one of the least acrimonious of forums for high-level discussion of North-South problems, and in the next year it may be the only such meeting to proceed with relative congeniality. Multilateral Aid for Agricultural Development The 1974 World Food Conference heavily emphasized the need to intensify cooperative international efforts directed toward the goal of food self-sufficiency for developing countries. Primary responsibility for rapid rural development and population control was declared to rest with the developing countries, with the industrial states providing sustained technical and financial support. The outlook for this Conference goal is not encouraging. In 1977–78, cereal imports for all developing countries are expected by the FAO to achieve record levels in excess of 65 million tons. More important, however, dependence on imports among the countries the UN considers to be “most seriously affected” by recent adverse economic conditions is projected to increase to 17.4 million tons in 1977–78, or some 7 percent above the previous year’s levels.5 According to the World Food Council, the growth of food production in these countries fell from 2.5 percent annually during the 1960s to 2 percent during 1970–77. While a 2 percent agricultural growth rate is historically acceptable, production has not kept pace with population growth. Per capita production growth in these countries has thus continued to decline in this decade. External financial assistance for increasing food production is still substantially below the recommended target of $8.3 billion, but international efforts to stimulate and divert funds to food production continue. For example, among the terms of a new economic and technical cooperation agreement between the USSR and Ethiopia was the stipulation that such aid be channelled to food industries and agriculture, at least for the present. The World Food Council’s most important contribution has been its role in the creation of the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), with a $1 billion commitment from the OPEC and OECD countries. The Fund will provide grants and low interest loans to stimulate food production in low income, food deficit 5 This group of 45 countries includes India, Bangladesh, Burma, Ethiopia, and Egypt. [Footnote in the original.]
