World Hunger and Food Policy
817
tion, transfer or stockpiling of food, it was able for the second consecu-
tive year to issue a coherent set of food policy recommendations. The
developing countries continued to press the advanced countries for
funds and technology, and the industrial countries continued to press
LDCs to increase agricultural production. Although there was no sign
of increased resource commitment on either side, there was an obvious
desire to sustain a discussion. The WFC has proved to be one of the
least acrimonious of forums for high-level discussion of North-South
problems, and in the next year it may be the only such meeting to pro-
ceed with relative congeniality.
Multilateral Aid for Agricultural Development
The 1974 World Food Conference heavily emphasized the need to
intensify cooperative international efforts directed toward the goal of
food self-sufficiency for developing countries. Primary responsibility
for rapid rural development and population control was declared to
rest with the developing countries, with the industrial states providing
sustained technical and financial support. The outlook for this Confer-
ence goal is not encouraging. In 1977–78, cereal imports for all devel-
oping countries are expected by the FAO to achieve record levels in
excess of 65 million tons. More important, however, dependence on im-
ports among the countries the UN considers to be “most seriously af-
fected” by recent adverse economic conditions is projected to increase
to 17.4 million tons in 1977–78, or some 7 percent above the previous
year’s levels.5 According to the World Food Council, the growth of
food production in these countries fell from 2.5 percent annually
during the 1960s to 2 percent during 1970–77. While a 2 percent agricul-
tural growth rate is historically acceptable, production has not kept
pace with population growth. Per capita production growth in these
countries has thus continued to decline in this decade.
External financial assistance for increasing food production is still
substantially below the recommended target of $8.3 billion, but inter-
national efforts to stimulate and divert funds to food production con-
tinue. For example, among the terms of a new economic and technical
cooperation agreement between the USSR and Ethiopia was the stipu-
lation that such aid be channelled to food industries and agriculture, at
least for the present. The World Food Council’s most important contri-
bution has been its role in the creation of the International Fund for Ag-
ricultural Development (IFAD), with a $1 billion commitment from the
OPEC and OECD countries. The Fund will provide grants and low in-
terest loans to stimulate food production in low income, food deficit
5 This group of 45 countries includes India, Bangladesh, Burma, Ethiopia, and
Egypt. [Footnote in the original.]
