Afghanistan
513
The Recommended Line. In my view, all top Administration officials
should be speaking with one voice in disseminating the following
analysis of events in Afghanistan:
—The Soviet decision to invade Afghanistan was a carefully consid-
ered one and grew out of the mission of General Pavlovski to Afghani-
stan, which began last August.
—The Czars thirsted after ports on the Indian Ocean for centuries.
In line with those historical aspirations, Molotov asked von Ribbentrop
for a sphere of influence over Afghanistan and Iran in 1940. The Soviets
marched into Northern Iran in 1942 and again in 1946. The geopolitical
aims of the Soviets in taking over Afghanistan should not be underesti-
mated. Soviet education, doctrine, and outlook would all lead one to
believe that the geopolitical factor is an important element in the Soviet
design to turn Afghanistan from a buffer state into the Mongolia of
Southwest Asia.
—The Soviets are, of course, aware that by introducing their troops
into Afghanistan they are measurably escalating the risks of eventual
armed conflict. Obviously, they felt the risk was worth taking.
—The elimination of Afghanistan as a buffer state in Southwest
Asia, just as the elimination of Cambodia as a buffer state in Southeast
Asia, indicates a dangerous, even unprecedented, new adventurism on
the part of the Soviets, who have been, ever since 1975, demonstrating
a growing willingness to use armed force to settle disputes in their
favor in Third World countries.
—Our best forecast is that the Soviets will put enough strength
into Afghanistan to prevail militarily and that they will eventually
subdue Afghanistan, just as they subdued the peoples of the Baltic and
East Europe in the 1940s. Any other conclusion would be wishful
thinking.
—While we would welcome being proved wrong, we do not expect
the Soviets to withdraw their forces from Afghanistan for the foresee-
able future. Our reaction to the Soviet aggression must, therefore, be
firm, measured and long-term in nature.
—The United States has no intention of resuming a “business as
usual” posture toward the Soviet Union until we are convinced that
the Kremlin has absorbed the message that was delivered in the State
of the Union address. President Carter is, above all, determined to
avoid future Afghanistans. (C)
Trying to shove this message directly down the throat of the State
Department would be worse than hopeless. My suggestion is that you
proceed as follows:
a) Raise the importance of speaking with one voice on this issue
in the SCC, emphasizing the need of those working in the reelection
campaign to have clear, simple guidance on Afghanistan and Iran.7
7 The issue did not arise at the next SCC meeting, February 6. See Document 198.
Brement attended the meeting, but Brzezinski did not; he was in Saudi Arabia at the
time. See Documents 194 and 195.
