352  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
with concerns that might exist in the Soviet Union or the United States 
that, in the future, such capabilities could be developed for unilateral 
advantage and could raise the risk of a first strike. Burt said that in his 
view there was a need to head off those kinds of concerns. To the extent 
that the sides could create greater confidence and predictability in both 
sides’ forces and intentions, not only would greater arms control prog-
ress be possible but also greater confidence and trust in the relation-
ship. Nazarkin thanked Burt for the clarification and asked whether the 
U.S. side had any further items on its agenda. Burt suggested a short 
break so the conforming group on the strategic exercise notification 
agreement could present its report.
Strategic Exercise Notification (Conforming Issues)
28. After the break, Medas reported general agreement on the text 
of the strategic exercise notification agreement, but pointed out that in 
Article I Neverov had suggested that the English version refer to notifi-
cation of “the” major strategic forces exercise instead of “one.” The sides 
had agreed that the Russian formulation should say “the major . . .” 
(“Samyi Krupnyi”). In Article II, Medas continued, a change had been 
made in the English text which did not require a change in the Russian 
text, but which reflected the Russian better and was consistent with 
treaty Article X/Paragraph 5: the first sentence would read: “each party 
shall provide to the other party the notifications required . . .” This was 
parallel to language in Article II/Paragraph 2, Medas said. Medas 
also noted that in paragraph 2, the language had been adjusted to be 
more consistent with treaty language: “provided” was used instead of 
“made,” and “prior to” was used in the second sentence. The sides were 
still discussing the question of the date, Medas said, and the Soviet side 
was checking the language in Article II/Paragraphs 2–3.
29. Nazarkin thanked Medas, and sought confirmation that the 
time used in Article II/Paragraph Two was equivalent to Greenwich 
Mean Time; Burt confirmed that it was. Nazarkin reiterated the Soviet 
request that Article I refer to “the major” exercise, since this was closest 
to the Russian “Samyi Krupnyi;” he said he would have to confirm this 
with higher authorities, but thought it would be acceptable. Burt gave 
AD Ref U.S. agreement to the changes in Articles II and III, but sought 
to explain, as he had the previous day, the U.S. approach concerning 
Article I. The U.S. proposal would obligate both sides to notify “one” 
major strategic forces exercise involving heavy bombers per year. As 
the U.S. had said, our intention is to notify Global Shield, which is the 
largest such exercise if it is held. If Global Shield were canceled, the U.S. 
would notify another major exercise—­the largest one held in that year 
involving heavy bombers. However, to avoid the difficulty of defin-
ing precisely what would be “the” largest exercise, the legal obligation 
would be to notify “one” exercise; the U.S. side had not tried to define
