Arms Control and Disarmament 1499 probability of nuclear origin shall be inspected”. Renumber sub-­para (c) as new sub-­para (b). Delete para 2. Article 8: First sentence para 1 should read “The system shall, when completely established, have about ten regional offices each pro­ viding logistic support and administrative supervision to elements of the system operating in its region.” Delete paras 2 and 3. Article 9: Delete all after word “posts” in first sentence para 1 and substitute “uniformly equipped with apparatus satisfying the speci­ fications set forth in the Report of the Geneva Conference of Experts of 20 August 1958.” Second sentence para 1 should end before word “however” and should be followed by new sentence reading “The exact number of control posts within the limits indicated above shall be determined as a result of actually distributing them, etc.” In para 2 substitute “operation” for word “observation”. Delete paras 3 and 4. Article 10: Delete “and Functions” in title of para 1. Delete paras 2 and 3. Article 11: Begin first sentence para 1 with word “Daily”. Substi­ tute for present text para 2 sub-­para (b) “When geophysical data from the control posts indicate that an event has occurred which cannot be identified as a natural event and which could be suspected of being an uncontained nuclear explosion”. Correct reference to treaty in last sen­ tence para 2. Delete para 4. Insert first three sentences present para 5 as last two sentences para 2. Final sentence para 5 should be inserted as final sentence present para 3. Article 12: Add words “by the Central Inspection Office” to para 1 sub-­para (h). Delete present para 2. Delete title para 3 and incorporate para 3 as part of para 1. Article 13: Delete present text. Change title to “High Altitude Detection” and substitute following parenthetical text for this Article: “(appropriate techniques as may be decided for detecting very high altitude explosions should be described here.)” Article 14: Replace all before word “immediately” in first sentence with words “all elements of the system shall”. Third sentence should read: “On request, all elements of the system shall provide additional data to the center.” In final sentence first para, substitute “shall” for “will” and delete last four words. Substitute “examined” for word “observed” in first sentence second para. PART VI: (Time Schedule) Department confirms views expressed para 3 of NUSUP 112 on method of handling this problem. Herter Acting
