488 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 132. In mid-1956, the USSR apparently settled on an improved pro­ duction model of the BISON jet heavy bomber, with a new bombing-­ navigation system as well as provision for inflight refueling. Considering the somewhat better performance characteristics of the BISON, its greater development potential, and the development of an inflight refu­ eling capability, the USSR may have decided to place greater emphasis on the BISON than on the BEAR. We therefore believe that the BISON will probably comprise the greater proportion of Soviet strength in heavy bombers in the later years of this period. A BISON with additional improvement in performance could probably be operational in 1959. 133. No positive evidence of Soviet research specifically directed toward nuclear propelled aircraft has been obtained. However, we esti­ mate that: a. The Soviet aircraft nuclear propulsion program is probably now engaged in development and testing of reactor components and sub systems. b. A reactor system suitable for nuclear propulsion of subsonic air­ craft could probably be available to the Soviets in 1962. It is possible that the USSR could for propaganda purposes fly an experimental air­ craft powered in part by nuclear power at an earlier date. 134. To employ its long-­range bomber force most advantageously, especially for intercontinental operations, the USSR would require a substantial inflight refueling capability. Refueling is particularly desir­ able for jet heavy bombers; for example, one refueling by a compati­ ble tanker could approximately double the area of the continental US that could be reached by the BISON on a two-­way mission from bases in the Chukotski area. BADGER coverage of US targets on one-­way missions could also be increased by refueling. Refueling for the BEAR, while less essential than for the jet bombers, could increase its coverage of US targets from interior bases in the USSR. The USSR could employ turbo-­prop heavy bombers in the tanker role. Aircraft configured spe­ cifically as tankers might also appear as the period advances. But on the basis of present evidence, we believe most of the tankers in Soviet Long Range Aviation during the period are likely to be convertible jet tanker-­bombers, and that the bulk of these will probably be in the heavy category. The use of convertible tanker-­bombers would permit greater flexibility in the employment of Long Range Aviation. 135. While evidence is inadequate to establish precisely the total size of the Soviet heavy bomber force, we have unusually good evi­ dence on the one plant known to be producing BISON jet heavy bombers, which indicates a cumulative BISON production of 65 by mid-1957. Evidence on BEAR turboprop heavy bomber production is
