718 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I The Olympic idea [has been rescued] from the remote past. You have the opportunity to rescue it from the immediate present—and to safeguard it for posterity.6 His words reach out to us across the decades. History rarely offers us a second chance. If we fail to seize this one, history itself may fail us. 6 Reference is to Jahncke, who included the statement in his November 25 letter; see footnote 4, above. 144. Editorial Note Secretary of State Cyrus Vance submitted a resignation letter to President Jimmy Carter on April 21, 1980, citing his inability to support Carter’s decision to launch a rescue operation to free the American hostages held in Iran. At an April 11 National Security Council meeting, participants supported the rescue attempt; Vance did not attend the meeting as he was away from Washington. In his resignation letter, Vance noted, “I know how deeply you have pondered your decision on Iran. I wish I could support you in it. But for the reasons we have discussed I cannot. “You would not be well served in the coming weeks and months by a Secretary of State who could not offer you the public backing you need on an issue and decision of such extraordinary importance—no matter how firm I remain in my support on other issues, as I do, or how loyal I am to you as our leader. Such a situation would be untenable and our relationship, which I value so highly, would constantly suffer.” (Department of State Bulletin, June 1980, page 2) Vance delivered the letter to the President the afternoon of April 21: “With great sorrow, I handed him the letter. He started to put it away. I asked him to read it. He did, and then slowly put it in his pocket. He said we would have to talk again. I told him that I wanted to make it clear that I would resign whether or not the mission was successful. I agreed to his request not to make my resignation public until after the rescue attempt, and to remain in my position until the mission was completed. It was clearly understood that my decision was irrevocable, whatever the outcome of the rescue operation. Over the next three days I offered whatever advice and help I could to make the operation a success.” (Hard Choices, page 411)
