World Hunger and Food Policy 675 I believe something along the lines of one of the above approaches will enhance prospects for accomplishing meaningful results. In the past, efforts in this area have had mixed or poor results and public interest and action subsided because competing U.S. agency as well as private interests were not resolved. These views are offered as a start toward the development of a joint memo to the President recommending a course of action. My assistant, Jerry Fill (ext. 6687), will serve as my representative on this issue during my vacation in England for the next 9 days. 214. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of Agriculture Bergland1 Washington, June 15, 1977 SUBJECT Your Manila WFC Meeting in the Context of Our Emerging Foreign Policy Your presence at the World Food Council in June presents an excellent opportunity to press forward with some major Administration foreign policy themes as they relate to outstanding issues between developed and developing countries.2 In particular, the forum seems highly suited to expand upon the “basic human needs” theme which the President has sounded in his United Nations and Notre Dame 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 92, Food: 1977. No classification marking. Bergland served as head of the U.S. delegation to the third session of the World Food Council in Manila, Philippines, June 20–24. For additional information concerning the WFC meeting, see Document 221. 2 Under cover of a May 27 memorandum, Hansen sent Brzezinski and Aaron a copy of telegram 117059 to multiple diplomatic posts, May 20, which requested that posts deliver to the host country’s WFC delegate a copy of a letter from Bergland discussing the outcome of the May 9–14 WFC Prepcom meeting and proposing an agenda for the upcoming WFC session. Hansen noted how “swiftly” Bergland had moved “in the Basic Human Needs direction” in advance of the Manila meeting. As the administration wanted to use the upcoming OECD Ministerial to secure the BHN strategy as a major component of the OECD’s North-South program, Hansen suggested that Brzezinski stress the connection between hunger and BHN, concluding: “What a memo from you to Bergland would do is to give his effort a proper place in a far broader and more comprehensive foreign policy initiative.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 92, Food: 1977)
