3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
660
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
leadership could only proceed from those considerations which he had
just presented to the Secretary, i.e., there was no need whatsoever to in-
troduce any kind of changes into existing arrangements, and therefore
the Soviet leadership did not intend to do so. However, the suggestions
the Secretary had made to Ambassador Dobrynin were aimed at intro-
ducing such changes.
Gromyko thought that there was a way out of this situation. He
was firmly convinced that there was an appropriate way out. In a cer-
tain sense, he could understand that the Secretary found himself in a
delicate situation as a result of certain statements made by the US Ad-
ministration. However, since the Soviet side had had no hand in
bringing about that situation, since those statements had been made by
the US side, it would be up to the US to find an appropriate way out. He
did believe that such a way out could easily be found. The US Adminis-
tration had at its disposal the official statement the Soviet Union had
made on Cuba, to the effect that there were certain Soviet facilities in
Cuba, i.e., a training center. If the Secretary deemed it useful, he could
make that Soviet statement public. He could say that some information
had been received which required verification as well as certain clarifi-
cation, that this had now been accomplished and apart from the clarifi-
cations provided, an official statement had been made by the Soviet
Union. He was deliberately saying “statement” rather than “under-
standing between the Soviet Union and the US,” because this matter
was one that concerned only the Soviet Union and Cuba. Nonetheless,
the Soviet Union had made a statement to the effect that it had a
training center in Cuba, and, further, the US Administration could state
that it had taken note of that Soviet statement. This is what the Secre-
tary could do if he was sincerely seeking a way out of the situation.
To reinforce what he had said about the noisy campaign in the US,
Gromyko cited the following data regarding the number of US military
personnel stationed in countries adjacent to the Soviet Union as of Sep-
tember 25, 1979 (Gromyko referred to a paper brought to him by Am-
bassador Makarov),5 he noted that in Turkey, i.e., close to the borders of
the Soviet Union, the US had stationed approximately 5,000 men. He
was in possession of the appropriate breakdown of that figure into
ground personnel, air force personnel and naval personnel. In Japan,
the US had 44,500 troops. Here, too, he had the relevant figures for
ground forces, air forces and naval forces. After all, Japan was a
neighbor of the Soviet Union, separated from Soviet territory by a
narrow strip of water, just as Cuba was separated from the US by a
narrow strip of water. In South Korea, the US had approximately 40,000
men, again broken down into the three categories. As for the overall
5 Not further identified.
