Panama  985
the genuine friendship existing between our two Governments and peo-
ples, my Government has determined that as a voluntary act on the part of 
the United States, and in recognition of the titular sovereignty residing in 
the Republic of Panama with respect to the Canal Zone, the Panamanian 
flag will hereafter be flown together with the United States flag on a daily 
basis in the area known as Shaler’s Triangle in the Canal Zone. This deter-
mination is in nowise to be considered as modifying in any way the trea-
ties and agreements in force between the United States and Panama.
“Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurances of my highest 
consideration.”
Excellency: I have the honor to refer to the Panamanian note 
No. D–1011, of November 25, 1959,3 delivered to me by your prede-
cessor. His Excellency, Ricardo M. Arias, stating it to be the aim of 
the Government of Panama to have the Panamanian flag raised reg-
ularly in the territory of the Canal Zone and also stating the view 
that Panama, under existing treaties, has “merely accorded” to the 
Government of the United States “the rights, power, and authority 
required by the United States for purposes of maintenance, operation, 
sanitation, and protection of the Canal”.
After careful consideration, I must inform your Excellency that the 
Government of the United States cannot agree with, and must reject, 
the position of the Panamanian Government just quoted and contained 
in the note under reference.
However, I am pleased to state that—­as you may be aware—­
the United States Ambassador to the Republic of Panama has today 
informed His Excellency, Miguel J. Moreno, Jr., Minister of Foreign 
Relations of Panama, that as a further reflection of the genuine friend-
ship existing between the Governments and peoples of our two coun-
tries, the Government of the United States has determined that as a 
voluntary act on its part, and in recognition of the titular sovereignty 
residing in the Republic of Panama with respect to the Canal Zone, the 
Panamanian flag will hereafter be flown together with the United States 
flag on a daily basis in the area known as Shaler’s Triangle in the Canal 
Zone. This determination is in nowise to be considered as modifying in 
any way the treaties and agreements in force between the United States 
and the Republic of Panama.4
3 Not printed; 729.00/11–2559.
4 Commenting on the text of this note in telegram 152 from Panama City on 
September 16, Ambassador Farland informed the Department of State that Foreign 
Minister Moreno was in Mexico until September 18 or 19 and recommended that his name 
be deleted from the note and be replaced with that of Rodrigo Miro, the Acting Foreign 
Minister. (719.04/9–1660)
