FOREIGN RELATIONS OF THE UNITED STATES

Foreign Relations of the United States, 1977–1980 Volume IV National Security Policy Editor James Graham Wilson General Editor Kathleen B. Rasmussen United States Government Publishing Office Washington 2024

DEPARTMENT OF STATE Office of the Historian Foreign Service Institute For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office

III About the Series The Foreign Relations of the United States series presents the official documentary historical record of major foreign policy decisions and significant diplomatic activity of the U.S. Government. The Historian of the Department of State is charged with the responsibility for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series. The staff of the Office of the Historian, Foreign Service Institute, under the direction of the ­General Editor of the Foreign Relations series, plans, researches, compiles, and edits the volumes in the series. Secretary of State Frank B. ­Kellogg first promulgated official regulations codifying specific standards for the selection and editing of documents for the series on March 26, 1925. These regulations, with minor modifications, guided the series through 1991. Public Law 102–138, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, established a new statutory charter for the preparation of the series which was signed by President George H.W. Bush on October 28, 1991.

IV About the Series engaged in foreign policy formulation, execution, or support cooperate with the Department of State historians by providing full and complete access to records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions and by providing copies of selected records. Most of the sources consulted in the preparation of this volume have been declassified and are available for review at the National Archives and Records Administration. The editors of the Foreign Relations series have complete access to all the retired records and papers of the Department of State: the central files of the Department; the special decentralized files (“lot files”) of the Department at the bureau, office, and division levels; the files of the Department’s Executive Secretariat, which contain the records of international conferences and high-­level official visits, correspondence with foreign leaders by the President and Secretary of State, and the memoranda of conversations between the President and the Secretary of State and foreign officials; and the files of overseas diplomatic posts. All of the Department’s central files for 1977–1979 are available in electronic or microfilm formats at the National Archives and Records Administration (Archives II) in College Park, Maryland and may be accessed using the Access to Archival Databases (AAD) tool. The Department’s central files for 1980–1981 will eventually be transferred to the National Archives. Research for Foreign Relations volumes is undertaken through special access to restricted documents at the Jimmy Carter Presidential Library and other agencies. While all the material printed in this volume has been declassified, some of it is extracted from still-­classified documents. The staff of the Carter Library is processing and declassifying many of the documents used in this volume, but they may not be available in their entirety at the time of publication. Presidential papers maintained and preserved at the Carter Library include some of the most significant foreign-­affairs related documentation from White House offices, the Department of State, and other federal agencies including the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Some of the research for volumes in this subseries was done in Carter Library record collections scanned for the Remote Archive Capture (RAC) project. This project, which is administered by the National Archives and Records Administration’s Office of Presidential Libraries, was designed to coordinate the declassification of still-­classified records held in various Presidential libraries. As a result of the way in which records were scanned for the RAC, the editors of the Foreign Relations series were not always able to determine whether attachments to a given document were in fact attached to the paper copy of the document in the Carter Library file. In such cases, some editors of the Foreign Relations series have indicated this ambiguity by stating that the attachments were “Not found attached.”

About the Series V Editorial Methodology This documents are presented chronologically according to time in Washington, DC. Memoranda of conversation are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted. Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Relations series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the General Editor and the Chief of the Declassification and Publishing Division. The original document is reproduced as exactly as possible, including marginalia or other notations, which are described in the footnotes. Texts are transcribed and printed according to accepted conventions for the publication of historical documents within the limitations of modern typography. A heading has been supplied by the editors for each document included in the volume. Spelling, capitalization, and punctuation are retained as found in the original text, except that obvious typographical errors are silently corrected. Other mistakes and omissions in the documents are corrected by bracketed insertions: a correction is set in italic type; an addition in roman type. Words or phrases underlined in the original document are printed in italics. Abbreviations and contractions are preserved as found in the original text, and a list of abbreviations and terms is included in the front matter of each volume. In telegrams, the telegram number (including special designators such as Secto) is printed at the start of the text of the telegram. Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate omitted text that deals with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classified after declassification review (in italic type). The amount and, where possible, the nature of the material not declassified has been noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of text that were omitted. Entire documents withheld after declassification review have been accounted for and are listed in their chronological place with headings, source notes, and the number of pages not declassified. All brackets that appear in the original document are so identified in the footnotes. All ellipses are in the original documents. The first footnote to each document indicates the sources of the document and its original classification, distribution, and drafting information. This note also provides the background of important documents and policies and indicates whether the President or his major policy advisers read the document. Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent material not printed in the volume, indicate the location of additional documentary sources, provide references to important related documents printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide summaries of and citations to public statements that supplement and

VI About the Series elucidate the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs and other firsthand accounts has been used when appropriate to supplement or explicate the official record. The numbers in the index refer to document numbers rather than to page numbers. Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation, established under the Foreign Relations statute, monitors the overall compilation and editorial process of the series and advises on all aspects of the preparation of the series and declassification of records. The Advisory Committee does not necessarily review the contents of individual volumes in the series, but it makes recommendations on issues that come to its attention and reviews volumes as it deems necessary to fulfill its advisory and statutory obligations. Declassification Review The Office of Information Programs and Services, Bureau of Administration, conducted the declassification review for the Department of State of the documents published in this volume. The review was conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive Order 13526 on Classified National Security Information and applicable laws. The principle guiding declassification review is to release all information, subject only to the current requirements of national security as embodied in law and regulation. Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State, other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government, and the appropriate foreign governments regarding specific documents of those governments. The declassification review of this volume, which began in 2015 and was completed in 2024, resulted in the decision to withhold 7 documents in full, excise a paragraph or more in 32 documents, and make minor excisions of less than a paragraph in 68 documents. The Office of the Historian is confident, on the basis of the research conducted in preparing this volume and as a result of the declassification review process described above, that the documentation and editorial notes presented here provide a thorough, accurate, and reliable— given the limitations of space— record of the Carter administration’s national security policy. Kathleen B. Rasmussen, Ph.D. General Editor Adam M. Howard, Ph.D. The Historian Foreign Service Institute March 2024

VII Preface Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series This volume is part of a subseries of volumes of the Foreign Relations series that documents the most important issues in the foreign policy of the President Jimmy Carter administration. Given the interconnectedness of U.S. national security policy and the Cold War, it should be considered alongside Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI, Soviet Union; Volume XXVI, Arms Control and Nonproliferation;

VIII Preface Carter looked toward B–52 bombers equipped with air-­launched cruise missiles (ALCMs) and the Advanced Technology Bomber (ATB, later the “B–2”) to fill the gap. Here, documentation on budget decisions reflects the Carter administration’s efforts to cut spending without damaging national security. While in pursuit of the SALT II Treaty, which he and Soviet Premier Leonid Brezhnev signed on June 18, 1979, President Carter exhorted his team to come up with a survivable basing mode for the MX missile. On September 7, 1979, flanked by Secretary of Defense Harold Brown, Carter announced a Multiple Protective Structure (MPS) system for basing 200 MX missiles, which would be transported among 23 shelters via specially-­constructed roadways in western states of the United States at a projected cost of $33 billion. Accompanying the planned Trident II submarine-­launched ballistic missile, the refitting of B–52s to carry ALCMs, and the pursuit of stealth technologies, MX was intended to replace the Minuteman III as the land-­based leg of the U.S. nuclear triad. The Carter administration’s attempt to modernize U.S. strategic forces is in documents such as papers prepared for meetings of the National Security Council, the minutes of these meetings, and records of the Presidential decisions that resulted from them. Dissatisfied with the implementation of National Security Decision Memorandum 242, “Policy for Planning the Employment of Nuclear Weapons,” which his predecessor Gerald Ford signed on January 17,

Preface IX November 4, 1980, his administration developed an updated national security strategy document. On January 15, 1981, Carter approved PD–62, “Modifications in U.S. National Strategy.” Extensive documentation on the evolution of all three PDs is included in this volume. The central figure in the development of U.S. national security policy during the Carter administration was the President himself. As the directives, memoranda, meeting minutes, and marginalia in this volume attest, Carter took a particularly keen interest in the details of nuclear matters and national security policy more broadly. Other key figures in this volume include Brzezinski, Harold Brown, and Odom, as well as members of the National Security Council Staff such as Fritz Ermarth, Roger Molander, Victor Utgoff, and Jasper Welch. Principals and deputies expressed themselves forcefully in meetings of the Policy Review Committee and Special Coordination Committee (recorded here in minutes and summaries of conclusion) and in internal memoranda and interagency correspondence that constitute the backbone of this volume. While Secretary of State Cyrus Vance played a lead role in the negotiation of SALT II, he was much less involved in the formulation of overall national security policy. The same can be said of Edmund Muskie, who, having succeeded Vance in May 1980 following the failed Iran hostage rescue attempt, learned of PD–59 by reading newspaper coverage of it. As a result of Vance and Muskie’s relative lack of influence on matters of national security, this volume contains fewer Department of State documents—­such as memoranda, position papers, and telegrams to and from posts—­than other volumes in the Carter administration subseries. Acknowledgements The editor wishes to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the Jimmy Carter Library, especially Ceri McCarron, Brittany Parris, and James Yancey. Thanks are also due to Nancy Smith, who served as the Director of the Presidential Materials Staff at the National Archives and Records Administration during the research of this volume, Sandy Meagher, who provided access to Department of Defense materials, and to the Central Intelligence Agency for arranging access to the Carter Library materials scanned for the Remote Archive Capture project. The Historical Staff of the Central Intelligence Agency were helpful in arranging full access to the files of the Central Intelligence Agency. The editor would like to thank Jeffery Flannery and Ernest Emrich of the Library of Congress for arranging access to the Harold Brown papers. The Office of the Historian wishes to thank the interagency declassification personnel who conducted the review of this volume, including those at the Department of State, Office of Information Programs and Services, the FRUS Coordination Staff at the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, Office of Prepublication and

X Preface Security Review, the OSD, Records and Declassification Division at the Department of Defense, the Department of Energy, the Department of Homeland Security, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Department of Justice, the National Archives and Records Administration, and particularly, the Directorate of Records and Access Management at the National Security Council. Additionally, the editor wishes to thank the Interagency Security Classification Appeals Panel (ISCAP) for adjudicating the appeal of documents selected for inclusion in this volume. Keri E. Lewis provided invaluable assistance to the Office of the Historian in her capacity as FRUS Coordinator at the Office of Information Programs and Services (IPS), and in serving as the Department of State ISCAP liaison. The editor also thanks the staff at the National Archives and Records Administration facility in College Park, Maryland. Peter Kraemer collected and made an initial selection of the documentation to be included in this volume. James Graham Wilson conducted additional research and edited the volume under the supervision of Kathleen B. Rasmussen, then Chief of the Global Issues and General Division. The volume was reviewed by Kathleen B. Rasmussen and then Historian of the Department of State Stephen Randolph. Chris Tudda coordinated the declassification review under the supervision of Carl Ashley, Chief of the Declassification Division. Heather McDaniel and Stephanie Eckroth did the copy and technical editing under the supervision of Mandy A. Chalou, Chief of the Editing and Publishing Division. James Graham Wilson Historian

XI Contents About the Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . III VII XIII Abbreviations and Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XV XXI National Security Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

XIII Sources Sources for Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV The Carter Library is the best source of high-­level decision making documentation for U.S. national security policy from 1977 to 1980. A number of collections within the National Security Affairs files are particularly relevant in this regard. Within the Brzezinski Material, the Subject File contains documentation on strategic modernization, nuclear doctrine, arms control, missile warnings incidents, and the defense budget. A separate collection, Brzezinski Donated Material, contains additional documentation on nuclear doctrine and overall national security strategy. Within National Security Affairs, Staff Material are key documents pertaining to defense and security produced by Fritz Ermarth, Samuel Huntington, William Odom, Victor Utgoff, and Jasper Welch in response to Presidential Review Memorandum 10, “Comprehensive Net Assessment and Military Force Posture Review,” which President Carter signed on February 18, 1977. The National Security Council Institutional Files, which are also at the Carter Library, contain the minutes and preparatory staff work for meetings in advance of Presidential Directive 18, “U.S. National Strategy,” which President Carter signed

XIV Sources General Odom File Subject File National Security Affairs, Staff Material Defense/Security Deputy File Europe, USSR, and East/West Office File National Security Council Institutional Files Papers of Walter F. Mondale President’s Files Plains File Presidential Handwriting File Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary Zbigniew Brzezinski Donated Material Ronald Reagan Presidential Library, Simi Valley, California National Security Council, Intelligence Directorate Files Central Intelligence Agency, Langley, Virginia Electronic Reading Room History Staff Files Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. Harold Brown Papers Published Sources Keefer, Edward. Harold Brown: Offsetting the Soviet Military Challenge, 1977–1981, ­Washington: Government Printing Office, 2017. United States. Department of State. Department of State Bulletin, 1977–1980. United States. National Archives and Records Administration. Public Papers of the

XV Abbreviations and Terms AAH, Advanced Attack Helicopter AAW, anti-­air warfare ABM, anti-­ballistic missile ABNCP, Airborne Command Post ACDA, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency ADM, Admiral ADP, automatic data processing AF, Air Force AIMS, Alternative Integrated Military Strategies AFSAB, Air Force Scientific Advisory Board ALCM, air-­launched cruise missile AMRAAM, Advanced Medium Range Air-­to-Air Missile ANMCC, Alternate National Military Command Center APU, Auxiliary Power Unit ASAT, anti-­satellite weapon ASD, Assistant Secretary of Defense ASEAN, Association of Southeast Asian Nations ASW, anti-­submarine warfare AT&T, American Telephone and Telegraph, Inc. AWACS, Airborne Warning and Control System B, billion BBV, Brown-Brzezinski-Vance lunch meeting (see also VBB) BMD, Ballistic Missile Defense BMEW, ballistic missile early warning BRICKBAT–DX, denoting highest level of priority for production and acquisition for a weapons system (DOD) C3, Command, Control, and Communications C3I, Command, Control, Communications, and Intelligence CAT, Convention Against Torture CD, civil defense CEP, Circular Error Probability CFV, Cavalry Fighting Vehicle CG, Consolidated Guidance CGN, guided missile carrier, nuclear propulsion CI, Counterintelligence CIA, Central Intelligence Agency CIEP, Council on International Economic Policy CJCS, Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff CNA, Comprehensive Net Assessment CINC, Commander in Chief CINCEUR, Commander in Chief, European Command CINCPAC, Commander in Chief, Pacific Command CINCPACFLT, Commander in Chief, Pacific Fleet CINCSAC, Commander in Chief, Strategic Air Command CM, cruise missiles CMC, cruise missile carrier COB, close of business

XVI Abbreviations and Terms COG, continuity of government COMINT, communications intelligence COMSEC, communications security CONUS, continental United States CPX, Command Post Exercise CRAF, Civil Reserve Air Fleet CSGN, strike cruiser, nuclear propulsion (USN) CTB, Comprehensive Test Ban CTBT, Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty CV, aircraft carrier (USN) CVN, aircraft carrier, nuclear propulsion (USN) D, Democrat DARPA, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency DC, District of Columbia DCI, Director of Central Intelligence DCPA, Defense Civil Preparedness Agency DEPSECDEF, Deputy Secretary of Defense DDCI, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence DDG, guided missile destroyer (USN) DDI, Deputy Director of Intelligence DDO, Deputy Director of Operations, Central Intelligence Agency DEFCON, Defense Readiness Condition DIA, Defense Intelligence Agency DNA, Defense Nuclear Agency DOC, Department of Commerce DOD, Department of Defense DOE, Department of Energy DOJ, Department of Justice DOS, Department of State DP&E, Defense Planning & Evaluation (DOD) DR&E, Defense Research & Engineering (DOD) DSARC, Defense Systems Acquisition Review Council DSB, Defense Science Board DSP, Defense Support Program EA, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State EAM, Emergency Action Message ECM, electronic countermeasures ELINT, electronic intelligence ELF, extremely low frequency EMP, electro-­magnetic pulse EMT, equivalent megatonnage ERW, Enhanced Radiation Weapon; “neutron bomb” ESVN, Executive Secure Voice Network EUCOM, United States European Command EUR, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State EW/GCI, Early Warning/Ground-Controlled Intercept FBI, Federal Bureau of Investigation FCC, Federal Communications Commission FE, Far East FEMA, Federal Emergency Management Agency FFG, guided missile frigate (USN)

Abbreviations and Terms XVII FOC, full operational capability FPA, Federal Preparedness Agency FRG, Federal Republic of Germany FY, fiscal year GCI, Ground Control Intercept GLCM, ground launched cruise missile GNP, gross national product GPS, global positioning system GSA, General Services Administration HEW, Department of Health, Education, and Welfare HQ, headquarters HTC, hard target capability HTK, hard target kill IBM, International Business Machines, Inc. IC, intelligence community ICA, International Communications Agency ICBM, intercontinental ballistic missile IFV, infantry fighting vehicle IIM, Interagency Intelligence Memorandum IOC, initial operational capacity IMET, International Military Education and Training INR, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State IR, infrared IRBM, intermediate range ballistic missile ISA, Bureau of International Security Affairs, Department of Defense ITAR, International Traffic in Arms Regulation JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff JCSM, Joint Chiefs of Staff Memorandum JSBS, Joint Strategic Bomber Study JSTPS, Joint Strategic Planning Staff JTF, Joint Task Force KGB, Komityet Gosudarstvennoy Bezopasnosty (Soviet Committee for State Security) Kt, kiloton LNO, limited nuclear [employment] option(s) LOC, lines of communication LTDP, Long Term Defense Plan LUA, launch under attack LVT, landing vehicle, tracked M, million; mile MAO, major attack option MAP, Military Assistance Program; multiple aim point (MX missile) MAPS, Multiple Aim Point System MBB, Muskie-Brown-Brzezinski lunch meeting MBFR, Mutual and Balanced Force Reduction MCI, Microwave Communications, Inc. MD, Maryland

XVIII Abbreviations and Terms ME/PG, Middle East/Persian Gulf MEECN, Minimum Essential Emergency Communications Network MILCON, military construction MIRV, multiple independently targeted reentry vehicle MIT, Massachusetts Institute of Technology MM, Minuteman (missile) MOLINK, Moscow Link (Moscow-Washington Direct Communication Link or Hot Line) MPS, multiple protective shelters MRA&L, Manpower, Reserve Affairs, and Logistics MRV, multiple reentry vehicle MSC, Military Sealift Command Mt, megaton MTMC, Military Traffic Management Command MVD, Ministry of Internal Affairs (USSR) M–X, an experimental MIRVed ICBM under development by the United States n, nautical (miles) NATO, North Atlantic Treaty Organization NBS, National Bureau of Standards NCA, National Command Authority NCS, National Communications System, Office of the Secretary of Defense NEA, Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs, Department of State NEACP, National Emergency Airborne Command Post NFIB, National Foreign Intelligence Board NIE, National Intelligence Estimate NM, nautical mile(s) NMCC, National Military Command Center NMCS, National Military Command System Nocontract, No distribution to contractors Noforn, No foreign distribution NORAD, North American Air Defense Command NORTHAG, Northern Army Group (NATO) NSA, National Security Agency NSC, National Security Council NSDM, National Security Decision Memorandum NSSM, National Security Study Memorandum NSTAP, National Strategic Targeting and Attack Policy NTM, national technical means NUWEP, policy guidance for the employment of nuclear weapons OAPEC, Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries OASD, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense OBE, overtaken by events ODDR&E, Office of the Director, Defense Research & Engineering, Department of Defense OECD, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development OMB, Office of Management and Budget OPEC, Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries OPIC, Overseas Private Investment Corporation OSD, Office of the Secretary of Defense OSD/NA, Office of Net Assessment, Office of the Secretary of Defense OSTP, Office of Science and Technology Policy OTP, Office of Telecommunications Policy

Abbreviations and Terms XIX PA&E, Program Analysis & Evaluation Department of Defense PD, Presidential Directive PFIAB, President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board PG, Persian Gulf PG/IO, Persian Gulf/Indian Ocean PGMs, precision-­guided munitions PIA, political-­ideological action PM, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs, Department of State POL, petroleum oil lubricant POM, prepositioned materiel POMCUS, prepositioned materiel configured to unit sets PRC, Policy Review Committee; People’s Republic of China PRM, Presidential Review Memorandum psi, pounds per square inch PVO, Protivo Vozdushnaya Oborona (Soviet Air Defense Forces) QRHTC, quick reaction hard target capability R, Republican R&D, research and development RADM, Rear Admiral RDF, Rapid Deployment Force RDT&E, research, development, test, and evaluation RISOP, Red Integrated Strategic Offensive Plan RNO, regional nuclear [employment] option(s) ROK, Republic of Korea RV, reentry vehicle S, Secret SAC, Strategic Air Command SACEUR, Supreme Allied Commander, Europe SAL, Strategic Arms Limitation SALT, Strategic Arms Limitation Talks SAM, surface-­to-­air missile SAO, select attack option SCC, Special Coordination Committee SECDEF, Secretary of Defense SFRC, Senate Foreign Relations Committee SIOP, Single Integrated Operational Plan SLAC, Stanford Linear Accelerator Center SLBM, submarine-­launched ballistic missile SLCM, submarine-­launched cruise missile SLEP, Service Life Extensive Program SLOC, Sea Lines of Communication SNDV, strategic nuclear delivery vehicle SNI, Soviet Naval Infantry SNM, special nuclear materials SOSUS, Sound Surveillance System S/P, Policy Planning Staff, Department of State SRAM, short range attack missile SRF, Strategic Reserve Force; Secure Reserve Force; Strategic Rocket Forces (USSR) SRG, Senior Review Group SSBN, ballistic missile submarine, nuclear propulsion (USN) SSN, attack submarine, nuclear propulsion (USN)

XX Abbreviations and Terms STOL, short takeoff and landing aircraft SU, Soviet Union SUAWACS, Soviet Union Airborne Warning and Control System SURTASS, Surface Towed Array Surveillance System T–AGOS/TAGOS, ocean surveillance ship (USN) TACAIR, Tactical Air TACAMO, Take Charge and Move Out (survivable communication links) TALCM, Tomahawk air-­launched cruise missile T–ARC, submarine cable repair vessel (USN) TEL, transporter-­erector-­launcher TNF, theater nuclear forces TOA, total obligational authority TS, Top Secret U, Unclassified US, United States USAF, United States Air Force USCSB, United States Communications Security Board USG, United States Government USN, United States Navy USNATO, United States Mission to NATO USSR, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics VBB, Vance-Brown-Brzezinski lunch meeting (see also BBV) VIP, very important person VSTOL (V/STOL), Vertical/Short Takeoff and Landing WHEP, White House Emergency Procedures WP, Warsaw Pact WWMCCS, Worldwide Military Command and Control System Z, Zulu (Greenwich Mean Time)

XXI Persons Aaron, David L., Deputy Assistant to the Assistant to the President for National ­Security Affairs Allen, Lew, General, USAF; Vice Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force, from April 1978 to August 1978; Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force, from August 1978 Aspin, Les, Congressman (D-Wisconsin) Bartholomew, Reginald H., “Reg,” Deputy Director, Policy Planning Staff, Department of State, until January 1977; Deputy Director, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs, Department of State, from January until November 1977; member, National ­Security Council Staff for USSR/East Europe Affairs from November 1977 until April 1979; Director, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs, Department of State, from July 1, 1979 Bialer, Seweryn, Professor of Political Science, Columbia University Blechman, Barry, Assistant Director, Weapons Evaluation and Control Bureau, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency Bowie, Robert, Director, National Foreign Assessment Center, Central Intelligence Agency Brezhnev, Leonid, General Secretary, Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union Brown, George S., General, USA; Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff until 1978 Brown, Harold, Secretary of Defense Brzezinski, Zbigniew, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Bundy, McGeorge, President, Ford Foundation Callaghan, James, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from April 5, 1977, until

XXII Persons Eizenstat, Stuart E., Organizer, Issues Staff, Carter-Mondale campaign, from 1974 until 1976; Director of Policy Planning for the Transition, from November 1976 until ­January 1977; thereafter Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs and Policy and Executive Director of the Domestic Council Ellis, Richard H., General, USAF; Commander in Chief, Strategic Air Command, from August 1, 1977 Ermarth, Fritz, member, National Security Council Staff from 1978

Persons XXIII Murphy, Daniel, Admiral, USN; Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Policy Murray, Russell II, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Program Analysis and Evaluation Muskie, Edmund S., Senator (D-Maine) until May 1980; Secretary of State from

National Security Policy,

Enclosure

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense3 Washington, February 16, 1977 Department of Defense—FY 1978 Budget Revision Summary of Approved Issues Budget Authority ($ in Millions) STRATEGIC NUCLEAR FORCES B–1 Bomber—Slow down and re-­evaluate program. Reduce planned FY 1978 buy from 8 to 5 aircraft.

Appendix A

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council3 Washington, undated NATIONAL OBJECTIVES—Those fundamental aims, goals, or purposes of a nation—­as opposed to the means for seeking these ends—­toward which a policy is directed and efforts and resources of the nation are applied. Example: The continued freedom and security of our Western European allies. NATIONAL STRATEGY—The development and use of the political, economic, military, and psychological powers of a nation during peace and war, to secure national objectives. Example: Pursue a strong NATO alliance. Support economic growth and strength of individual members, through various economic agreements (investments, tariffs, credits, etc.) and through combined defense programs and U.S. military force commitments. MILITARY STRATEGY—A statement of the ways in which we intend to handle the various combinations of military contingencies that could arise in the pursuit of our national strategy. 3 Secret.

Tab A

Paper Prepared in the Ad Hoc Interagency Net Assessment Group9 Washington, March 28, 1977 PRM/NSC–10 COMPREHENSIVE NET ASSESSMENT SUMMARY OF WORK TO DATE 1. The Presidential Review Memorandum itself was prepared, circulated among the interested agencies, revised, and approved by the President on February 18th. Terms of Reference was drafted, circulated, revised, and approved by the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs on March 10. 9 No classification marking.

Tab B

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council10 Washington, undated PRM/NSC–10 COMPREHENSIVE NET ASSESSMENT ORGANIZATION I. NSC CENTRAL STAFF Samuel P. Huntington William Odom Richard Betts Catherine Kelleher II. NET ASSESSMENT GROUP Zbigniew Brzezinski, NSC, Chairman David Aaron, NSC Anthony Lake, State/SP Bowman Cutter, OMB Richard Lehman, IC Leslie Gelb, State/PM William Y. Smith, JCS Samuel P. Huntington, NSC Sayre Stevens, IC David McGiffert, OSD Paul Warnke, ACDA III. NET ASSESSMENT WORKING GROUP Samuel P. Huntington, NSC, Chairman Richard Anson, JCS Andrew Marshall, OSD Reginald Bartholomew, State/PM William Odom, NSC Robert Behr, ACDA Edward Sanders, OMB Richard Betts, NSC James M. Thompson, OSD Leslie Brown, State/PM Victor Utgoff, OSD Edward Jayne, NSC John Whitman, IC Jerome H. Kahan, State/SP IV. TASK FORCE CHAIRMEN AND ASSOCIATE CHAIRMEN Chairman Associate Chairman Europe: Robert Hunter, NSC Warren Zimmerman, State/EUR Middle East: Michael Sterner, State/NEA William Quandt, NSC 10 No classification marking.

Table I

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council3 Washington, undated ALTERNATIVE STRATEGIC BOMBER MODERNIZATION PROGRAMS (Yearly Production/Conversion)4 1. Continue current B–1 plan; Maximum rate 4/month B–1’s B–52’s with Cruise Missiles Cruise Missile Carrier 2. Slow B–1 production buildup; Maximum rate 2/month B–1’s B–52’s with Cruise Missiles Cruise Missile Carrier 3A. Two year delay in further B–1 ­production; Initiate R&D on cruise missile carrier (CMC). Assumes B–1 terminates in 1980 and production commences on CMC B–1’s B–52’s with Cruise Missiles Cruise Missile Carrier 3 Top Secret. 4 Note that the forces procured or converted in any given year appear on-­line perhaps 18 months later. [Footnote is in the original.]

Table II

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council5 Washington, undated STRATEGIC BOMBER INVESTMENT OPTIONS ($ BILLIONS) 1979 1981 5 Years

Plot 1

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council Washington, undated [No classification marking. 1 page not declassified.]

Plot 2

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council Washington, undated [No classification marking. 1 page not declassified.]

Plot 3

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council Washington, undated [No classification marking. 1 page not declassified.] Editorial Note On June 30, 1977, President Jimmy Carter held a news conference which he began with a prepared statement: “During the last few months, I’ve done my best to assess all the factors involving production of the B–1 bomber. My decision is that we should not continue with deployment of the B–1, and I am directing that we discontinue plans for production of this weapons system.” Carter noted that the United States would continue the existing B–1 research and development program to learn more about the potential of the bomber and its systems, such as electronic countermeasures techniques, as well as assess the implications of the ongoing strategic arms limitations negotiations for future nuclear weapons delivering system investments. He continued: “In the meantime, we should begin deployment of cruise missiles using

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council3 Washington, undated SCC AGENDA PAPER I. Findings The studies authorized by PRM/NSC–10 have found that: —A rough overall equivalence with some asymmetries exists in military capabilities between the US and the Soviet Union. —The US remains significantly ahead of the USSR in most non-­ military aspects of national power. —The trends in many areas have been against the US, but significant adverse trends in strategic forces and in conventional forces in Europe can be halted in the early 1980’s if appropriate programs are carried out. —The US can capitalize on its advantages in economic power, diplomatic resources, technology, political-­ideological action, and force projection capabilities, in countering adverse Soviet influence. II. Guidelines In view of these findings, in the current era of US-Soviet relations US strategy will be: 1. To maintain an overall balance of military power between the US and its allies and the Soviet Union and its allies at least as favorable as that which now exists, taking into account the increasing relevance of conventional forces under conditions of essential strategic nuclear equivalence. 2. To prevent or counter Soviet use of military force to gain influence over other societies except where overriding US interests dictate otherwise.

Attachment

Final Report of the Ad Hoc Group on Military Force Posture2 Washington, July 7, 1977 [Omitted here are the title page and table of contents.] EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Purpose. The purpose of the PRM–10 Force Postures Study is to elicit policy guidance from the President on key issues pertaining to national military strategy. The scope of this study is intentionally broad. It partakes of most, but exhausts none, of the numerous topics and factors which enter into the determination of national military strategy. It is designed to provide a solid basis for further detailed work on defense force structure and program issues, using either the interagency process or the normal PPBS decision process, as appropriate. 2 Secret.

Tab 1

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense3 Washington, July 20, 1977 POINT PAPER ON CONTINUATION OF BOTH ALCM AND TOMAHAWK PROGRAMS The principal considerations are: 1. Risk: The risk represented by the ALCM program is different from that of the TALCM (TOMAHAWK Air-Launched Cruise Missile) program. The ALCM is less mature in its development and test program, having had only six flight tests of which four were successful, although all tests have been in conjunction with a B–52 bomber. The TOMAHAWK, on the other hand, has had 22 flight tests, 18 of which have been successful; however, it is untested and unevaluated in the context of the B–52 operational weapon system. The cruise missile will now be crucial to maintaining the bomber leg of the TRIAD. I am therefore convinced that it is appropriate to minimize the risk by maintaining both of these programs in parallel until either or, preferably, both have completed comprehensive tests in the B–52 environment. Furthermore, cancellation now (or soon) of a cruise missile program could raise questions about the B–1 decision, and about our determination to pose a severe air-­breathing threat to the Soviets into the 1990s. In the long run it may indeed prove to be economical to pick only one for the inventory, though depending on the number of different applications (ALCM, GLCM, SLCM—­nuclear and/or antiship), several different designs may be appropriate for the inventory. 2. Competition: Continuing both ALCM and TOMAHAWK in RDT&E will create a healthy competition between the two missile configurations as strategic air-­launched cruise missiles. We expect, as a result, both programs will achieve better performance and lower cost than if there were only one program. At about $1M per missile in recurring costs (for a buy of 3000 to

Tab 2

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council4 Washington, undated ISSUE: Whether to Continue Two ALCM Development Programs Pro Arguments (From Harold Brown’s Point Paper) Con Arguments (From NSC Staff) 1. Risk —Neither missile has been adequately tested in the context of the B–52 operational weapon system. ALCM–B has been tested from a B–52, but there have been only six tests (four successful), and these were of the shorter range ALCM–A. The TALCM has not been tested or evaluated for deployment on the B–52, although it has been tested 22 times (18 successful) from other platforms. —The Tomahawk cruise missile has been fully tested, including tests from aircraft. Since both the guidance and propulsion systems (the two critical development items) are common to both Tomahawk and ALCM–B, we can be fully confident about the basic performance of either missile. While there are some changes in transitioning to the B–52, these changes are well understood from an engineering standpoint (the TALCM proponents have been studying them for several years) and would not bear on the choice between TALCM and ALCM–B. —Cancellation of one of the ALCM programs at this time could raise questions about the B–1 decision and our commitment to maintaining an “air-­breathing” threat to the Soviets into the 1990’s. —This argument is very unpersuasive. In fact, just the opposite might be the case—­choice of a single ALCM program and direction of all development funds to this program could serve to emphasize our commitment to the ALCM program. 4 Secret.

Tab 4

Memorandum From President Carter to Secretary of Defense Brown5 Washington, August 5, 1977 SUBJECT Choosing a Single ALCM Development Program I have reviewed the point paper that you sent me on the issue of whether to continue two ALCM development programs. Would you provide me as soon as possible a more detailed discussion of the program you would pursue for both versions (TALCM and ALCM–B), the development and testing schedules, tentative deployment plans, and cost implications. Additionally, would you provide your recommendation as to how to proceed should I decide to consolidate the two programs.6 Jimmy Carter 5 Secret. 6 Carter wrote at the bottom of the memorandum: “P.S. At what stage, assuming tests go well, could you certify that the 1978 Authorization Act requirements have been met? J.”

Tab A

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter4 Washington, August 19, 1977 SUBJECT Choosing a Single ALCM Development Program Your memorandum of August 5, 1977, raised questions about our plans for parallel development of the cruise missiles for the B–52. As I indicated in our conversation last week, I do not believe that we are ready to select with confidence one design (and contractor) for the air-­ launched cruise missile mission. Nor could we defend adequately a selection of either missile and contractor at this stage. The ALCM missile has yet to be modified to its long range (ALCM–B) version. The modification is relatively straightforward, (basically “stretching” it by adding two sections). But a successful flight test of the modified missile is indicated before this missile could appropriately be selected. The TOMAHAWK (TALCM) missile has had sufficient flight tests to tell us about its flight characteristics, but has never been mated to or launched from the B–52. Again, we believe the mating is a straightforward engineering task. But until it is demonstrated, we cannot convincingly argue that TALCM is the preferred missile. To arrive at the point where we could select either missile with the required confidence will take a minimum of 6 to 9 months of testing to conduct the necessary flight tests and evaluation of each. Based on such preliminary test results, a selection could be arrived at by a year from now, in mid-1978. However, with this much additional effort required for parallel programs, I believe it will probably make good management sense to carry the programs in parallel all the way through as a carefully conducted competitive flyoff, with selection by October 1979. The savings that could be achieved by not carrying the parallel program through a flyoff is about $200M to $300M, depending on how soon the parallel program is terminated, and which missile is selected. The benefits to be expected from maintaining the parallel program through the flyoff are as follows: (1) The competition can be fairly determined on an objective basis from the operational tests conducted by SAC crews on B–52s. (2) The technical characteristics of the successful missile will probably be superior because each contractor will be working hard to maximize his “score” on the indicated performance parameters, including 4 Secret.

Tab A

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter6 Washington, August 19, 1977 SUBJECT US Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy (U) (TS) Several months ago, you directed Zbigniew Brzezinski to ask me7 several questions concerning our current nuclear weapons employment policy (NSDM–242), and the appropriateness of retaining that policy. My response to your questions was initially forwarded to the White House on June 3.8 At that time, however, it was anticipated that PRM–10 would likely provide additional insight with respect to nuclear weapons employment questions. As a consequence, the report was held within the NSC awaiting completion of PRM–10. The report was returned to me on July 29 to permit whatever modifications necessary to accommodate my views on the results of PRM–10. (TS) I have reviewed my previously developed responses to your questions, and am enclosing the report, slightly altered to the above end, for your information and consideration. In addition to responding to your specific questions, the report provides additional background to help in understanding our existing policy and the complexity of 4 Orr Kelly, “If U.S. Comes Under Nuclear Assault,” U.S. News & World Report, ­September 5, 1977. 5 Brzezinski wrote below this paragraph: “I inserted 5 clips, marking items you might want to read, time-­permitting.” 6 Top Secret.

Tab B

Report Prepared in the Department of Defense11 Washington, August 12, 1977 [Omitted here are the title page and table of contents.] REPORT BY THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE ON CURRENT US NUCLEAR EMPLOYMENT POLICY (U) I. Introduction (TS) The following report responds to the President’s request for information and comments on the US nuclear employment policy established by NSDM–242. (C) It is appropriate to note that NSDM–242 provides policy for planning the employment of all available US strategic and theater nuclear weapons (except anti-­submarine and anti-­air defense weapons), and should be regarded as quite distinct from acquisition and deployment policies which appear in other documents and about which determinations are made separately. The operational employment plans (SIOP and other contingency plans) developed in support of NSDM–242 are capabilities plans designed to achieve NSDM–242 objectives to the extent practicable with currently available nuclear forces. (TS) The main body of the report (Sections II–V) focuses on our present nuclear war doctrine, and the underlying observations, assumptions and rationale that led to adoption of the policy represented by NSDM–242, and discusses the advisability of retaining NSDM–242. Discussions of the more specific questions relative to: (1) procedures for conducting nuclear war, (2) command and control survivability, and (3) objectives and assumptions of our current limited nuclear options are contained in appropriate annexes to the basic report. (C) The report draws on the current views and recommendations of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. In its explanation of the current policy stated in NSDM–242, the report also draws heavily on the record of the NSSM– 169 interagency study group on nuclear weapons employment policy12 11 Top Secret. 12 For the Summary Report of the Inter-Agency Working Group on NSSM 169, June

Tab C

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense16 Washington, undated PROCEDURES FOR CONDUCTING NUCLEAR WAR (TS) Limited Nuclear Conflict. The primary command center for conduct of a limited nuclear conflict would be the National Military Command Center (NMCC). The Secretary of Defense and Joint Chiefs of Staff, operating from the NMCC, would monitor the conflict through inputs from the commanders of unified and specified commands (CINCs) and the National Military Intelligence Center (NMIC) and 14 In the right margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “ok JC.” 15 In the right margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “ok—Zbig do this.” 16 Top Secret.

Tab D

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense17 Washington, undated SURVIVABILITY OF US COMMAND AND CONTROL SYSTEMS (TS) Under either attack with warning or surprise conditions, analytical studies show that US C3 systems could suffer severe damage from a major nuclear exchange or a limited exchange aimed at 17 Top Secret.

Tab E

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense20 Washington, undated LIMITED NUCLEAR EMPLOYMENT OPTIONS (LNO/RNO) OBJECTIVES AND ASSUMPTIONS (U) The basic objective of non-SIOP limited nuclear employment options (LNOs and RNOs) is to strengthen deterrence across a broader range of possible conflicts by providing a series of preplanned, measured and discrete nuclear response options more applicable to situations where the deterrent threat of the large-­scale options in the SIOP would be inappropriate or incredible. In the event that deterrence fails, the principal objective of non-SIOP options is to secure early war termination on terms acceptable to the US and its allies at the lowest level of conflict feasible, thereby limiting the level of overall damage. In accordance with this objective, LNOs and RNOs have been developed for a number of contingencies. These options are available for consideration by the NCA during a crisis and for use in conjunction with political and other military measures such as employment of conventional forces. Specific objectives of current LNOs and RNOs are contained in the Appendix. (U) The basic political assumption underlying the development of non-SIOP nuclear options is that escalation control can be achieved. The fundamental assumption of escalation control is that there are limits on the risks or losses the enemy is willing to accept. Militarily, a key assumption is that the controlled, restrained use of nuclear force provides the capability to demonstrate resolve, to reverse locally a 18 Carter underlined “aimed at command and control components” and wrote next to it: “certain target.”

Appendix to Tab E21 Washington, undated LIMITED NUCLEAR OPTIONS (LNOs) AND REGIONAL NUCLEAR OPTIONS (RNOs) OBJECTIVES (U) EUROPEAN COMMAND [3 paragraphs (18 lines) not declassified] ATLANTIC COMMAND [2 paragraphs (9 lines) not declassified] PACIFIC COMMAND [1 paragraph (8 lines) not declassified] STRATEGIC AIR COMMAND [1 paragraph (8 lines) not declassified]

Tab F

Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Brown) to Secretary of Defense Brown22 Washington, May 9, 1977 SUBJECT Nuclear Weapons Employment Doctrine (U) 1. (TS) The Joint Chiefs of Staff are pleased to provide their views on the subjects raised in the memorandum by the Assistant to the 21 Top Secret. 22 Top Secret.

Attachment

Letter From Eugene Rostow of the Committee on the Present Danger to President Carter4 Washington, September 19, 1977 Dear Mr. President, The Executive Committee of the Committee on the Present Danger appreciated our meeting last Friday, September 16, with Samuel Huntington, of your National Security Council staff. Pursuant to your request at our meeting on August 4,5 he came to explain the several steps which led to your assessment of Soviet policy, and your decisions

Attachment

Executive Summary of a Report Prepared by the Vulnerability Panel of the Office of Science and Technology Policy2 Washington, undated I. The proposed M–X weapons system includes a missile which is larger, more accurate and carries more warheads than Minuteman III, and a mobile basing system to make the missile more survivable. The proposed M–X funding plan for FY 79 allocates about $200 M to missile development. This can be viewed as a commitment to the 2 Secret.

Tab A

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council4 Washington, undated Level of Defense Spending Issue: What overall level of defense spending should your FY 79 budget call for?

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense3 Washington, undated US AND SOVIET LASER WEAPONS CAPABILITIES (S) The potential of laser weapons is embodied in three fundamental characteristics: delivery of energy at the speed of light, a ­potentially large magazine, and a wide field of fire within which the laser can switch rapidly from target to target. The US High Energy Laser (HEL) program is intended to develop the technology base for laser devices, and to demonstrate the feasibility and potential of the HEL as a weapon. We plan to assess, by the early 1980s, the viability of lasers in comparison to other weapons. Principal applications defined today include defense of aircraft, ships and ground targets against aircraft and tactical missiles. A decision to develop prototype weapons for these applications would produce laser weapons by the late 1980s. We are also examining concepts for space-­based laser ASAT devices. The feasibility of such devices could be demonstrated by the late 1980s. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski

Table 1

Table Prepared in the Department of Defense4 Washington, undated U.S. AND SOVIET LASER WEAPONS CAPABILITIES IN ANTI-SATELLITE MISSIONS POTENTIAL5 U.S. CAPABILITY ESTIMATED SOVIET CAPABILITY Time Frame Laser Basing Mode JAM SENSORS (film, detector arrays) KILL SENSORS (film, detector arrays) KILL STRUCTURE OF SATELLITES JAM SENSORS (film, detector arrays) KILL SENSORS (film, detector arrays) KILL STRUCTURE OF SATELLITES Now (within one year) Ground To geosynchronous altitudes. Low-­altitude (800 km) (Photo recon)6 None To geosynchronous altitudes. (Photo & launch warning) Low-­altitude recon)7 Uncertain—­ possible subsystem damage or degradation at low-­altitude8 Aircraft To geosynchronous altitudes. Low-­altitude (500 km) (Photo recon) None None None None Space None None None None None None 4 Top Secret. 5 Implementation of these capabilities is not included in current US programs. [Footnote is in the original.] 6 Reaction time limited. [Footnote is in the original.] 7 Reaction time limited. [Footnote is in the original.] 8 Reaction time limited. [Footnote is in the original.]

Table 2

Table Prepared in the Department of Defense12 Washington, undated (Number of weapons for a “meaningful effect”) U.S. AND SOVIET CAPABILITIES LASER WEAPONS—OTHER THAN ASAT POTENTIAL13 U.S. CAPABILITY ESTIMATED SOVIET CAPABILITY Mission Now Early 1990s Now Early 1990s Point defense—Ship (enough to equip 6 aircraft carriers) None—­technology and lethality demonstrations underway. Sensor kill devices widely deployed—­ initial capability for other devices. None14 Ship defense system against anti-­ship missiles, cruise missiles. Point defense—Ground target (approx. 30) None—­technology and lethality demonstrations underway. Sensor kill devices widely deployed—­ initial capability for other devices. None15 Short range (3–8 km) air defense and mobile lasers against personnel & light armored vehicles. 12 Top Secret. 13 Implementation of these capabilities depends upon assessments relative to competing weapons. Assumed no fiscal constraints but conservative development approach. [Footnote is in the original.] 14 Believed prototype projects underway. [Footnote is in the original.] 15 Believed prototype projects underway. [Footnote is in the original.]

Tab A

Memorandum From the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering (Perry) to Secretary of Defense Brown and the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Duncan)4 Washington, March 15, 1978 SUBJECT Strategic Deterrence This is a brief status report on an ongoing analysis we are conducting on alternative ways of maintaining our strategic deterrence in the face of the growing Soviet counterforce capability. The data available to date on the new guidance systems being tested on the SS–18 and SS–19 suggest that these systems have as their objective significant improvements in accuracy, probably reducing CEP to the dangerous area of 200m to 250m. If they are successful in this area, and if they retrofit this system on deployed SS–18s and SS–19s, they could pose a serious counterforce threat as early as 1983. This is two or three years earlier than we would have estimated if the improved guidance capability had to wait for the next generation of missiles to be deployed. [8 lines not declassified] The latter assumption I think is unrealistic. Thus our land-­based ICBM force not only becomes susceptible to being taken out, it could almost be considered as an invitation to attack. 3 Reference is to Dr. Richard L. Garwin, physicist and IBM Fellow at the Thomas J. Watson Research Center in New York. Garwin was a member of the Council on Foreign Relations and an expert on nuclear weapons technology. He was also a member of the Office of Science and Technology Policy panel conducting the Vulnerability Study of the M–X missile. See the attachment to Document 43. 4 Top Secret; Eyes Only. Outside the System. A stamped notation reads: “SecDef has seen.”

Attachment 1

Chart Prepared in the Department of Defense4 Washington, undated FY 1979–FY 1983 SHIPBUILDING PLAN (Number of Ships/Millions of Then-Year Dollars) FY 79 FY 80 FY 81 FY 82 FY 83 Total Trident (Ballistic Missile Submarine)

Attachment 2

Point Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense5 Washington, undated RATIONALE FOR THE SIZE OF THE SHIPBUILDING PROGRAM • Two balances to consider: • Total Navy vs. rest of DoD • Even with planned Army add-­ons, Navy gets 26% more than Army over 5 years • Navy gets 16% more than Air Force over 5 years • Diverting even more from Army or Air Force to Navy would interfere with or prohibit our highest priority task in General Purpose Forces—­to improve the ability of NATO to withstand a blitzkrieg attack. • Thus, cannot divert more funding to Navy. • If we increase the defense budget above what is now contained in the fiscal guidance, expansion of the Navy budget will compete with expansion of other capabilities. Such options should be considered during the budget review later this year, but not now. • Within Navy, near-­term vs. long-­term objectives • Shipbuilding needed to assure long-­term forces • But, excessive shipbuilding funding can jeopardize near-­term capability • Must operate current forces • Reduction of carrier force would cut o’seas deployments with serious effect on perceptions of continuing US commitment, either in Far East or in Med • Must maintain current forces • Backlog of ships awaiting o’haul excessive now—­ degrades readiness, causes reenlistment problems. • Must support current forces • In recent past, haven’t had enough funding to buy more than about half the tactical aircraft required to support the force structure properly on a long-­term basis; in FY79, won’t be able to buy enough to offset peacetime accidents. • Thus, desire to build for future cannot be considered in isolation of pressing current needs. 5 Secret.

Enclosure

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter7 Washington, May 5, 1978 You and I and Charles Duncan will be meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff for lunch on Wednesday, May 10th. This will be followed by a meeting of the NSC (Dave Jones will be the only Chief present) to which Jim McIntyre has also been invited. The announced subject in both cases is the Consolidated Defense Guidance. I hope that the bulk of the discussion in both sessions will center on the elements of that guidance that deal with foreign policy, defense strategy, and defense programs, though inevitably the fiscal guidance portion is also likely to be touched upon. If you care to examine some materials in advance of the meeting, I suggest that you re-­read the 10-­page summary of the major issues and features of the DOD Consolidated Guidance for Fiscal Year 80–84 and my accompanying memorandum to you dated 10 March.8 (Copies are attached.) The Chiefs, I think, may be more outspoken than at previous meetings. My impression from their remarks to me is that they value the opportunity to interact with you, but have concluded from their past experience that these interactions have not produced decisions they consider favorable. They were particularly disappointed with the budget decisions in the Fiscal 79 budget—­decisions that some of them saw as contrary to the points that they raised in their December 14th breakfast with you. They are rather pessimistic in general about the prognosis 6 Carter underlined the phrase “examination of a 1500 km MRBM.” 7 Secret. 8 Attached but not printed is Brown’s March 10 memorandum to Carter, which is printed as Document 54.

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense9 Washington, undated DOD FISCAL GUIDANCE If not the most important issue in the Consolidated Guidance (CG), the size of the Defense budget in FY 80 through FY 84 is certainly high on the list. In accord with an earlier agreement with the OMB, the basic Fiscal Guidance for DoD planning is based on the $126 billion submission to the Congress for FY 79. For the five years covered in the CG, it grows at slightly less than 3% annually in terms of real TOA. I think it is clear that the Defense program must grow in real terms, given the obvious and continuing growth on the Soviet side. The particular growth rate allowed in the CG is tied more to the commitment we have jointly undertaken with our NATO allies than it is to any firm conviction that it will assure, in the words of PD–18, that “the United States will maintain an overall balance of military power between the United States and its allies on the one hand and the Soviet Union and its allies on the other at least as favorable as that that now exists.” That is an important goal, and one to which I firmly subscribe. Unfortunately, it is hard to measure that balance in any precise and unambiguous way. And of course we cannot be sure as to what the Soviet forces of the future will turn out to be. Thus, there is inevitably a lot of judgment involved in deciding whether the Fiscal Guidance in the CG is or is not enough for us to be able to meet that basic objective stated in PD–18. To further complicate the issue, it is not merely a question of whether you, or I, or the Joint Chiefs of Staff feel that the Fiscal Guidance is high enough to assure maintenance of the current balance. The perceptions of that balance—­and particularly of the trend in that balance—­on the part of Soviets, on the part of our allies, on the part of the third world, and even on the part of the United States public, can have a major effect on what actually happens on the world scene. So we have to judge not only how we view the trend in that balance, but also how we think others will view it. Though there is no way to make such a difficult and critically important judgment simple, I do hope to illuminate the issue somewhat better than it has been in the past. This year, instead of asking the Services to submit only programs to match the basic level of the ­Fiscal Guidance, I have asked them also to submit modifications of those 9 Secret.

Tab A

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter2 Washington, June 17, 1978 SUBJECT M–X/TRIDENT II Commonality Study (U) We are conducting a detailed study to determine the extent of commonality we should require in the M–X missile (currently in the advanced development phase) and the TRIDENT II missile (currently still in the design phase). There is a significant difference in the performance and physical characteristics of these missiles as they are now envisaged. [5 lines not declassified] The estimated developmental cost of each of these missiles is about $6 billion. If we developed only one common missile we could achieve

Enclosure

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense3 Washington, undated M–X/TRIDENT II Commonality Study 1. Major design considerations for a possible common missile [5 paragraphs (26 lines) not declassified] 2. Study Ground Rules —Common missile to meet all key requirements per above. —[1 paragraph (1 line) not declassified] —[1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified] —Management plan to be based on one service taking the lead, with its existing organization, to develop the system and be the acquisition agent. Each service will have its respective weapon system integration responsibilities. —System cost-­effectiveness evaluation to be consistent with evaluation methods for baseline, dedicated missiles. 3. Study Output —Common Missile Definition —Assessment of Expected Accuracy —Cost and Performance Comparisons —Technical, Schedule and Management Plans —Identifications of Technical and Management Problems 4. Common Missile Parameters [2 columns (16 lines) not declassified] 5. When the common missile study is completed, we will consider variations which would involve modifying the common missile (e.g., extra stage, new stage, liquid bus) for the M–X application, thereby achieving additional payload at a relatively small increase in developmental cost. This probably will be necessary (and possible) to avoid major degradation in M–X potential capability. 3 Secret; Formerly Restricted Data.

Attachment

Summary of a Report Prepared in the National Security Council2 Washington, undated PRM/NSC–32 CIVIL DEFENSE OVERVIEW REPORT Summary This summary is not designed to be a section by section precis of the Overview Report. It is rather designed: 1. to present a brief summary description of current US and Soviet civil defense programs; 2. to provide answers on the basis of the Overview Report to the key questions posed at the beginning of that report; 3. to lay out briefly the options for US civil defense policy and programs set forth in Chapters V and VI of the Overview Report. I. US AND SOVIET CIVIL DEFENSE PROGRAMS US strategic doctrine has consistently emphasized deterrence of nuclear war, rather than effective defense. The US civil defense program has been viewed as insurance providing some capability to enhance population survival should deterrence fail, thus fulfilling the government’s statutory responsibility under the Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950 (as amended).3 The Soviets integrate civil defense into an overall scheme of the likely origins, course, and consequences of nuclear war. Soviet strategy relies on convincing potential enemies that they cannot win a nuclear war against the USSR. Should nuclear war occur, civil defense is meant to help: (1) maintain a functioning logistical base for operations by their armed forces to “win” the war; and (2) enable Soviet recovery from war damage, to improve their postwar position vis-­a-­vis the US and other adversaries. At the present time US civil defense efforts are directed primarily to population and leadership protection. These programs, currently divided among several federal agencies, are now scheduled to be 2 Secret.

Tab A

Minutes of a Policy Review Committee Meeting2

Tab A

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council4 Washington, undated PROPOSED STATEMENT OF US CIVIL DEFENSE POLICY Enhanced Survivability. The U.S. civil defense program will seek to enhance the survivability of the American people in the event that a major nuclear war occurs by providing some increase in numbers of surviving population and leadership, thereby improving the basis for eventual national recovery. In addition, the U.S. civil defense program will contribute in part to the overall U.S.-Soviet strategic balance and reduce the possibility that the Soviets could coerce us in time of crisis. Perceptions of the overall balance should not be marked by major asymmetries in population of leadership fatalities. “Enhanced survivability” as a policy does not require similar or equivalent programs. Survivability will depend on the nature of the society as well as the nature of the attack directed against it. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General

Tab B

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council5 Washington, undated CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT The FPA paper for the Policy Review Committee on civil defense provides several alternative approaches to enhancing the survival of continuity of government elements, but it does not make a comparative analysis on which to make a selection among the alternatives. It does, however, provide sufficient analysis to suggest that the current system needs significant improvements, probably including “mobility” in addition to, or in place of, fixed sites. The choices for the Policy Review Committee, therefore, are: a. Retain the current continuity of government program, or b. Improve the present capability to make it more survivable but defer choice of alternatives for improvement pending further analysis. 5 Secret.

Tab A

Executive Summary of a Report Prepared by the Defense Science Board3 Washington, August 11, 1978 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY This paper summarizes the major findings and recommendations of the DSB Strategic Nuclear Balance panel. Current Policy and Planning A review of official U.S. policy and guidance documents indicates that current definitions of strategic policy objectives are inconsistent, vague and incomplete. Technical-Operational [3 paragraphs (20 lines) not declassified] • ICBM survival will be increasingly doubtful starting in the early to mid-1980’s because of the major increase in RVs as the Soviets MIRV their ICBM force and because of the increased accuracy being introduced in the SS–18 and SS–19. • In view of the Soviet SLBM threat, bomber base escape is questionable, especially from coastal bases. Considerable improvement in 3 Top Secret. The summary cover sheet, which bears the title “The Strategic Nuclear Balance,” is attached but not printed.

Tab B

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense4 Washington, undated Seminar on ICBM Vulnerability & Responses 1. Purpose (S) [2 lines not declassified] The impact of this threat and potential US responses have been studied this year under the sponsorship of a number of organizations: Air Force Scientific Advisory Board (AFSAB), Defense Science Board (DSB), JASON and OSTP. This seminar provided a forum for interchange and discussion among representatives of these groups in an attempt to: 1) examine the convergence of the technical community on the basic facts and issues, 2) better focus and understand the issues, and 3) separate the issues from the underlying technical facts. The discussion was organized in four topic areas:

Tab A

Memorandum From McGeorge Bundy to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)2 August 21, 1978 SUBJECT The Next Strategic Nuclear Weapons System In the last month or two, partly as a member of the President’s General Advisory Committee and partly as a foundation executive attending the annual summer seminar run by experts from the arms control centers that the Ford Foundation helps to pay for, I have had some exposure to the bothersome question of Minuteman vulnerability, and what to do about it. I have reached the conclusion that if I had your job again I would want to be sure that the President is fully caught up on some of the troubles that seem to be brewing. It looks to me as if both our basic deterrent posture and SALT are headed for a lot of trouble unless there can be a better solution than is currently favored by any uniformed service. To put it another way, I believe that we are headed for a dilemma which can be resolved only by the President as 2 No classification marking.

Tab A

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council2 Washington, undated COMPREHENSIVE NET ASSESSMENT 1978 Overview I. Introduction The principal purposes of Comprehensive Net Assessment 1978 (CNA 78) are to assess: 1. The changes that have occurred since January 1977 in: (a) the military, political, economic, diplomatic, and technological capabilities of the U.S. and the USSR; (b) the projections of future trends in those capabilities; and (c) our perceptions of those capabilities and trends; 2. The causes of these changes; 3. The implications of these changes for U.S. strategy vis-­a-­vis the Soviet Union. The starting point for CNA 78 is the PRM–10 Comprehensive Net Assessment completed in June 1977, with most of its data referring to

Attachment 1

Table Prepared in the National Security Council5 Washington, undated Table 1 U.S.–USSR Global Balance January 1977 CAPABILITIES U.S. Advantages Rough Equivalence USSR Advantage PRO U.S. Economic Resources and Productivity Political Institutions/Leadership East Asia TRENDS MIXED Political-Ideological Action Intelligence East Europe PRO USSR Technology Overall Military Covert Action Diplomatic Balance Capabilities NATO-Warsaw Pact Power Projection Strategic Balance Military Balance West Europe Economic Interaction Third World 5 Top Secret.

Attachment 2

Table Prepared in the National Security Council6 Washington, undated Table 2 U.S.-USSR Global Balance July 1978 CAPABILITIES U.S. Advantages Rough Equivalence USSR Advantage TRENDS PRO U.S. Economic Resources and Productivity East Asia East Europe * Political-Ideological Action * Diplomatic Balance * West Europe * Third World * MIXED NATO-Warsaw Pact Military Balance * Economic Interaction PRO USSR Technology Power Projection Overall Military Capabilities Covert Action Strategic Balance Note: Intelligence capabilities and political institutions/leadership were not assessed in July 1978. * Asterisk indicates change in trend direction. Underscoring indicates trend intensification. 6 Top Secret.

Attachment 3

Table Prepared in the National Security Council7 Washington, undated Table 3 Changes in Trends in Global Balance January 1977–July 1978 A. From pro-USSR to pro-U.S. Diplomatic balance West Europe Third World B. From pro-USSR to mixed NATO-Warsaw Pact military balance Economic interaction C. From mixed to pro-U.S. Political-­ideological action East Europe D. Intensified pro-U.S. Economic resources and productivity East Asia E. Intensified pro-USSR Strategic balance F. Unchanged pro-USSR Overall military capabilities Power projection Technology Covert action 7 Top Secret.

Attachment 4

Table Prepared in the National Security Council8 Washington, undated Table 4 Diplomatic Relations of US and USSR With Other Countries US USSR 1976 1978 1976 1978 NEGATIVE (Hostile or antagonistic) MIXED (Cool, neutral or sympathetic) POSITIVE (Friendly or allied)

Attachment 5

Table Prepared in the National Security Council9 Washington, undated Table 5 Shares of Global Power Resources 1978 U.S. U.S. Allies & Friends Total USSR USSR Allies & Friends Total Population

Attachment 6

Chart Prepared in the National Security Council10 Washington, undated CHART 1 LONG TERM US/USSR STRATEGIC FORCES RATIO–1976 DATA STATIC INVENTORY (TRADITIONAL MEASURES) 10 Secret.

Attachment 7

Chart Prepared in the National Security Council11 Washington, undated CHART 2 LONG TERM US/USSR STRATEGIC FORCES RATIO STATIC INVENTORY (TRADITIONAL MEASURES) 11 Secret.

Attachment 8

Chart Prepared in the National Security Council12 Washington, undated CHART 3 ADVANTAGE RATIO FOR POSSIBLE FORCE CONFIGURATIONS ECMP–C.G.DATA EXCLUDES BACKFIRE 12 Secret.

Attachment 9

Chart Prepared in the National Security Council13 Washington, undated CHART 4 ADVANTAGE RATIO FOR POSSIBLE FORCE CONFIGURATIONS EMT–C.G.DATA EXCLUDES BACKFIRE 13 Secret.

Tab A

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council4 Washington, undated NOMINAL US STRATEGIC FORCE POSTURE FOR 1990 Assumptions

Tab A

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter3 Washington, November 4, 1978 SUBJECT Strategic Force Modernization Plan I. Introduction At the mid-­term review I described the requirements for upgrading our strategic forces and presented a tentative program for strategic force modernization.4 Subsequently I sent you a paper describing why I believe we need to maintain the vitality of our strategic TRIAD and why this requires the rebasing of our ICBM’s to enhance their survivability.5 We have continued to study our strategic offensive forces in general and the alternative solutions to the difficult ICBM problem in particular. I have arrived tentatively at a course of action which seems to me to meet our needs. This paper describes the programs I believe appropriate for modernization of our ICBM force, SLBM force and bomber/ cruise missile force. The resulting capability would give us reasonable assurance that our strategic forces would provide essential equivalence with those of the USSR through the 1980’s. Though forecasting beyond that is more risky, I think that the recommended program would also allow our successors to assure essential equivalence into the 1990’s by exercising the appropriate options as that time draws near. The plan is consistent with SALT II provisions as we now envisage them and would put us in a strong position to negotiate major arms reductions in SALT III. The plan can be adjusted as time unfolds to reflect reductions negotiated in SALT II. II. ICBM Modernization The ICBM modernization plan has three major components: 3 Top Secret; Sensitive. Carter wrote “Zbig. C” in the upper right corner of the memorandum.

Attachment

Report Prepared in the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Program Analysis and Evaluation5 Washington, November 1978 [Omitted here are the title page and table of contents.] 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 14,

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense3 Washington, November 1, 1978 [Omitted here are the cover page and table of contents.] NUCLEAR TARGETING POLICY REVIEW Summary of Major Findings and Recommendations A. Purpose The purpose of this review was to evaluate nuclear employment policy—­that is, the policy guidelines and procedures for the targeting 3 Top Secret.

Attachment

Table Prepared in the National Security Council8 Washington, undated MAP AIR MOBILE OFF-ROAD MOBILE Concept Rotate missiles among simplified silos when maintenance needed; approximately 20 silos per missile. Carry 2 missiles each in C5A aircraft or 1 each in stretched AMST aircraft; strip alert at military bases—­disperse to civil airfields in crisis. Large transporters carrying 1 missile each; normally in garrison but scatter, across wide area on alert. Interaction with Missile Decision No advantage to small missiles; larger missiles imply lower total costs to achieve objective of 800 surviving EMT. Optimal missile smaller than M–X (TRIDENT II size missile could throw 8 RVs with air drop and northern launch areas). Same as MAP. Warning Requirement Completely independent of warning. Needs tactical warning of incoming missile attack; significantly harder to attack if dispersed. [5 lines not declassified] IOC Early ’86 with M–X partly common missile; late ’86 with common missile. 8 Secret.

Tab A

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council2 Washington, undated SUGGESTED PRESIDENTIAL ACTIONS • Deliver a major, nationwide address on the importance of the Armed Forces and of their special relationship with the President. Put Vietnam behind us by eliminating the “second-­class citizen” stigma that has been attached to the military since that conflict. Recognize the wartime and peacetime sacrifices of the military community, with a special bow to the families of the KIAs/MIAs (who are still regarded with considerable reverence in the military community). Recognize also the special demands placed on the Services as a result of our more complex two-­tracked approach to national security—­arms plus arms control. (Suggest: Memorial Day, Armed Forces Day, Veterans Day, or Vietnam Veterans Week.) • Continue the above theme in every subsequent major address (where feasible), including State of the Union message. • Deliver a major, nationwide address on SALT TWO, explaining: the hard choices that were made and why they were the right ones; that we are committed to essential equivalence; and that JCS advice played a prominent role in making these choices. Announce the M–X decision or expand on it. (Suggest: the AF Academy Commencement Ceremony.) • Announce “quality of life” decisions (e.g., the military retirement policy, Ethics law, pay caps, selective service decisions, etc.) at the opening of press conferences or in other fora with nationwide audiences. If the decision will be unpopular in the military community, announce it as the Commander-­in-Chief expecting his subordinates to rally to the decision. • When traveling, attempt to visit an important military installation enroute or near the destination, with appropriate pomp and publicity. Where possible, inspect facilities and talk to enlisted personnel. Attend important missile, aircraft or ship launchings (or significant tests). • After the fact, publicize any direct Presidential involvement in military exercises or crises (e.g. Yemen), to demonstrate a readiness and determination to take actions as Commander-­in-Chief when necessary. 2 Confidential; Sensitive.

Tab A

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter3 Washington, April 7, 1979 SUBJECT Ground Missile M–X (U) (U) You asked for a status report on Ground Mobile M–X. We have had a team restudying this problem the past few months in parallel with our study of Air Mobile M–X. Both studies were under the direction of the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering. The Ground Mobile team consisted of senior personnel from the Air Force Office of System Analysis and two contractors (Boeing and Martin). All of them have had extensive experience in missiles and their basing systems (the Air Force team leader was the same officer who led our design team on GLCM basing). Their study is essentially finished and will be ready for review, along with the Air Mobile report, in a week or two. (U) The study has considered two different types of ground mobile systems—­road mobile and off-­road mobile. Preliminary findings on each of these follow: Road Mobile: (S) The missile would be carried on a Transporter Erector Launcher (TEL) which would weigh (including the missile) about 200,000 pounds (limited by the load-­carrying capability of the interstate system). [3 lines not declassified] 3 Secret. Carter initialed the upper right corner of the memorandum.

Tab A

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of Defense Brown4 Washington, undated SUBJECT DOD’s Study of the US–USSR Military Investment Balance (S) I have reviewed the subject paper you sent to the President on 5 July. Although it’s an impressive piece of work and it presents an important message, the paper may characterize the defense investment imbalance too unfavorably and even the executive summary is much too long to ask the President to read. (S) Because the message of this study is very important and disturbing, I urge you to prepare a short 3–5 page memo for the President that: —­crisply summarizes the study; —­states the appropriate caveats (our staffs have discussed the more important ones); and —­states your own view of the implications for our defense spending and policies. (S) Zbigniew Brzezinski5 4 Secret. 5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense5 Washington, undated THE MILITARY INVESTMENT BALANCE We have recently assessed the US–USSR Military Investment Balance. Some military expenditures contribute only to current capability, others—­in varying degrees—­to future as well as present military capability, and ought to be considered as investments. The assessment concentrated on future-­oriented activities such as RDT&E, procurement of long-­lived weapon systems, and the construction of military facilities. It examined those current investment flows, and the accumulated stock of past investments, which contribute to future military capability. The assessment, thus, is an indicator of the future military balance. The main message of this balance is that continuing current trends in and differences between US and Soviet military efforts for 5–10 years will place the US in a clearly inferior military position. Focusing on investment makes this clearer, providing a picture less favorable to the US than does comparing overall efforts. The assessment is based on CIA-­produced dollar estimates of Soviet military programs. Those show that: —Soviet military efforts measured in dollars have exceeded ours by a steadily widening margin since 1969 and are now almost 45% greater. —The Soviets have out-­invested us for 10 years and, for the last few years, their investment effort has been about 75% larger than ours. —Projecting current Soviet trends and US plans into the future shows only a slow reduction in the gap in the rate of investment, and even that reduction is uncertain. The Soviet advantage is growing even more rapidly than is revealed by the respective rates of current investment flow, since: —Soviet investment stock value is now about 25% more than ours. —That differential is expected to increase to 40–60% by the mid 80’s, depending on assumptions about the depreciation profile. —The stream of Soviet investment dividends can be expected to exceed those of the US for many years. The analysis also examined several possible, but not very convincing, arguments as to why these investment trends need not be cause for concern. 5 Top Secret; Eyes Only.

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense3 Washington, undated NATIONAL SECURITY TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY It is essential to the national security of the United States to have a telecommunications capability to meet the needs of the Nation during and after any national emergency, including nuclear war. This capability 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski

Attachment

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter3 Washington, undated SUBJECT FY81 Presidential Review, Department of Defense I am concerned that the OMB paper, subject as above, does not by itself provide an adequate basis for your consideration of the FY81 DoD budget and FY81–85 program. In particular, the first two sections (“Overview” and “Issue #1: Level of the Defense Budget”) represent a perception so different from my own, and bear upon matters of such fundamental importance to the security of the nation, that I believe you are entitled to these additional views as a matter of fairness to you in the decision-­making process. It is of course true that the level of the Defense budget always has been, and always will be, decided in the light of other demands that compete for our national resources. But, it is just as true that the choice—­unlike much of the rest of the federal budget—­must also reflect demands over which we have little control because they are imposed on us by the Soviet Union and its allies. In my opinion, the treatment in the OMB paper of this latter factor—­the Soviet threat, the balance, and the trends in that balance—­is inadequate and misleading. The situation we face today is the result of 15 years or more of failing to match a steady, resolute, and comprehensive growth in the Soviet Defense program. During each of those years, when the budget was being formulated, similar arguments to those contained in this week’s OMB analysis could be and were made. They were made successfully, and the present situation is in part the result. While we were spending hundreds of billions of dollars in Vietnam at the expense of building our forces for the future, the Soviet Union was building the unprecedented force we face today. While we have stopped the decline in Defense spending and—­much to your credit—­have even turned it around to real growth, it is important to understand that the results of a 15 year trend cannot be repaired in one, or even five years. In my view, the OMB paper does not address that key point satisfactorily; the 3 Secret. Carter initialed the upper right corner of the memorandum.

Attachment

Table Prepared in the Department of Defense4 Washington, undated Table 1. Summary of Quick Fix Options WHDS Cost (FY 81 $M) Option IOC FOC 1984 FOC Acquisition Annual O&S Comments 100 MN III missiles in silos 2005 2006 Little increase in survivable capability. Full bomber weapon load-­out Poses operational problems All MN III to MK–12A Little increase in survivable capability 200 mobile MM III 3007 3008 3000 Needs strategic warning to survive 4 Secret. 5 Adherence to SALT I or SALT II would require retirement of other systems, resulting in smaller increases in warheads. [Footnote is in the original.] 6 Adherence to SALT I or SALT II would require retirement of other systems, resulting in smaller increases in warheads. [Footnote is in the original.] 7 Adherence to SALT I or SALT II would require retirement of other systems, resulting in smaller increases in warheads. [Footnote is in the original.] 8 Adherence to SALT I or SALT II would require retirement of other systems, resulting in smaller increases in warheads. [Footnote is in the original.]

Tab D

National Intelligence Estimate4

Tab B

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)6 Washington, May 20, 1980 SUBJECT PD on Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy With your April 22 draft, modified as recorded in Walter Slocombe’s May 2 memo for General Welch,7 we have, I believe, a text for a good directive on our nuclear employment policy. I think the next step should be for the two of us to discuss it with Ed, given the obvious foreign policy and alliance implications of the issue. I do not, however, think any further interagency discussion is necessary or appropriate, given the nature of the subject and the prior interagency discussion of the underlying issues. When we discuss the PD itself with Ed, we should also talk about how best to present it to the Allies. One possibility would be a presentation at the forthcoming NPG. We will also need to discuss what (if any) public statement should be made about it. Harold 6 Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. 7 Not found.

Attachment

Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)3 Washington, May 7, 1980 SUBJECT Crisis Management 1. During the long meeting of the NSC the night the rescue mission aborted, vital communication with the Pentagon, State and CIA was carried out by Harold Brown and Cy Vance using the President’s secure telephone in the Oval Office and through Bob Gates passing information to me that he had received via the secure telephone in your office. I think you will agree that at a time when we were so dependent on real time information from the Pentagon, CIA and NSA, these arrangements did not serve us well. They were neither efficient nor, as it turned out, particularly accurate. 2. I know that you have had Bill Odom working to improve White House crisis management procedures, particularly with respect to nuclear conflict and other large scale operations. Nevertheless, in keeping with our conversation the week of the rescue attempt, I believe several inexpensive, easy to implement changes can be made to improve substantially communications to and from the SCC and the NSC during crises of a lower order of magnitude—­such as the rescue attempt. These might include: —Installing a secure voice conference call capability in the Situation Room conference room. This would enable all of us to receive information directly and simultaneously from the NMCC, CIA and NSA, thus saving time and improving the accuracy of information received. —Providing for permanent direct secure voice channels from the Situation Room to the NMCC, the CIA Operations Center, and the State Department Operations Center. These would be helpful at any time, but I think you will agree could prove especially useful during a crisis situation. This would also leave available two or three or more regular secure voice channels for principals or staff to use. —Installation of another direct link between NSA and the Situation Room. The existing link is used for the transmission of routine NSA traffic. A second channel could be used for passage of information in extremely close hold situations (such as the rescue), bypassing staff 3 Secret. Brzezinski wrote in the upper right corner of the memorandum: “WO.

Tab A

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense5 Washington, June 4, 1980 FACT SUMMARY Early yesterday morning a technical problem in a computer at North American Air Defense Command caused some erroneous data to be transmitted. As a result some displays at the National Military Command Center and Strategic Air Command Headquarters indicated multiple missile launches against the United States; however, other information available directly from the sensor system failed to confirm that any missiles had been launched. As a precaution and in accordance with standard procedures, certain Strategic Air Command aircraft and Command and Control aircraft were brought to a higher state of readiness. These aircraft were manned and engines started. One Command and Control aircraft in the Pacific took off. There was no change in overall US defense posture and, after an evaluation, all systems were returned to normal. The cause of the computer discrepancy is under investigation. In the meantime arrangements have been made to insure that at all times a special secure telephone connection is in effect to provide a parallel line of communication from one center to the other, permitting even more prompt override, if necessary, of any false computer driven indications of an attack. 2 No other record of Carter’s questions was found.

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the Office of Science and Technology Policy5 Washington, April 15, 1980 [Omitted here is the title page and table of contents.] EXECUTIVE SUMMARY The Soviet Union is intercepting U.S. domestic microwave telecommunications from diplomatically immune locations in Washington, D.C., New York City and San Francisco. Exploitation of U.S. common carrier domestic satellite communications is also of serious concern. Presidential Directive PD/NSC–24 was issued with the objective of enhancing the protection of United States communications, the intercept and exploitation of which may be useful to a foreign adversary. Primary emphasis was placed on protecting government information of value to the USSR. (TS) The Presidential Directive assigned Executive Agent responsibilities to the Departments of Defense and Commerce. The Secretary of Defense is the Executive Agent for Communications Security (COMSEC) to protect government-­derived classified information and government-­derived unclassified information which relates to national security. The Secretary of Commerce is the Executive Agent for the protection of government-­derived information not related to national security and for dealing with the commercial and private sector to enhance their communications protection and privacy capabilities. The State Department, the Manager, National Communications System (NCS), and the General Services Administration (GSA), were also given specific on-­going responsibilities. Revised guidance was given to 5 Top Secret.

Tab A

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council Washington, undated [Top Secret. 13 pages not declassified]

Annex A

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council Washington, undated [Top Secret. 2 pages not declassified]

Annex B

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council1 Washington, undated SOVIET NUCLEAR THREAT TO U.S. LEADERSHIP (TS) A critical question in the COG problem is, if the Soviet Union were to attack the United States, would the civilian and military leadership infrastructure be attacked as well? The evidence suggests that they would. Soviet doctrine stresses the importance of effective command and control for the successful conduct of military operations. Accordingly, Soviet military planning emphasizes the neutralization of enemy C3 assets. In the case of a conflict within a theater of operations, there is an extensive body of information regarding Soviet planning for attacks on opposing command posts and communications centers. Targeting of such facilities is accorded the highest priority, equivalent to targeting nuclear weapons of opposing forces. In the case of intercontinental conflict, there is no direct evidence of recent vintage. However, a considerable body of indirect evidence suggests that targeting priorities are similar. (TS) Although direct evidence of Soviet intentions is not available, it is considered highly unlikely that the Soviet Union would launch a major intercontinental strike against U.S. military forces that would not include strikes against key command, control, and communications centers, including the National Command Authority (NCA). Since the locations of the primary U.S. federal relocation sites are publicly available, it is again considered highly unlikely that these would not be targeted. Thus, it must be assumed that the Soviet Union would apply as many weapons as necessary to ensure the destruction of these key sites. The single warhead versions of the SS–17, SS–18, and SS–19 (in particular, the SS–18) would be the most likely candidates for attacking [1 line not declassified] given our estimate of their damage expectancy. (S) There is some dated evidence of Soviet intent to use SLBMs against command posts and communications centers. Although current Soviet SLBMs have a much lower damage expectancy than more modern ICBMs, SLBMs have the advantage of shorter flight times, which reduce the amount of warning time available. However, it is not believed that the Soviet Union would consider a “decapitation” attack alone, that is one aimed solely at the NCA command and control, to be 1 Top Secret.

Annex C

Paper Prepared in the National Security Council2 Washington, undated ALTERNATIVE CONCEPTS FOR PRESIDENTIAL SUCCESSOR SUPPORT Over the past several years, a number of studies have been conducted to evaluate various concepts to improve the survivability and endurance of the Presidency in a protracted nuclear conflict. These concepts include: —Submarine Emergency Alternate Command Post (SEACP); —Maritime surface vessels; —Airborne systems, including the NEACP; —Land-­based systems. All are motivated by the basic need for the Presidency to survive and function over extended periods of time in a nuclear environment. The following outlines the major conclusions of these efforts and offers some thoughts on directions various basing platforms might go. 2 Secret.

Tab B

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination ­Committee Meeting4

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense2 Washington, undated STRATEGIC FORCE COMPARISONS Summary The charts that follow compare U.S. and Soviet central strategic forces with and without a SALT II agreement. In both cases, the contribution of MX to the strategic balance is highlighted. We have used 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File,

Attachment

Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (McIntyre) to President Carter3 Washington, July 24, 1980 SUBJECT Defense Program for 1982 Introduction Upward pressures for even higher Defense spending will continue. This memo provides you an update of the Defense program status and the major fiscal and programmatic questions which you will have to address in the FY 1982 budget. In March you approved 1981–85 Defense funding levels that provide cumulative real growth of $116B in this five year period. This is the largest peacetime commitment to Defense real growth since 1945. Defense spending will remain at just over 5% of GNP. This compares

5 Carter underlined “‘essential equivalence,’” “telecommunications,” “mobilization planning guidance,” “maintenance of the National Command Authority under nuclear attack,” and “targeting policy” in this sentence. The Presidential Directives are printed as

Tab A

Memorandum From the Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (Macy) to President Carter4 Washington, August 19, 1980 Dear Mr. President: (U) On June 4, I sent an initial report5 to you on Exercise NINE

Tab B

Paper Prepared in the Federal Emergency Management Agency Washington, undated [Secret. 8 pages not declassified] 214. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to Secretary of State Muskie and the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, November 7, 1980 SUBJECT Basic Strategy Issues (U) I believe that one of the most important legacies we can leave to our successors is some clear advice on the basic strategic issues they will now have to confront. Our views on these issues should also shape our own final budget decisions. To this end, I would like to discuss the attached paper with you at the next MBB with a view to then providing a paper to the President. For obvious reasons let me request that you give the attached no further distribution, and that no copies be made. Harold 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Geographic File, Box 16, Southwest Asia/Persian Gulf—(12/80). Secret; Sensitive. Sent via Alpha Channel. On November 4, President Carter lost reelection to former California Governor Ronald Reagan.

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense2 Washington, undated BASIC ISSUES AFFECTING STRATEGY AND FORCE POSTURE IN THE 80s I. THE PROBLEMS WE CONFRONT A. The “catch-­up” problem. The cost of the Vietnam War ($236B in FY

Appendix 1

Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency4 Washington, undated Steps to move to a mobile military strategy for the United States in the 1980s: 1. Establish a sense of strategic priorities: 3 Turner signed “Stan Turner” above this typed signature. 4 Secret.

Appendix 2

Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency5 Washington, undated Steps to move to an economic strategy for the United States in the 1980s: 1. The U.S. is totally unprepared to conduct a coherent economic strategy against a specific adversary. The first step in pursuing such a strategy would be to establish a mechanism empowered to coordinate and control economic warfare (including export/import controls, 5 Secret.

Tab A

Draft Presidential Directive6 Washington, undated TO The Vice President The Secretary of State The Secretary of The Treasury The Secretary of Defense The Secretary of Commerce The Secretary of Energy The Director, Office of Management & Budget The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff The Director of Central Intelligence SUBJECT Modifications in U.S. National Strategy I set forth U.S. National Strategy in 1977 in Presidential Directive/ NSC–18. It remains our strategy, but in light of increased projection of Soviet power which threatens U.S. vital interests in the Persian Gulf region, it has become necessary7 to modify emphasis and priority in the strategy,8 and to elaborate and codify our progress in building a security framework for the Persian Gulf. (S) Greater Readiness Required Given the increased risk of major local or regional conflict involving key U.S. interests in the 1980s we must increase the priority given to readiness in defense resource allocations. Shifts in Priority for General Purpose Forces Presidential Directive/NSC–18 put the focus for our general purpose forces on Europe but also called for capabilities for contingencies in Korea and the Persian Gulf region. Soviet actions in [the Horn of Africa and]9 Afghanistan have, in the interim, increased substantially the threat to our vital interests in the Persian Gulf region. [Moreover, the chaotic situation following the Iranian revolution, the Iraq-Iran war and the 6 Secret. Brackets are in the original. 7 Carter inserted “through a serious of individual directives” after “necessary.” 8 Carter changed the comma after the word “strategy” to a period, struck out “and to,” and began a new sentence with the words “This Directive will.” 9 Carter deleted the brackets around the phrase “the Horn of Africa and,” and wrote “ok” in the left margin next to it.

Tab D

Memorandum From Secretary of State Muskie to President Carter17 Washington, January 7, 1981 SUBJECT Draft PDs on “U.S. National Strategy” and on the “Persian Gulf Security Framework” I have three reasons for urging most strongly that you not issue PDs on “U.S. National Strategy” and the “Persian Gulf Security Framework.” 1. When these directives become public, as I believe they inevitably would, the reaction among reporters, members of Congress and the public would almost certainly be strongly negative. It would cloud your last days in office and detract from your farewell address to the nation.18 —We would be seen by some as simply having neglected to issue appropriate directives at the outset of the Southwest Asian effort of the past year. And obvious questions would be raised about the issuance of orders to the Departments on long-­term issues by a President who had only a few days left in office. —We could be accused by others of a clumsy attempt to force a set of policies on the incoming Administration. —Instead of leaving office with much-­earned credit for having created the security framework, you and your Administration would end up publicly embarrassed. 2. They could have a negative effect on the new Administration’s policies. —The incoming Administration would no doubt feel challenged by these directives, and would move to rescind them as soon as the Administration had something to put in their place—­if not sooner. 17 Secret. 18 Carter delivered his farewell address to the nation on January 14. See Foreign Rela-
