1014 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX blessing. Not only is there the time needed to put a new government in place; but also “autonomy” is Begin’s concept (though he didn’t go very far with it). Labor has favored territorial readjustment, the Allon Plan,8 etc., and it will not be easy for Labor to shift gears. Because of Begin’s personal commitment to Camp David, having a strong Begin government would probably be best from the standpoint of the talks— but this may now be a pipedream. (An alternative school of thought holds that Begin’s leadership on peace is played out anyway, and that only an alternative political constellation can now move forward). (S) The choice for Israel is fairly stark: between having five more years of effective “control” over the West Bank/Gaza—with the legitimacy of Camp David (as far as it goes)—or a breakdown of a framework for dealing with the Palestinian issue, further isolation in the world (where Israel is probably at its low point) and even more terrorism. The nature of this choice is added reason for trying to get a Self-Governing Authority more or less on time: thus preserving some “framework,” instead of seeing diplomatic anarchy again. (S) One angle is worth exploring—though not much weight can be put on it: that this is probably Begin’s last chance to make peace for his nation, and to assure his place in Judaism’s history. (S) We should also not rule out the possibility that Dayan will re-involve himself in the peace process (provided his health9 holds out). He played a key role in Camp David, etc., and is never without ideas. (S) The Begin government may collapse in the near future10 (the smart money gives him only a few more weeks; yet the sizeable Labor lead in the polls will concentrate Likud and NRP minds, and creates a strong incentive for soldiering on). If the government does collapse, implementation of the Egypt-Israel treaty will most likely proceed on schedule. But it is unrealistic to expect the Autonomy Talks to make any progress (though the form and actual meetings will most likely proceed). The timetable will almost certainly slip, though we must not rule out Israeli political ingenuity (e.g. a government of national unity that could take some decisions). (S) The aid relationship with Israel will be important. It gets $1.7 billion now (in effect, “straightlining” for the past three years, discounting the special $3 billion peace package). This means real erosion from inflation. Israel has asked for a doubling in FY 81—to $3.45 billion. It does not expect to get that (and may realistically not hope for more than an 8 See footnote 10, Document 64. 9 Dayan had been diagnosed with colon cancer in June. (Dayan, Breakthrough, p. 289) 10 See Document 313.
