346 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I We can do all this, however, only if we are willing to show leadership through example as well as strength. Only through our own constructive domestic and foreign policies—whether on energy or the Panama Canal—can we inspire and presume to encourage other nations to act with us for the common good. As President Carter said at the United Nations last October,5 “However wealthy and powerful the United States may be—however capable of leadership—this power is increasingly relative, the leadership increasingly is in need of being shared. “No nation has a monopoly of vision, of creativity, or of ideas. Bringing these together from many nations is our common responsibility and our common challenge. For only in these ways can the idea of a peaceful global community grow and prosper.” 5 See Document 56. 71. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, March 3, 1978 SUBJECT Speech on Defense Policy At Tab A is an outline of a speech on this Administration’s defense policy for your consideration.2 The speech should note briefly that you conceive national security to be more than military affairs and that your efforts in the non-military areas of national security have been many. That must not, however, lead anyone to the mistaken view that you neglect the military dimen- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 64, Speeches: Wake Forest University: 10/77–3/78. Confidential. The President initialed the top-right hand corner of the memorandum. Brzezinski also wrote “ZB file” in the top-right hand corner of the memorandum. Huntington sent the memorandum and the speech outline to Brzezinski under a March 3 cover memorandum, indicating that he, Odom, Putnam, and Westbrook had attempted to incorporate Brzezinski’s and Aaron’s suggestions. Huntington also requested that Brzezinski send both the memorandum and the outline to the President. 2 Attached but not printed. The undated, 3-page outline is entitled “Defense Policy Speech.” For the text of the address as delivered by the President on March 17, see Document 72.
