January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1153 Israel. When Begin found a willing negotiating partner in President Sadat, there was no positive response from Jordan, Saudi Arabia, or the Palestinians. President Sadat: There has been a misunderstanding. What we have reached is not the end of the road. We have to start somewhere. Camp David is not an end but only a beginning. You are right in saying that I have done some things against my own convictions, but after 1977, when Geneva looked like a failure, I got a letter from President Carter.4 I was disappointed that the Palestinians welched out on their promise on 242. Also, when I met with Arafat he proposed an American professor to represent the PLO at Geneva and then reneged on that. The Syrians, Soviets and Palestinians maneuvered against us. By October 1977 we had reached a stalemate. President Carter was vehemently attacked here after the U.S.-Soviet statement,5 which he intended to be a source of pressure on Israel. President Carter was the first to speak of a homeland for the Palestinians; the first to demand immediate Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon, and that is what the United States should also have done after the 1967 war. Under Carter, the U.S. has a solid position on the settlements. I took the initiative because Carter was under attack from the Jewish lobby and also in the Arab world. But again he emphasized that this is not the end of the road. I initially also thought that the Israelis would not withdraw, but they did. I have recovered 80% of the Sinai, all the oil, etc. We have started on a road, but we cannot insist that Begin promise everything at once. To ask for everything is to give him the golden opportunity to do nothing. Yet he evacuated the settlements, then abandoned the airports there. It was President Carter and I who brought him to do this. We have thus created precedents for the West Bank and the Golan Heights. Sitting in our capitals and waiting for Begin to act is going to get us nowhere. I made the breakthrough not to recover the Sinai alone but because it is the only way. We now have U.S. and world public opinion on our side. Let us exploit it. I am not optimistic for the first time about achieving full autonomy on schedule, but I will continue to work for it. Whenever Egypt and Saudi Arabia work together, the Arab world comes along. What I ask is this: Why not wait till I could clarify my position to you after I signed Camp David? I have nothing against Prince Fahd or Prince Sultan. I have always been on good terms of brotherhood with 4 Reference is presumably to Carter’s November 5, 1977, letter to Sadat. See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January 1977–August 1978, Document 142. 5 See footnote 3, Document 221.
