538  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
give additional instructions to our negotiators in Geneva to speed up 
their work. I believe that in Moscow we made good progress. As you 
know, there are still some difficult positions, particularly on ALCMs. 
I have to tell you that I really don’t have any fallback on that one. I 
am not proposing that we should raise the ALCM issue right now but 
I want to mention that.
Baker: Well, I have got to tell you that if you do not have a fallback 
on ALCMs then we are going to have to leave this issue up to our two 
Presidents to solve.
Shevardnadze: But we will be scolded if we do that. Presidents 
shouldn’t have to spend their valuable time on such specifics. I know 
we have made some progress on SLCMs as well and therefore I hope 
we can complete our work on the substance of the parallel statements 
on SLCMs. I think we also should be able to complete our work on the 
duration of the treaty and on the non-­circumvention clause of the treaty. 
Then that will leave some comparatively smaller issues to resolve. As 
regards subsequent talks for strategic negotiations, we propose that the 
Summit produce a statement of intent on where we plan to be taking 
our follow-­on negotiations.
On chemical weapons, I think we are making good progress. Our 
delegations are working at it, and I think there is a good basis for an 
agreement.
On nuclear testing talks I think most of the work has been com-
pleted. So I believe our delegation should work hard and actively on 
these issues.
In Washington, we should also seek to try to get something done 
on CFE. Perhaps we should try to agree in advance with our allies 
before Washington and then we could move the whole process much 
farther when we have our Ministerial.
Baker: On issues other than manpower, I would like to reserve on 
that proposal because our allies see CFE as really a pact-­to-­pact negoti-
ation so I don’t want to create an image that it is something else.
While we are on conventional arms, I would like to ask a question. 
It was my understanding that when we agreed to our bilateral under-
standing on U.S.–Soviet troop levels in the central zone that that meant 
that you were not going to try to reach in CFE I an overall stationed 
forces agreement or an overall stationed forces limit. But subsequent 
to our agreement your Ambassador Grinevskiy in Vienna tabled a pro-
posal. Maybe I misunderstood, but I thought that President Gorbachev 
in Moscow and that you in Ottawa had made it clear that there would 
be no overall ceiling.
Shevardnadze: Yes, that is so. We agree that there should be no over-
all ceiling of manpower in the Atlantic to the Urals zone. But when we
