476 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement G. I do this with regard to your subject even though you have thus far refused seriously to discuss or even consider with me the question of missing military personnel which is a subject of deep interest to my government and people and which clearly is a matter at issue between us. I also say to you that I would not consider it within the spirit of these talks to refuse to accept any material which you may desire to give me with respect to your subject. H. In discussing the matter of trade at our meeting of September 14 you referred to what you termed “economic blockade and embargo imposed by U.S.” I am not clear as to what you have in mind in this regard. I know of no blockade and I know of nothing imposed by the U.S. on anyone else. I. I do know of various sovereign measures taken by my govern­ ment with respect to economic intercourse between my country and your country. I also know of common measures taken by several other countries in consultation with each other as well as with the United States concerning the export to your country of strategic materials. I also know of the resolution of May 18, 1951 by the General Assembly of the United Nations recommending an embargo on the shipment to your country of arms, ammunition, implements of war and other stra­ tegic materials. J. Therefore, when you present the views of your government, I hope that you will clarify exactly what aspects of this matter you have in mind. 76. Wang replied that at the last meeting he had stated that after discussion of question of agreed announcement, we should go on to question of embargo. He had not said there was any connection between these questions. 77. Wang said he had never intended create impression that discus­ sion of certain subject is precondition for discussion another. Question of embargo is precisely one of issues between US and China. It is exactly one of items which should be discussed. Discussion and solution of these issues aimed at improving relations between two countries. 78. Wang said he regarded embargo unreasonable by principle. Such policy runs against peaceful trade relations between nations. Therefore it is his view that to improve relations policy of embargo must be abolished. Abolition of embargo policy is in accord with desires and wishes all people including US people. 79. Wang said he reserved further discussion at next meeting. He asked whether he could be given a copy of my statement since they had not taken complete notes. 80. We agreed that a copy would be sent this afternoon. 81. Wang asked whether it would be convenient that the next meet­ ing be advanced to Tuesday, November 8.
