Yugoslavia Finally, Kardelj noted that all Arab states have recognized the PLO as the representative of the Palestinian people. In his press conference, the President had mentioned the possibility of a flexible solution.5 Kardelj thought that might work but believed it important that the PLO be represented. The President said that the US was willing to talk with the PLO, even with Arafat, but that first the PLO had to agree—as had all other states of the region—to negotiate on the basis of UN resolutions 242 and 338. As long as the PLO refuses to do that it is impossible for the US to talk directly with it. The President said he knew the PLO trusted the Yugoslavs and suggested that the Yugoslavs might use their good offices to get the PLO to make a declaration that it agreed with the principles of those UN resolutions. If the PLO wanted to add language indicating that something more than a refugee problem was involved— indicating, perhaps, the need for a homeland—that would be okay with the United States. But so far the PLO has rejected even that course. The US had signed, and the President indicated he had confirmed, an agreement with Israel that PLO acceptance of 242 was a prerequisite for US dealings with that organization. The President said he would appreciate any Yugoslav help. He looked forward to reports of Kardelj’s talks with Cabinet officers. The President presented Kardelj a book of satellite photographs, indicating that he thought one was of the Yugoslav coast. He said the photos were available to Yugoslavia any time they would be useful. Kardelj presented the President with a gift from President Tito for the President’s birthday. The President expressed his thanks to Kardelj and to President Tito. Kardelj said that any time the President could come to Yugoslavia, it would be a pleasure to welcome him. [At 11:25 a.m., the President and the Vice President left; other participants remained and the meeting continued.6] 5 In a press conference on September 29, Carter stressed that if the PLO were to accept UN Resolution 242 and the right of Israel to exist, the United States would begin negotiations with the PLO on the Palestinian question. (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book II, pp. 1687–1688) 6 No memorandum of conversation for the remainder of the meeting was found.
