Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 191 conceive of genuine peace existing between countries who will not talk to one another. If they are prepared for peace, the first proof is a willingness to negotiate their differences. This is why we believe it is so important to proceed with the holding of a Geneva conference this year. That conference provides the forum for these nations to begin the working out of these problems together directly, face-to-face. We have a continuing objective to convene such a conference before the end of this year. Underlying this entire effort to promote the process of negotiation is our determination to maintain the military security of Israel. There must be no question in anyone’s mind that the United States will do what is necessary to insure the adequacy of Israel’s military posture and its capacity for self-defense. We recognize that America has a special responsibility in this regard. In fact, in promulgating our overall policy to curb the international traffic in arms, the President specifically directed the government that we will honor our historic responsibilities to assure the security of the State of Israel. Let there be no doubt about this commitment by this Administration. We do not intend to use our military aid as pressure on Israel. If we have differences over military aid—and we may have some—it will be on military grounds or economic grounds but not political grounds. If we have differences over diplomatic strategy—and that could happen—we will work this out on a political level. We will not alter our commitment to Israel’s military security. Let me conclude by saying that we hope the concepts I have been discussing here today—concepts which the President has advanced at talks with Israeli and Arab leaders—will stimulate them to develop ideas of their own. We realize that peace cannot be imposed from the outside, and we do not intend to present the parties with a plan or a timetable or a map. Peace can only come from a genuine recognition by all parties that their interests are served by reconciliation and not by war, by faith in the future rather than bitterness over the past. America can try to help establish the basis of trust necessary for peace. We can try to improve the atmosphere for communication. We can offer ideas, but we cannot, in the end, determine whether peace or war is the fate of the Middle East. That can only be decided by Israel and her Arab neighbors. We believe that both sides want peace. As the President has said [at Notre Dame on May 22]: This may be the most propitious time for a genuine settlement since the beginning of the Arab-Israeli conflict almost 30 years ago. To let this opportunity pass could mean disaster, not only for the Middle
