642  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
as such and none could be persuaded that Japan’s action was taken in 
self defense. Therefore, there should be a clear definition and under­
standing as to this word self-­defense and this word must not be arbi­
trarily abused.
33. Wang said that as to question US side had raised regarding 
whether peaceful solution of disputes between our two countries 
applied to Taiwan area, as he had repeatedly declared this did concern 
Taiwan area. The peaceful solution of disputes between two countries 
also applied to Taiwan area.
34. Wang said as to openness of meetings: it was not meant that 
public would be admitted to this conference room. But he meant the 
content of our discussion be released to press. Hence, as US side clearly 
recalled, at outset of talks he had followed US suggestion that these 
talks should be held private and this arrangement have no set time 
limit. The Chinese side throughout has observed these two rules in 
hope that it would permit full exchange of views, frankly, and would 
settle issues between us, and finally reach agreements.
35. Wang said Chinese side felt these rules had been useful to our 
discussion in initial stages. And facts showed that after forty days dis­
cussion we did reach our first agreement on the return of civilians. That 
also showed there was common desire between two sides to arrive at 
agreement and Chinese had expressed their welcome to such a spirit. 
Thus it showed that provided both sides shared a common desire to 
solve their common issues, these issues would be capable of resolu­
tion. For example, last September between Soviet Union and German 
­Federal Republic. As we knew, relations were rather tense; however, 
after one week’s discussion they did arrive at an agreement simply 
because of their common desire to reach an agreement, and hence there 
were favorable results.
36. Wang said that since last September 14 we had begun to discuss 
item two. It was now four months. This was not a short time. If there 
did exist common desire between two sides to settle issues between 
them, he should say that the two would have been able to reach many 
agreements instead of only one agreement. However, after four months 
both still found themselves deadlocked in the same place, and found 
themselves incapable of agreeing on simple announcement after all this 
time.
37. Wang said questions between us not only concern peoples of 
our two countries but also concern people of whole world. They, how­
ever, are not informed about our talks and of what has taken place. 
Now people ask why after such long time discussion, you people 
have obtained no result. As to Chinese side, they have always wanted 
an agreement to be reached between two so that Chinese Government 
could make account to its people as to what had happened. We have
