398
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Amer officials to visit or pass thru tribal areas. Whenever this necessity
arose I wld make special effort to see that appropriate governmental
authorities were fully informed in advance re contemplated trips.
5. Shortly after my return to Emb I learned that Iran police had this
morning informed French correspondent that Dubois “was being
brought to Tehran under detention”. I sent message to Mosadeq, in-
forming him that police were already passing out information re
Dubois’ difficulties and suggesting that Iranian Govt and Emb both
reply to inquiries that police had stopped Dubois in southern Iran for
purpose checking his documents, but that they had not held him, and
that he was returning to Tehran. Mosadeq agreed with this explanation
except that he insisted that Iranian Govt wld state that Dubois was re-
turning to Tehran on request Iranian Govt.
6. I believe it wld be wise for Dubois to leave Iran several days after
his arrival in Tehran. I also venture recommend that during this diffi-
cult period visits of US officials to Iran for purposes of “orientation” be
reduced to minimum.
Henderson
140.
Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of
State1
Tehran, November 9, 1952.
1907. 1. Two days ago Kashani sent message asking me to call on
him. I did so Nov 8. Our conversation somewhat disjointed and incon-
clusive since after one hour another appointment compelled me leave. I
shall see him again evening Nov 10.
2. It not yet clear just why he wanted see me unless he wished give
impression to friends or enemies or both he was in touch with US. He
started conversation by saying policies US Govt ruining his health and
damaging Iran and if continued might lead to third world war, destruc-
tion modern civilization, and ruin US. He was Iranian and his love for
Iranian people transcended all considerations. At same time he was
Moslem and believed precepts of Koran promised salvation for world.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 84, Tehran Embassy Files, 1950–1952, classified
general records, Box 42. Secret; Security Information; Limited Distribution; Noforn.
Drafted by Henderson. Repeated to London. The telegram is the Embassy copy as ap-
proved and has no time of transmission.
