March 27–December 31, 1979
921
fresh and vigorous considering the fact that he had chaired what was
apparently a fairly difficult Cabinet meeting for much of the day.
4. I gave Begin a very brief summary rundown on my meeting Sat-
urday night with Sadat (reftel), stressing Sadat’s statements to me that
his relationship with Begin is much better than before and that he looks
forward to their pending meeting4 in Haifa for even more improve-
ment. I told Begin that I explained to Sadat the rationale behind our po-
sition on putting forward a resolution of our own in the Security
Council, and that I told Sadat of Begin’s disagreement with our pro-
posed course of action. Sadat’s response, I said, was that he agreed with
Begin’s view and that any resolution would complicate the picture for
the autonomy negotiations and distract from the progress which Sadat
was confident would be made before the end of the year. I told Begin
that Sadat had given as his reasoning for opposing any new resolution
his “high hopes” that—as he and Begin talked further about the
issues—they will gradually find solutions to most of the outstanding
problems, and that any UN action would complicate this process. I con-
cluded by telling Begin that I would now return to Washington and re-
port to you and to Cy Vance both his (Begin’s) and Sadat’s reactions to
our proposed view and strategy. There was no reason to avoid telling
Begin of Sadat’s attitude because Sadat in a speech delivered after our
meeting had expressed his concern and negative attitude.
5. Begin was clearly pleased to learn that Sadat agreed with him. (I
had previously suspected that they had talked by phone before I had
seen Sadat; however, I now doubt that for it would have been almost
impossible for Begin to feign the degree of surprise he registered when
he heard my report.) He then said that it was all the more obvious that
we should reconsider our course of action and drop the idea of any new
resolution. He summarized the decision already taken Sunday by the
Israeli Cabinet in support of his initial negative reaction to me on
Friday. He again asked that you review your decision in light of my ad-
ditional findings in Egypt.
6. During this discussion, I did not deviate from the position I had
taken with Begin on Friday:5 that while our decision is still tentative, I
would be less than candid if I did not say that this is the direction in
which we are now moving.
7. I then asked Begin whether he was optimistic about the course of
the autonomy negotiations. Begin said that he believed the approach
was the correct one. As was the case before Camp David and during the
Treaty negotiations, there were obviously major difficulties ahead.
4 See Document 288 and footnote 4, Document 289.
5 See Document 283.
