308 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 85. Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 Washington, undated SUBJECT Yasir ‘Arafat’s Preference to Deal Directly with the United States Government rather than to Discuss a Middle East Peace with Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat 1. The following information was obtained [less than 1 line not declassified] October 1978. Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat recently gave Major General Shawqat, the head of Military Intelligence, permission to probe Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) Chief Yasir ‘Arafat’s views on the Camp David Accords and on continuing Middle East negotiations. Yasir ‘Arafat conveyed a message to General Shawqat via an emissary on 12 October to the effect that he, ‘Arafat, does not trust President Sadat and would prefer to deal directly with the United States (U.S.) on the matter of peace in the Middle East and the role of the PLO. 2. Given the nature of the message, General Shawqat chose not to pass the message to President Sadat and instead sent his own emissary to contact ‘Arafat for clarification of ‘Arafat’s precise views and desires. General Shawqat’s emissary was expected to return with ‘Arafat’s more precise views on 19 October. 3. General Shawqat has been appointed by the Egyptian Government to maintain discreet contact with the PLO. General Shawqat expressed the view that Yasir ‘Arafat believes the U.S. Government is sincere in its efforts to bring peace to the Middle East and desires to be fair to all parties. General Shawqat believes, therefore, that Yasir ‘Arafat would indeed want his own direct contact with the U.S. Government. 4. (U.S. Ambassador to Egypt’s Comment: In our talk earlier this week, Shawqat also mentioned to me ‘Arafat’s alleged desire to engage in a direct dialogue with the U.S. He did not cast it in terms of a new effort, but rather as a continuation of ‘Arafat’s longstanding desire to have direct association with us. ‘Arafat’s desire to do so, Shawqat claimed, is intensified by the recent Camp David Accords. I reminded Shawqat of our offer of last summer to engage in a dialogue with the 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 80M01542R, Executive Registry Subject Files (1978), Box 7, Folder 13, M–1: Middle East. Secret; Sensitive. The report was found attached to a covering memorandum from Turner to Brzezinski, date stamped October 23, stating that a copy of the report had also been sent to Vance.
