Yugoslavia 865 262. Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter1 Washington, January 2, 1979 SUBJECT Request for an Arms Transfer Policy Exception for a Jet Engine for Yugoslavia I. ISSUE The Government of Yugoslavia (GOY) has requested United States Government approval to explore with Pratt & Whitney Aircraft (P&W) the co-production and assembly of the TF30–P–414 jet engine in Yugoslavia. Such an arrangement would require that you authorize an exception to the arms transfer policy of May 19, 1977 on the grounds that approval of the program will promote our national security interests. II. DISCUSSION The US has been seeking to build more durable relations with Yugoslavia in anticipation of the post-Tito era. Our success depends upon our ability to establish strong links with the leading individuals and institutions, key among which is the Yugoslav military. The Yugoslavs produce about 75 percent of their military needs. For the remainder, which includes nearly all sophisticated equipment, they depend primarily on the Soviets. The Yugoslavs have been diversifying their sources of supply and have sought to purchase from us a number of new items. Most important among these would be a new engine for the Eagle II (Orao II) all-purpose, supersonic fighter aircraft which Yugoslavia plans to build during the mid-1980s. After several exchanges with us about which engines might be available for this plane, the Yugoslavs settled on the P&W TF30. The GOY is also considering several West European and Soviet Engines. We authorized P&W to discuss direct sales of the engine with the GOY, consistent with your approval last year of a moderate expansion in our arms transfer relationship with Yugoslavia with emphasis on political impact. The Yugoslavs are very interested in the TF30 but their decision will depend largely upon our willingness to permit joint production of the engine; they probably are not interested in a straight sale. The GOY requests detailed commercial and technical information regarding both direct purchase and co-production by January 15, 1979. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 57, Yugoslavia: 1–8/79. Secret. The memorandum is not initialed by Vance.
