1980  837
• The incidents on June 3 and June 6 were caused by errors gen-
erated in a NORAD communications device (minicomputer), which 
resulted in false indications of a missile attack. The minicomputer is 
used to transmit data from NORAD’s main computer to other com-
mand centers. NORAD’s main computer receives warning data from 
sensors such as satellites and radar, which actually monitor missile 
launches and flights. The sensors themselves never registered a missile 
attack, nor did the main computer indicate an attack. Consequently, the 
false indication was recognized by the appropriate people in the mili-
tary command centers within 2–3 minutes. (U)
• Our response during both incidents was in accordance with 
planned procedures. What occurred were the initial precautionary 
measures to prevent our bombers and command aircraft from being 
trapped on the ground—­measures which do not represent even the 
beginning of a retaliatory attack. Within the first two minutes, SAC 
alerted its aircraft crews as a precautionary measure and instructed 
them to start their engines. This procedure is frequently practiced as 
part of our training. Nothing irreversible was done in our response to 
the false warning. (U)
• Although we believe the immediate cause of these incidents has 
been isolated to a particular device, the Department of Defense has 
assembled a task force of highly respected computer systems and com-
munications experts to conduct a thorough examination of our NORAD 
attack warning system. (U)
195.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to 
President Carter1
Washington, June 15, 1980
SUBJECT
Update on M–X (U)
I have recently informed you of several changes we have made 
in the detailed engineering design of the M–X basing arrangement,2 
while remaining well within the scope of the basing decision you made 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/Security, 
Welch, Box 208, Chron: 6/17–30/80. Secret. Enclosures 1 and 2 were not found attached.
2 In the margin to the right of this clause, Carter wrote a question mark and drew 
an arrow inward.
