918 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement and related training program which would qualify Panamanians to work in higher grades in Canal Zone establishments; (2) agreed to re-­examine “security” classification positions with a view to reducing them further; and (3) agreed to examine means of adjusting wages for manual-type labor paid to unskilled and semi-­skilled employees, such adjustment probably to date from February 1960, the first anniversary of the new wage plan. According to Governor Potter, changes in existing regulations may be required in order to implement these decisions. ARA agrees with Ambassador Harrington’s suggestion that, as a result of the strong personal interest taken by the President in the current state of United States-Panamanian relations and in view of the President’s instructions to the responsible United States officials to undertake to interpret the 1955 Treaty in a broader sense then heretofore, a letter should be sent to President de la Guardia of Panama by President Eisenhower stating that he has approved a number of revisions in Canal Zone operating policies which he believes will redound to the benefit of Panama. This letter would have effect of taking the immediate pressure off the United States, particularly during the forthcoming presidential campaign in Panama, and would place us in a more favorable light before the bar of world public opinion. At the outset, the Department of the Army and Governor Potter did not favor sending the letter, but desired that the same points be made orally to the Panamanian President by our Ambassador. They have now receded from that position and have concurred in the letter as drafted. ARA feels strongly that the suggested letter should be signed by the President, for, in addition to the reason set forth above, it would be a clear indication of the president’s desire to cooperate with Panama in minimizing certain frictions in our foreign relations. Moreover, if at some future time Panama should take the 1955 Treaty compliance issue to the IOJ, we would have a written record of our attempts to be cooperative and that we had, in fact, leaned over backward to assuage Panamanian desires. It is ARA’s view that the message should be released to the press upon its delivery by Ambassador Harrington. ARA is, however, not laboring under any delusion that these steps will halt further Panamanian attempts to seek additional benefits from our presence in the Canal Zone. ARA anticipated that these decisions affecting our operations in the Canal Zone will come to the notice of the Congress, of the Board of Directors of the Panama Canal Company, and of the public in general, and that considerable comment will result therefrom. ARA in conjunction with H plans to undertake immediately to brief the members and staffs of the appropriate committees in Congress on the background of the decisions taken at the White House to point out that the foreign relations aspects of this matter outweigh the possible inconveniences which they may cause to Canal Zone residents or members of the Armed Forces on duty there.
