Yugoslavia
887
sures, Tito’s successors will have to overcome the constraints on effec-
tive and timely decisionmaking that inhere in a strictly collegial
leadership system. Initially, they will probably not encounter inordi-
nate difficulties. The great bulk of the population will react to Tito’s
departure by rallying around the regime, and the ruling elite will
display a high degree of collective solidarity. Before long, however,
these shock effects can be expected to dissipate. Public support for the
regime will then become much more contingent on policy outputs and
outcomes, and Tito’s successors will find it much harder to submerge
their internal differences. Although the preceding period will not neces-
sarily be free of significant challenges, this will be the point at which
the transition to the post-Tito era really begins and Tito’s achievements
undergo their first really strenuous posthumous test of endurance.
A. Breakdown Possibilities
24. The chances of passing this test have been diminished by the
recent (February 1979) death of Edvard Kardelj, who was the one Tito
aide who enjoyed broad popular respect and the general trust and
deference of his colleagues. Without such a man to serve as arbiter
and peacemaker, Tito’s successors will find it extremely difficult to
compromise their policy differences and rise above their personal and
factional antagonisms and animosities. In consequence, it is easy to
envision a post-Tito recurrence of the political degeneration which took
place during the late 1960s and early 1970s, when Tito allowed his
then lieutenants a fairly free hand in domestic policy.
25. By the time Tito belatedly terminated this experiment in late
1971, virtually the entire domestic policy process had succumbed to
paralysis, and personal and factional relations within the ruling elite
had deteriorated to the point where Yugoslavia faced incipient violence.
To restore political efficacy and order, moreover, Tito had to draw on
every ounce of his immense personal authority. And, when it appeared
that even this would not suffice, he took the extreme step of threatening
to call in the military.
26. In the event of a similar impasse among Tito’s heirs, the military
might well intervene on its own initiative if it were not invited to do
so by elements within the leadership. Tito’s designation of the armed
forces as the ultimate guarantor of Yugoslav unity could be cited as
justification of such an intervention and could mitigate reluctance in
the officer corps to interfere in political matters.
27. With their considerable internal discipline and cohesion
and close connection with the country’s security forces, the armed
forces could probably impose a degree of stability in an otherwise
shaky situation. In the process, they would probably tend to favor a
greater reliance on administrative and centralist methods of control
