September 18–December 16, 1978 245 Fahd continued that Saudi Arabia wishes President Carter every success. What would seem to spoil that wish, however, is how the Palestinians outside the area will react because they feel neglected. It would not be as smooth as Saudi Arabia or the U.S. would wish. If the outside Palestinians felt after five years that they would have self determination, all would go smoothly. They are at loss to see what is intended for them. The PLO is organized; it is recognized in the UN. What will it do? Fahd continued by asking what Saudi Arabia could tell the Palestinians in the absence of assurances. Without such assurances they would consider Saudi Arabia an enemy, not a friend, if it urged support for the agreement. Saudi Arabia hopes for a clear-cut reference projecting past the five-year period so that it can calm the Palestinians down. Fahd continued that he stressed this point because Saudi Arabia wants to cooperate with the United States. Thus Saudi Arabia is pleading for a significant indication or promise that the United States can give. He urged the Secretary to go back and discuss this with the President. He urged the Secretary to convey the strength of Saudi feeling. He asked that we come up with something tangible that the Saudis can use if they are to carry out their side of the bargain. This is urgent, so that Saudi Arabia can take an active role. It is extremely important for Saudi Arabia to support President Carter’s magnificent effort. Deputy Minister Mansouri asked if there is linkage between the two agreements. The Secretary replied that there is no specific linkage in the documents but that Sadat had said he would not sign the Sinai agreement until Israel had signed the general agreement. Fahd said Saudi Arabia wants to help Sadat. He asked the Secretary to convey to the President the tone, the spirit and the urgency of his remarks. He said that if the U.S. would give Saudi Arabia the wherewithal the Saudis will summon the PLO and others to soothe the situation. Saudi Arabia is fearful of an explosion. The Soviets and rejectionists are lighting a fire under the Palestinians. It is easy to do. If the U.S. will enable Saudi Arabia to hold the reins the Saudis can help with the Palestinians. The U.S. should also get Begin to “pipe down”. The Secretary said that he had called Begin personally6 to say that Begin is doing a disservice to his own country and to Sadat. Counselor Pharaon noted that the absence of reference to Palestinians outside the area will cause Israel to insist on security barriers as long as there are displaced Palestinians who might cause trouble. The Secretary noted 6 A record of this conversation was not found.
