696 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV Survivability: Stan Turner believes that the Soviets may try to increase numbers of ICBM warheads numbers enough to make targeting all MX shelters feasible. This doesn’t seem reasonable. While increasing numbers of silo based missile warheads might be possible at costs comparable to those required to make corresponding increases in the size of the MX system, the Soviets will see that their efforts can readily be offset, and that such a race would increase their vulnerability to a U.S. first strike. If on the other hand the Soviets consider expanding the threat to MX in the form of mobile missiles, they have some significant technical problems to solve, and would be at a significant economic disadvantage in such a race given the extra costs of mobile systems. (S) Verifiability: Stan Turner also believes that we do not yet know what design measures are needed to allow satellites to verify that extra missiles are not hidden in the shelters (memo at Tab A).3 His staff believes that appropriate measures can be found—­perhaps [1 line not declassified] You should question Stan to get as tight a statement of his concerns as possible, and then simply instruct Harold to ensure that the shelter design does allow satellite inspection.4 Waiting another several weeks or months in order to sort out the detailed design requirements of inspectable shelters isn’t reasonable. (S) If at this point you can make a decision to accept Harold’s recommendation, or if you anticipate accepting it soon, we should discuss how to implement it. (U) The first question on implementation is how we should continue to explain the counterforce capabilities of the MX. We need to agree on what the valid arguments are, and that no other arguments will be given without further NSC discussion.5 This is necessary in order to minimize the chance that anyone will undermine the arguments that have been made so far, or alternatively that the MX decision will be taken to imply things it does not necessarily mean such as—­we are taking a first step toward a damage limiting capability. (S) In my view there are two valid arguments we should use: —We don’t want the Soviets to see a potential advantage in any nuclear exchange limited to strikes against each others forces (I used this argument in answering Senator Hatfield’s criticisms) —MX counterforce capabilities should push the Soviets toward the same kinds of relatively expensive mobile systems we are moving toward. This would prevent them from maintaining their strategic posture at significantly less cost than we maintain ours, and may ultimately 3 See Document 151. 4 Carter drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this and the preceding sentence. 5 Carter drew an arrow in the right margin pointing to this sentence.
