Romania portant for us to have authoritative discussions with the Chinese at the highest levels in order to consult about these matters of mutual interest. (S) • The current expanse of U.S.–PRC contacts in such fields as scientific and technological exchanges, trade, and tourism helps create a favorable environment for normalization. We hope to enhance these dimensions of our relationship with China in the months ahead. (S) • You seek an improvement in relations with China because it is in our interest to do so. But, normalization is not directed against any Third Country. We simply believe that China plays a positive role in maintaining the global equilibrium, and we wish to consolidate our relations with China to enhance the prospects of peace in Asia and elsewhere. (S) —What will be the agenda of Ceausescu’s discussions with the Chinese? (S)13 —Whom does he expect his interlocutors to be? (S) —How does he view the future evolution of Chinese foreign policy? (S) 8. Korea (If asked) U.S. Objectives: To emphasize our desire for a reduction of tensions on the Korean peninsula. Ceausescu’s Objectives: To pass on the views of North Korean leaders and to obtain our views as to the prospects for a negotiated settlement of the Korean issue. Essential Factors: A high-level North Korean official visited Bucharest last month, and there is a good possibility that Kim Il-song has asked Ceausescu to carry a message to Washington. If that is the case, Ceausescu may offer to carry a reply back to Kim Il-song whom he will probably visit in May in connection with his visit to the PRC. Points to be Made: —State our opposition to talks with North Korea in the absence of the South, as Kim Il-song has urged for some time. —Explain our view that a serious direct dialogue between North and South Korea is necessary to bridge past hostilities and to move toward the eventual goal of reunification. —Note that those countries like Romania which wish to encourage a reduction of tensions on the peninsula can contribute by developing contacts of their own with both Koreas. (Romania currently shuns all diplomatic and commercial contact with South Korea.) 13 Brzezinski highlighted this paragraph in the margin.
