920 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV 219. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner to the Special Coordination Committee1 Washington, December 3, 1980 SUBJECT Basic Strategy Issues [portion marking not declassified] 1. Harold Brown’s paper recommending the development of a basic national strategy is a super idea.2 [portion marking not declassified] 2. The strategy recommended is based on two premises: a. that the United States has insufficient military power to handle the European, Asiatic, and Persian Gulf theaters simultaneously; and b. that a coalition strategy is therefore essential to protect even our vital interests. [portion marking not declassified] 3. The second premise is flawed. Historically, coalitions have been useful primarily in wartime because it is then that the vital interests of the partners coincide. Coalitions have not been useful in developing and executing peacetime strategies. To the extent that NATO has had success in peacetime over the past 30 years, it has only been because NATO policy was so dominated by the policies of the United States that it simply mirrored it. Now that NATO is moving swiftly away from American domination, it will, before long, be a matter of form and not substance as far as peacetime strategy is concerned. [portion marking not declassified] 4. It is highly unlikely that the members of any coalition would consistently agree that what was vital to the United States was vital to them also, except the defense of their homelands. No one would imagine that the Soviet Union would mortgage its vital interests to the voluntary support of the Poles, for instance. If we are willing to place our vital interests at risk to the cooperation of our allies, the world will simply perceive that we do not place as much value on our vital interests as do the Soviets on theirs. In fact, since our European allies have perceived that the U.S. nuclear umbrella no longer was a sure deterrent to a Soviet invasion, they have been less and less cooperative on Alliance matters. The U.S., by a combination of military strength, non-­military leverage and perceived will to act, must reassume that burden of protection of our, and their, vital interest. This does not mean that we should neglect their contributions to protecting our joint interests, but that we cannot 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 38, (Serial) XX—Sensitive: (11/80–12/80). Secret. 2 See Document 214.
