836 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS Mr. Aaron opened the meeting by noting that there had been no SCC meeting on Iran for a month. He reminded all participants to brief agencies on the importance of continued cooperation and coordination since many of the issues involving Iran were of considerable political sensitivity. (U) 1. Iranian Attendance at Scientific Conference. Frank Press summarized the case of a legitimate Iranian scientist who is to present a paper at a recognized scientific conference in Colorado. The National Academy of Science has asked that he be allowed to attend. Dr. Press pointed out that we have used the rules of the International Scientific Union to persuade the USSR to permit Israelis and Taiwanese to attend conferences in the USSR. We have been criticized for refusing access of Soviet scientists to conferences here after the Afghanistan crisis. If we reject Iranians for political reasons, we will again be subject to criticism. The numbers of Iranian cases are extremely small (only two known cases this year), and he felt that the U.S. national interest was served by granting visas in these cases. The SCC agreed that the specific case he raised should be approved. Other cases in the future which differed significantly from this case would be reviewed on a case-bycase basis.2 (C) 2. Iranians With Third Country Nationality. Iranians who are also nationals of a third nation (Italy, France, etc.) have been denied visas to enter the U.S. on the grounds that they are Iranian nationals, even though they carry legitimate passports of another nation. This rule has been enforced in order to prevent Iranians from simply buying passports of convenience from nations such as Monaco, Bahamas, Dominica, etc. and using them to circumvent U.S. rules. The SCC agreed unanimously that individuals with legitimate third country nationality (e.g. someone who has acquired British citizenship) should be treated as a citizen of that country, even if born in Iran or of Iranian parents. However, visas should continue to be denied in cases of “convenience” passports for circumvention. (C) Agree that an Iranian dual national who presents a third country passport shall be treated as a third country national unless the passport was acquired illegally or otherwise does not reflect a bona fide acquisition of third country nationality.3 No. Continue to deny visas to Iranian dual nationals. 2 Carter approved the item with a checkmark and initialed “J” in the right margin. 3 Carter approved this option with a checkmark, underlined the words “bona fide,” and wrote in the right margin: “Do not permit abuse.”
