understand that it was distinctly against naval opinion to purchase the two
flotilla leaders from Spain. I am also led to believe that Sir Malcolm
Robertson, the British Ambassador, interested himself extremely in the
allotment of the various units to Great Britain and pointed out that as his
country is Argentina’s best customer, and the largest ship-building nation in
the world, it should receive due consideration.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Even before presenting my letters of credence, I had a conversation with Dr.
Gallardo, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, on behalf of the Electric Boat
Company, recommending to the earnest consideration of the Argentine
Naval authorities its proposition to build three submarines in France for the
Argentine Navy. Before his departure for Europe, I talked with him again
on the subject and also took it up later with Dr. Sagarna, Acting Minister for
Foreign Affairs, and with Admiral Domecq Garcia, the Minister of Marine.
In view of the letting of the contract to the Tossi Company, I personally do
not believe that the Electric Boat Company have any further opportunity of
obtaining the units which are to be constructed in the future, unless they
should adopt different means of approach.
As far as it has been possible to learn, the bid made by the Electric Boat
Company exceeded that of the Tossi Company. It has been reported that
Signor Mussolini, at the request of the head of the Argentine Naval
Commission in Europe, intervened with the Italian company, with the result
that its price for the submarines was reduced from £218,000 to £208,000 for
each vessel.
The Bethlehem Steel Corporation have, I believe, a fair chance to gain the
contract for the four river gunboats, inasmuch as Mr. Hill, Vice President of
the Corporation, who is now in Buenos Aires, has made a tender which has
appealed to the Argentine Government. He has offered to assemble one of
these units in Argentina, with Argentine workmen, only the direction to be
controlled by the Bethlehem Steel Corporation. As this would be the first
naval unit of any importance to be built in South America, it would
naturally be a subject of local pride, and there is a reasonable expectation,
