826 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement HO–17. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Honduran Affairs (Chaplin)1 Washington, November 17, 1960. SUBJECT United Fruit Company Plans in Honduras PARTICIPANTS ARA—Assistant Secretary Thomas C. Mann Mr. Victor Folsom, General Counsel, United Fruit Co. Mr. Joseph W. Montgomery, Director, United Fruit Co. Mr. Alfred Giardino, Labor Consultant, United Fruit Co. Mr. Dale McConkey, Personnel Director, United Fruit Co. Mr. Jasper Baker, Wash. Representative, United Fruit Co. Mr. Andrew McClellan, AFL/CIO ARA:OAP—Mr. Higdon, Mr. Chaplin ARA:RPA—Mr. Hammond Mr. Folsom and his associates called on Mr. Mann at the latter’s request to discuss the United Fruit Company’s plans for its Honduran operations. Mr. Mann said that uncertainty over the company’s plans in Honduras is so intense as to create a political problem. The problem areas appeared to be in reduction of work force, leasing banana farms to private producers, withdrawal from schools, hospitals, the commissary, and possible turnover of the railroad to the Honduran Government. Mr. McClellan said that the union (SITRATERCO) did not intend to advise the company on plans for reorganization in the face of the declining economic position of the Honduran banana industry, but felt that the company had an obligation to arrange for transfer of the public services it operates in such a way that these services will continue to operate efficiently. He said that he hoped to arrange a meeting between company officials and the union leaders. Mr. Folsom outlined the grim outlook for the Honduran banana industry, and noted that at the current rate of spread of the Panama disease, United’s production of the Gros Michel variety will have been reduced to virtually nothing in five years. United has an investment of about $40 million in Honduras, and is doing everything it can to protect that investment. The only solution foreseen at this time is the discovery of a disease resistant banana variety. The company’s counting on having discovered a disease resistant variety before the existing Gros Michel production is wiped out. The company has established experimental growths of Lacatan and Giant 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 815.0511/11–1760. Official Use Only.
