Afghanistan cause to ease off. The lesson we are trying to teach by means of the sanctions will be easily dissipated if we do not assiduously maintain them. D. A corollary is that having administered the lesson (of which the Olympics boycott is important and deserves determined followthrough), we should stand back and await the results. Continued dribbling out of further sanctions beyond those specified by the President will give the impression of terminal anti-Sovietism rather than a stern lesson. Moreover, we ought to save a few measures for counter-retaliation for any Soviet retaliation against our sanctions and as new sanctions in the event of further Soviet misbehavior. E. Another point about economic sanctions: Our policy of stern application of sanctions even to the point of self-sacrifice, if it is to have any chance of contributing to improved Soviet behavior, must also leave open the possibility of some day resuming normal trade relations. I would be deeply concerned in this regard if we were to cut off completely the delivery of contracted items and particularly of spare parts. It would be satisfying indeed to see major Soviet projects grind to a halt until they can arrange alternate suppliers or install new machines not dependent on U.S. spare parts. But this would only be a temporary setback to them, while signalling that we have written off U.S.-Soviet trade for decades to come. I believe that would be a dangerous signal to send. Instead I recommend that contracts which are signed and well launched, as well as normal spare parts supplies, should be obstructed only if a good case can be made under revised, more stringent strategic guidelines. I am not concerned about the political consequences of discouraging new deals even in totally non-strategic areas during the coming year; this conveys the proper message and is in tune with our policy on agricultural exports. F. Scientific, cultural and educational exchanges should be an important part of our long-term repeat long-term strategy, because they can be helpful in gradually opening up this society to the kind of counterpressures against foreign adventurism and domestic repression which we would like to see gain a foothold. But since that internal process will require decades, at the present juncture we can afford to proceed tactically and we should therefore continue to hold down large-scale and visible exchanges (while if possible preserving the basic academic exchanges) until the Soviets give good reason for us to signal that they are worthy partners in this sort of endeavor. G. The most important and urgent positive signal is the one we have already given, that we are prepared even now to continue the arms control dialogue. Tactics and timing are important and are discussed below. H. Finally, there is the urgent question of the struggle for the support of the rest of the world in opposing Soviet external aggression. It
