704 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Egyptians, both in operations and contingency plans. Our long-term objective can be described as a Persian Gulf/Indian Ocean region with a permanent U.S. naval presence and surge capability, an Afghanistan whose neutrality has been restored, a strengthened Pakistan, a more cohesive and cooperative Iran, and an Arabian Peninsula free from threat from the PDRY. We have taken a number of actions to begin the implementation of our Persian Gulf strategy. A status report follows. Please indicate whether you would wish an NSC meeting on some of the following subjects, whether some of them in your judgment should be dropped, and whether you have any specific or general guidance that you could give us as we continue to work on the following: Actions Undertaken and/or Ongoing 1. Political/Diplomatic: —The State of the Union Address.2 —Agha Shahi visit to Washington.3 —Reaffirmation of the 1959 Agreement with Pakistan,4 new definition of assurances, and consultations with Congress. —Development of political assurances for states providing military facilities (Oman, Somalia, Kenya—before SCC).5 —Approaches to Spain, Morocco, and others about enroute basing and overflight support (in progress). —Christopher trip to Europe on Afghanistan and East-West relations.6 —Brown mission to China.7 —Clifford mission to India.8 —Brzezinski/Christopher mission to Pakistan.9 2 See Document 138. 3 Administration officials met with Shahi in Washington on January 12. (Graham Hovey, “Washington Vows to Help Pakistan: Carter and Vance Meet Islamabad Official in Response to Soviet Actions in Afghanistan,” The New York Times, January 13, 1980, p. 15) 4 See footnote 8, Document 138. 5 Documentation is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East Regional; Arabian Peninsula. 6 Christopher consulted with officials in London, Rome, Bonn, and Paris during mid-January. Records of these meetings are scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe. 7 See footnote 8, Document 135. 8 Clifford met with Gandhi in New Delhi at the end of January. 9 See footnote 9, Document 138.
