656
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
understood between the U.S. and U.K. before embarking upon any ad-
ventures in internal Iranian politics.
V. Relations With the USSR
1. The Soviets would undoubtedly use all means at their disposal
to oppose any government which promised to rule Iran with a firmer
hand than Mosadeq has used. The latter’s opposition has constantly ac-
cused him of softness toward the Tudeh, which organization has re-
cently devoted much effort to explaining to its members why Mosadeq
should be supported in his feud with the Shah, obviously fearing se-
vere restrictive measures against it should a new Prime Minister
appear.
2. Once he was out of office, Mosadeq would automatically be-
come a Tudeh martyr and the party would throw its full weight behind
those elements seeking his restoration. Should Mosadeq himself disap-
pear from the scene, the Tudeh could conceivably seize control of the
nationalist movement in his name and make a concerted drive to seize
power for itself.
3. It is to be expected that Soviet agents would actively aid the
Tudeh, including furnishing of arms clandestinely, but that Russian
armed forces would not enter Iran because of the danger of a resultant
all-out war. For the same reason Western forces could not be used on
Iranian soil to aid the new government without running the danger
that the Soviets would then invoke the 1921 treaty allowing for the in-
troduction of Soviet troops into Iran under certain conditions. That
these conditions as stipulated would not exist, would obviously not
delay Soviet action.
4. Aside from providing covert assistance to government forces,
the U.S. approach would consist of a vigorous propaganda offensive
pointing up a) the well-known and easily documented Russian orienta-
tion of Tudeh policy, b) the ways in which the Russian lend assistance
to Tudeh, and c) the complete opportunities of communist policy as ev-
idenced by its former violent attacks on Mosadeq as an imperalist
agent.
APPENDIX I
Iran’s gross budget is estimated to be running a deficit at the rate of
about 6 billion rials ($120 million) per year. On the optimistic assump-
tion that the National Iranian Oil Co. (NIOC) will export sufficient oil to
be self-supporting from oil revenues, and assuming further budgetary
economies, this deficit could be reduced to some 4.0 billion rials. At 50
rials per dollar this is the equivalent of $20 million. After allowing for
the increased rial revenues from customs receipts because of the greater
volume of imports resulting from an aid program, this would be re-
