Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
647
126.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, September 13, 1979
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #109
1. Opinion—Acquiescence vs. Assertiveness
I think all of us in this Administration should think through two
questions, which are both perplexing and troublesome:
1. Why is the public not giving this Administration, and particu-
larly the President, due credit for genuinely substantive foreign policy
accomplishments—accomplishments which no other Administration
in recent years has matched in a comparable period of time?
2. Why is public opinion in the world at large, notably in allied
countries, viewing this Administration as perhaps the most timid since
World War II?
The easy answer to these questions is that the U.S. public is simply
misinformed, because of the excessively critical and even prejudiced
views of the Washington press corps; and that this jaundiced perspec-
tive, echoed by a mindless foreign press, then shaped the stereotypes
with which we are now saddled.
There is doubtless some truth in that answer, and perhaps even a
great deal of truth. However, it is certainly not the entire truth. I think
that to find a more complete explanation one has to take a closer look at
the increasingly pervasive feeling in the country and abroad that in the
U.S.-Soviet relationship the Soviet side increasingly is the assertive
party and the U.S. side is the more acquiescent. This is seen as true in
terms of arms competition, though you are the first President in a
decade and a half to reverse the trends; this is seen as especially true in
terms of international behavior, particularly in relationship to the
various trouble spots. For better or for worse, we were passive in Iran;
the Soviets are far from passive in Afghanistan. We pursued a diplo-
matically amiable policy in Africa; the Soviets relied on Cuban arms,
not without some effect. In Latin America, and particularly in Central
America, revolutionary fervor is on the rise, and we have not been able
to give those who want to rely on us a sense of security.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 126, Weekly National Security Report: 6–9/79. Top Se-
cret. The President wrote “Good. C” in the top right-hand corner of the memorandum.
