Heads of Legation stating that diplomatic delegation at Shanghai has been instructed to consider with the consular body and Chinese delegates the best means to remedy the distressing situation, and recalling to the Chinese Government its grave responsibility for maintaining order throughout China. Opinions of Chang Tso-lin and Feng Yu-hsiang regarding Shanghai disturbances. Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513] June (225) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Report from the consul at Shanghai that part of defense forces have been withdrawn, owing to improved situation. [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 514] June (112) From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.) Information that the purport of telegram No. 107, June 12, to Peking, has been conveyed to the Foreign Minister, who expressed gratification. [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 516] June (237) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Inability of diplomatic delegation at Shanghai to reach an agreement with the Chinese Government delegates in respect of the Shanghai incidents; departure of the delegation for Peking. Decision of Heads of Legation to constitute the Italian and the French Ministers and the U. S. Chargé^ as a committee to negotiate with the Chinese Government for settlement of the incidents and, if so agreed by the Governments concerned, for a reorganization of the International Settlement and the administration of justice in the Settlement. [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 516] June (238) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Chinese Government’s preference for Shanghai as the place for negotiations; desire of Heads of Legation, conveyed to the Foreign Minister, that negotiations be held in Peking. [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 517] June (242) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Telegram from the consul general at Shanghai, June 22 (text printed), reporting belief that there will be no relaxation in strike until June 26; also that no practical assistance for maintaining order has yet been received from Chang Tso-lin. [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 519] June (Circular 187 bis) From the Italian Minister in China, Senior Minister, to the American Chargé Note from the Waichiaopu, June 24 (text printed), submitting the [Pg. 670 includes portions of
