Arms Control and Disarmament  1597
reason to expect before the recess a formal proposal on the lines of the 
idea which as I told you in my message of February 24 I had discussed 
very tentatively and non-­committally with Khrushchev, for they must 
know that I shall want to discuss it with you. A recess beginning only 
just before Easter and after I am back from Washington would be more 
awkward.
I suggest therefore that we plan for a recess of three weeks starting 
from March 20. I think it is most important that at the time of recess we 
should announce the date of re-­assembly, although we might have it in 
mind to considerably reduce the tempo of the negotiations when they 
start again. The case would then be an exact parallel to the Christmas 
recess, when as you remember no anxiety was expressed in any quarter 
that we might be working for a break.
No doubt you are aware of articles now appearing in the press 
and suggesting that the Western powers do not want an agreement at 
Geneva. If we were to recess without a date for re-­assembly this spec­
ulation would inevitably increase, and we should find ourselves in a 
bad public position. We do not want people to draw a parallel with the 
Surprise Attack Conference, which recessed before Christmas without 
setting a time for its re-­assembly; I think the public concludes that the 
Conference has not died.
Your delegation in Geneva has no doubt reported to you that the 
Russians there have been making tentative enquiries about the possi­
bilities of a recess. So far our delegation has not had similar enquiries. 
But I conclude that it might be possible for a recess to be arranged by 
the three delegations at Geneva. I think this would be a better way to 
arrange it than by our writing to Khrushchev, because I fear that if we 
did so he would seize the opportunity to publish a propaganda reply 
misrepresenting our proposal.
I agree with you that we could profit by a recess to make plain to 
the world at large the principle which is essential to a sound and accept­
able agreement: “an effective international control system not subject to 
veto or obstruction”, as you rightly put it. But I doubt whether it would 
be wise to have the status of the negotiations discussed in the United 
Nations Disarmament Commission. As our Embassy has told your offi­
cials, we are not sure that neutral nations will be so easily convinced 
of the rightness of the whole of our present position as it stands on 
the record of the Conference. At any rate, even if we were to secure a 
favourable verdict in the Disarmament Commission I do not see how, 
that would help us at Geneva. I think it would on the contrary be likely 
to make the Russians more difficult and obstinate.
Finally, I must mention a point in your letter with which I do not 
altogether agree. I do not think that the tentative suggestions which 
I made to Khrushchev have led the Russians at Geneva to show any
