120  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
2a. The US will maintain the 
nuclear forces to destroy 
70% of all identified 
Soviet economic recovery 
resources, [15 lines not 
declassified].
2b. The Secretary of Defense will 
review current targeting policy 
and recommend targeting crite-
ria for NSC consideration and 
Presidential decision. Pending 
the completion of this review, 
the US will continue to employ 
forces according to NSDM 242.
2c. The Secretary of Defense will 
review current targeting pol-
icy and recommend targeting 
criteria and acquisition policy 
for NSC consideration and 
Presidential decision. Pending 
the completion of this review, 
the US will continue to employ 
forces according to NSDM 242.
3. [2 lines not declassified] Additional forces should not be acquired 
for this purpose; forces acquired for other purposes should have the 
characteristics necessary to respond flexibly.
4. The specific amount of hard-­target kill capability the US should 
maintain and for what strategic purposes should receive further 
study by the Secretary of Defense. This review and the recommenda-
tions flowing therefrom should be submitted for NSC consideration 
and Presidential decision. Pending completion of this review, the US 
will maintain at least the current level of time-­urgent hard-­target kill 
capability.
5. The US will maintain the capability to provide attack warning 
and assessment and to insure adequate surveillance of US airspace. In 
addition, US R&D efforts in the area of active defenses should guard 
against possible Soviet technological breakthroughs or abrogation of 
the ABM Treaty and maintain those technology programs necessary to 
assess and respond to Soviet strategic defense initiatives, as appropriate.
6a. The US will continue to 
maintain a diversity of 
nuclear forces through the 
three legs of a TRIAD.
6b. The US will maintain a high 
overall level of invulnerability 
in its strategic force posture, 
with a diverse mix of systems 
designed to provide high con-
dence [confidence?] of surviving 
attacks, penetrating defenses, 
and guarding against the tech-
nological breakthroughs by an 
adversary and unanticipated 
failure of one type of system to 
perform as required.
