International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
541
Senate voted three weeks ago. The President vetoed a part of the Bill,
on textiles,3 and there is another part that has been adopted by the
Senate and which is absolutely against MTN negotiations.
The President said that the Congress did not act in time, but he has
no doubt that they will act very early in 1979.
President Giscard said that what he would suggest is that France is,
really and for national and for objective reasons, rather reluctant about
this, and it is not a mystery. He can send someone. The President’s
envoy—Mr. Strauss—is very energetic, but perhaps too much, because
he took for granted that he could obtain what he asked for—but he
probably didn’t. Would it be useful to have a frank and exhaustive ex-
ploration between the President’s people and his?
The President said “yes.” He asked whether President Giscard
agreed that they will try to meet the December 15th deadline which
they established in Bonn.
President Giscard said that he doesn’t know, because this deadline
was upset by this vote of the Senate. The President thinks this vote will
be reversed—but only at the beginning of January, not before.
The President said that the problem is that the Congress did not
vote. The legislation that we need and expect was inadvertently killed
in the last few hours of the Session because Congress didn’t get around
to it; they did not take affirmative action, they just failed to take af-
firmative action. He has no doubts that we can repair that very early in
the next Session, if we can have the implementation of the agreement
even contingent upon action by the Congress: this would suit him o.k.
President Giscard asked what the importance is for the President of
the December 15 deadline.
The President said that it is just that all of them agreed—including
President Giscard—at Bonn to have December 15 as a deadline, and if
we go back on that plan then it leaves the entire matter extremely un-
certain. He has, as he is sure does President Giscard, substantial protec-
tionist sentiment in the U.S., and we are trying to do everything we can
to prevent tariffs from being too high.
President Giscard said that, frankly, they could not commit them-
selves to this deadline, whatever the content is, because they have a
basic “place” on the substance. So he does not know if there is a chance
before December 15th to have agreement on the substance. He doesn’t
know. This discussion today is a discussion between the Nine, and he
thinks that they will keep their formal position. But then they will have
3 Regarding the legislation forbidding the granting of tariff concessions on textiles,
see Document 170 and footnote 3 thereto. On November 11, Carter vetoed the bill, H.R.
9937. See Document 178 and footnote 3 thereto.
