Human Rights
101
34.
Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Lake) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)1
Washington, April 14, 1977
SUBJECT
Attached Memorandum on Human Rights
As per your request at your luncheon, April 2, we have redrafted
the S/P–D/HA Action Memorandum of March 252 to proceed as a
memo directly from you to the Secretary.3
We have adjusted the previous draft in accordance with your com-
ments and suggestions. At the same time, we have preserved most of
the original thrust and text which you approved.
The result is a comparatively lengthy document. It is, however,
one which we believe is valuable, not only for the Secretary’s reference
but also—and this may be crucial for bureaucratic follow-up—as a
clear statement to the building of our overall policy and program de-
sign. It is, in effect, the bureaucratic or structural companion piece for
the much longer S/P background paper on human rights (which itself
is based on input from throughout the building and due for wide distri-
bution within the foreign affairs agencies in Washington and to all US
posts abroad). We have attached the latter in uncleared form for your
reference at this time. (See attachment B.)4
We have retained reference to your interagency coordinating role
in both the attached overall memo to the Secretary and the memo-
randum we propose he send to the President. Since we appreciate your
concern about a formal interagency mechanism, we have left the lan-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Di-
rector, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 2, TL 4/1–4/15/77. Confi-
dential. Drafted by Vogelgesang on April 6. Kreisberg wrote on the memorandum:
“MAC—what has happened to this memo? did the attachment go to Secy? Did memo go
to President? PHK.” Lake sent a draft of the memorandum to Habib, Cooper, Benson, Ni-
metz, Hansell, and Derian under cover of an April 7 memorandum, indicating that Chris-
topher had approved its substance. (National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Human Rights
and Humanitarian Affairs, Chron and Official Records of the Assistant Secretary for
Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Lot 85D366, D Meeting on Human Rights)
2 See Attachment, Document 29.
3 Attached but not printed is an undated memorandum from Christopher to Vance.
4 The S/P background paper is not attached. Sirkin drafted the paper in S/P on Feb-
ruary 26 and circulated it to the regional and functional bureaus on March 2. (National
Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher,
1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 16, Human Rights—Early Efforts) The final version of the
paper, April 25, is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global
Issues—Bloomfield Subject File, Box 17, Human Rights: State Department Mid-Course
Assessments: 5/77–11/78.
