398 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Last year, I attended a number of working groups, conferences, and seminars on the prospect for change in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. If the most optimistic of those experts had been given the power to dictate the pace of change they would have mandated far less than what has already occurred. The pace of change in Eastern Europe is both accelerating and spreading to more countries at an incredible rate. While at a conference in Berlin last week, I met with the leaders of some of the new opposition movements in East Germany. At this largely academic conference, attended by scholars and officials of East Germany and the Soviet Union, when observers noted that East German opposition leaders seemed to have no concrete agenda apart from free travel and free elections, one senior Soviet official leaned over to me and remarked that the same had been true initially in the Baltic States. He added that he fully expected these new German opposition movements to be part of the government within a year. Self-­determination and stability We still hear some journalists and experts recommend that the United States and the Soviet Union jointly manage change in Eastern Europe. It is difficult to believe that this process of radical political, economic, and social change, compelled in the first place by the failure of centralized planning, would benefit from attempts at just such management by the United States and the Soviet Union. Nevertheless, we must engage the Soviet Union on the subject or change and begin to discuss how positive developments will alter and improve our relationship. Our clear message to the Soviet Union, however, must be the primacy of self determination, not simply end of the Brezhnev Doctrine and military interference, but also the clear right of each Eastern European nation to decide its own path and timetable for change. In summary, we should not put ourselves in the position of telling Eastern Europeans to slow down, even if we thought it would have any effect. East Europeans are in a much better position to determine how fast they can go than we are. Rapid change always increases the chance of violence. Recently, a Soviet official, stressing the importance of the arms control process, asked me privately whether the use of force to deal with domestic violence in the Soviet Union or in any of the Eastern European countries would present a problem for progress in the negotiations. An effort was made to stress that they had in mind police actions, brought on by intersectarian violence. Obviously, a distinction between legitimate police functions and political repression can be made in theory, but in the current context, drawing such a distinction would be difficult. That the question was asked at all suggests that the fears of greater violence in the East are real. This is a question likely to be raised in some form at Malta and we should be prepared to answer it.
