National Security Policy 345 trying to say was that in this process we must make sure we are not substituting money for brains. He reiterated that in the long run he did not believe we could defend our freedom if we put too much money or resources into the machinery of war. Mr. Allen Dulles commented that the report points up the vital need for improved intelligence on what the Soviets are doing. He noted that they had recently been cutting back production of heavy bombers. Also, they were not testing ICBMs to the extent expected. He wondered how effective the elaborate protective screen around Moscow would be. Mr. Gray said that he thought one of the questions raised by the evaluation was the problem of dealing with limited wars, which had been before the NSC recently. The President repeated that he expected the Weapons Systems Evaluation Group to lay out clearly for the Joint Chiefs of Staff the advantages versus the disadvantages of various weapons systems. Then, he felt, some very tough decisions would have to be made. Admiral Sides said that the WSEG had presented its report in full detail to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who were now considering it. Secretary Quarles expressed the belief that, just as we have gone back to the manned bomber as an effective weapon, he expected that the Soviets would too. He thought it was risky to assume that the Soviets would forgo manned bombers. He believed they would find it very much to their advantage to have the same kind of capability that we are trying to develop. He thought that the Soviets might end up producing a heavy bomber somewhere between our B–58 and B–70. Mr. Allen Dulles estimated that the Soviets will keep up a substan­ tial manned bomber force. He didn’t know yet whether they would be able to get high speed together with the necessary range. The President noted that we expect to level out with about 600 B–52 s, while the Soviets will level off at about 200 heavy bombers. He questioned whether, as we convert to heavy bombers of 3-­mach speed, we would still feel that we needed 600. He questioned whether we always needed to be three times better than the Soviets. General White said that our problem was that we must assume that the Soviets will strike first. If they do, we cannot stop them by our Distant Early Warning lines. We must, therefore, find the number of bombers which it is logical for us to maintain in order to strike back after the initial Soviet attack. Mr. Gray suggested, and it was agreed, that the Department of Defense be asked to review within the next year its report on relative advantages of ballistic missiles versus manned bombers. [Omitted here is the remainder of the memorandum.] James S. Lay, Jr.
