[Document 1]
The Norwegian Minister (Bryn) to the Secretary of State
[Translation ]
WASHINGTON, March 20, 1924.

MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: I have the honor by order of my Government to inform
you that by a note dated February 16, last, the plenipotentiary representative
of the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics at Christiania notified the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Norway that from now on the Government of
the Union recognizes the sovereignty of Norway over Spitzbergen,
including Bear Island, and therefore will not hereafter make any objection
with respect to the Spitzbergen Treaty of February 9, 1920, and the mining
regulations relative thereto.

In bringing the foregoing to Your Excellency’s knowledge, I take the liberty
of adding that the King’s Government would attach value to having Russia
allowed to adhere to the said treaty at the same time as the other powers
which under the final provisions of the treaty will be asked by the
Government of the French Republic to adhere to the treaty when it is duly
ratified. The King’s Government would therefore be thankful to know
whether the Government of the United States of America would for its part
raise any objection to Russia’s being invited, together with the other
nonsignatory powers, to adhere to the treaty concerning Spitzbergen.
Adding that a similar approach has been made by my Government to the
other signatory governments parties to the Spitzbergen Treaty, I beg you to
accept [etc.]

H. BRYN

[Document 2]
The Secretary of State to the Norwegian Minister (Bryn)
WASHINGTON, April 30, 1924.

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of March 20,
1924, in which you bring up the question of Russian adherence to the
Spitzbergen Treaty and ask whether the United States of America would
raise any objection if Russia should be invited to adhere to this Treaty at the
same time as the other powers not signatory to the Treaty are invited to
adhere.

[Document 3]
Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with
the French Ambassador (Jusserand), June 21, 1924
June 21, 1924
[Extract]
The Ambassador said that he had been instructed to suggest a project of a
protocol relating to the adhesion of Russia to the Spitzbergen Treaty. This
protocol was to the effect that notwithstanding the stipulation of Article X
of the Treaty Russia should be allowed to give her adhesion even though all
the high contracting parties had not recognized the Russian Government.
The Ambassador left with the Secretary a copy of this proposal.
The Ambassador also left a memorandum giving a proposal of Mr.
MacDonald. The memorandum is as follows:
“Mr. Ramsay MacDonald has proposed, and we agree that, in the
protocol concerning Spitzbergen, wherever the word “Russie”
appears, it be replaced by the expression: “Union des Républiques
sovietiques socialistes”.

[Document 4]
The Norwegian Minister (Bryn) to the Secretary of State
AIDE-MÉMOIRE
In a note dated March 20, 1924, the Norwegian Minister, acting under
instructions from his Government, asked whether the United States of
America would raise any objection if Russia should be invited to adhere to
the Spitsbergen Treaty at the same time as the other powers not signatory to
the Treaty are invited to adhere.

In a note, dated April 30, 1924, His Excellency the Secretary of State
replied that the question appears to be covered by the provisions of Article
10 of the Spitsbergen Treaty as effective between the high contracting
parties.

As the Secretary’s note seems not to give a definite reply, the Norwegian
Government has instructed the Minister to approach again the Department
of State informally, at the same time making the Department acquainted
with the attitude taken by the other powers.

The Minister therefore begs to submit the following synopsis of the replies
received by the Norwegian Government from the various powers interested:
France. In a note to the Norwegian Minister in Paris, dated March 22, 1924,
the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Poincaré, states that the powers which have
not yet recognized the Union of the Socialist Soviet Republics, could not
without infringement of Article 10 of the Spitsbergen Treaty, actually admit
Russia to adhere to the Treaty, but the French Government has, in deference
to the desire of the Norwegian Government, sought a means to secure the
adhesion of the Soviet Government without furnishing this one an
opportunity to avail itself of Article 10 in order to pretend that it has been
recognized by all the signatory powers. Monsieur Poincare has therefore, so
he further says, decided to confer on this point with those of the signatory
powers which have not recognized the Soviet Government.

Netherlands. In a note dated April 14, the Dutch Foreign Minister states that
Her Majesty’s Government is disposed to render its co-operation in order
that the desire of the Norwegian Government may be met, but an agreement
to that effect cannot be concluded until after the ratification of the
Spitsbergen Treaty. Monsieur van Karnebeek has notified the French
Government accordingly.

Great Britain, Italy, Denmark, Sweden. The Governments of these countries
have replied that they have no objection against inviting the Soviet
Government to adhere to the Spitsbergen Treaty at the same time as the
other non-signatory powers.

Japan. The Japanese Government is the only one from which nothing has
been heard as yet.

The Norwegian Minister will be thankful to know whether the Government
of the United States in consideration of the above information might be
disposed to reconsider the question raised by the Norwegian Government.
Mr. Bryn avails himself of this opportunity to renew to Mr. Hughes the
assurances of his highest consideration.

WASHINGTON , June 23, 1924.

Secretary of State that the Norwegian Government had received a
communication from the Japanese Government to the effect that it had no
objection to inviting the Russian Government to adhere to the Spitzbergen
Treaty, provided all signatory powers agree on this point (file no.

[Document 5]
The Secretary of State to the Norwegian Minister (Bryn)
WASHINGTON, June 27, 1924.

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to the Norwegian Minister
and acknowledges the receipt of his aide-mémoire of June 23, 1924, in
which the Minister, referring to previous correspondence with the
Department, makes informal inquiry in behalf of his Government whether
the Government of the United States would be disposed to reconsider the
question whether it would raise any objection if Russia were invited to
adhere to the Spitzbergen Treaty at the same time as other Powers not
signatory to the same are invited to adhere thereto. In his aide-mémoire the
Minister is good enough to submit a synopsis of replies received by the
Norwegian Government from the Governments of France, Netherlands,
Great Britain, Italy, Denmark and Sweden in relation to the matter.

The Secretary of State desires to make the following response:
First. The Treaty relating to Spitzbergen signed February 9, 1920,
could not be modified save by agreement of all the Powers
signatory thereto: and such modification in the case of the United
States would not be effective without the approval of the Senate.
Second. As indicated in the Department’s communication to the
Norwegian Legation of April 30, 1924, the question raised must
be regarded as covered by Article X of the Treaty. The provisions
of the first paragraph thereof seem to have been designed
primarily to safeguard the rights of Russian nationals and
companies during a defined interval and until the recognition by
the High Contracting Parties of a Russian Government.

Third. Should it be the desire of the States which have accepted
the Spitzbergen Treaty to invite the adherence thereto of Russia
through the medium of the regime now functioning therein, which
has not been recognized by the United States, the Government of
the United States would not raise an objection, provided it were
clearly understood that the absence of such an objection should
not be construed by any party to the Treaty or by the régime
functioning in Russia as constituting the recognition of that
regime by the Government of the United States.

[Document 6]
The Department of State to the French Embassy
undated
PROPOSED DRAFT OF AGREEMENT RELATIVE TO THE ADHESION OF THE RÉGIME KNOWN AS THE UNION OF THE SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS TO THE SPITZBERGEN TREATY
The Governments of the United States of America, the British Empire,
Denmark, France, Italy, Japan, Norway, the Netherlands, and Sweden,
signatories to the Treaty concluded in Paris on February 9, 1920,
concerning Spitzbergen, having found that some of them are recognizing
the régime now functioning in Russia and known as the Union of the Soviet
Socialist Republics and that those who do not recognize that régime are,
under the following conditions, not opposed to the adherence of that regime
to that Treaty, Have agreed that, notwithstanding the stipulation in the first
paragraph of Article 10, to permit the régime known as the Union of the
Soviet Socialist Republics to adhere to the said Treaty, even though all of
the High Contracting Parties may not have recognized that régime, on
condition and with the definite understanding that the absence of objection
to such adherence, on the part of the United States of America or of any
other High Contracting Party shall not be construed by any party to said
Treaty or to this Agreement or by the said régime known as the Union of
the Soviet Socialist Republics as constituting the recognition thereof by any
High Contracting Party which has not recognized that régime.
The present Agreement shall be ratified by all of the High Contracting
Parties. Each High Contracting Party shall in the shortest possible time send
its ratification to the French Government which will see to its being notified
to His Majesty the King of Norway and to the other High Contracting
Parties. The ratifications shall remain on deposit in the Archives of the
French Government. The present Agreement shall go into effect for each

[Document 7]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, February 14, 1924.

No. 146
SIR: It appears to His Majesty’s Government from the extracts from the
annual report of the Secretary of the Navy, which have been made public,
that the United States naval authorities are again asking authority to utilise
the large appropriation for the purpose of increasing the elevation of the
turret guns of 13 capital ships already granted by Congress but on which
action was suspended. In these circumstances His Majesty’s Government
think it desirable that their views on this important subject should at once be
laid before the Government of the United States, especially as the fact that
His Majesty’s Government have not so far expressed their views on the
subject is apparently regarded in some quarters as indicating that in their
opinion the proposed action is not inconsistent with the terms of the
Washington Naval Treaty.

The relevant provision of the treaty is chapter II, Part 3, Section 1 (d),
which prohibits, subject to certain exceptions, expressly provided for, any
reconstruction of retained capital ships or aircraft carriers except for the
purpose of providing means of defence against air and submarine attack. In
the view of His Majesty’s Government the words quoted govern the whole
of the remainder of the paragraph, and the subsequent sentence dealing with
alterations in side armour, in calibre, number or general type of mounting of
main armament, does not in any way diminish the effect of these governing
words, but merely develops them in certain respects, while also introducing
certain exceptions which had been agreed on for special reasons. It follows
that nothing which amounts to “reconstruction” may take place unless its
object is to provide means of defence against air and submarine attack, as
permitted by the above section.

It is clear that an increase in the elevation of turret guns of capital ships
cannot be intended for the purpose of providing means of defence against
air and submarine attack.

As regards the question whether such increase in the elevation involves any
“reconstruction”, the increase of the elevation of guns together with
consequential alterations such as scrapping or replacement of existing fire-
control systems, etc., involves considerable “reconstruction” in the fullest
sense of that term. It is, therefore, the view of His Majesty’s Government
that an increase in the elevation of turret guns is not permissible under the
terms of the treaty.

There is, however, a larger aspect of the question, and it is on this that His
Majesty’s Government desire to lay particular stress. One of the objects of
the treaty, as expressed in the Preamble, is to reduce the burdens of
competition in armament; and His Majesty’s Government cannot but feel
that the inevitable result of the action proposed by the United States naval
authorities will be to defeat this object to a considerable extent. The
proposal is to increase the elevation of the turret guns of 13 capital ships.
His Majesty’s Government are, of course, not aware of the exact amount of
expenditure which this proposal would involve, but they note that the sum
of $6,500,000 is proposed for that purpose, in addition presumably to any
portion of the sum of $300,000 per ship per annum, regularly available for
repairs without express congressional sanction, which may be employed. If,
however, the proposal is carried! out, it can hardly be doubted that public
opinion in the United Kingdom will demand a corresponding increase in the
elevation of guns of the retained British capital ships, which will involve
The Japanese Government would probably feel compelled to take similar
action, and the peoples of the three countries concerned would have to
support the great expenditure involved, while the relative position of the
three fleets would not be materially affected by the alterations. His
Majesty’s Government cannot doubt that the Government of the United
States will agree that such a result would not only be deplorable in itself,
but inconsistent with the objects of the Naval Treaty and the hopes which its
conclusion inspired.

In these circumstances His Majesty’s Government desire to make an earnest
appeal to the Government of the United States not to impose upon the
peoples of the countries concerned the burdens of the competition in
armament, which will inevitably result from the execution of their present
proposals. Those proposals are, in the opinion of His Majesty’s
Government, inconsistent with the provisions of the treaty, but even if
arguments can be found in support of the contrary interpretation, it cannot
be doubted that the effect of carrying them out would be entirely
incompatible with its intentions. His Majesty’s Government earnestly
emphasize the psychological effect of such a departure as seems to be
contemplated and the great disappointment it would cause to the people of
all nations who regard the action of the United States Government at the
Washington Conference as one of the most notable steps ever taken by any
Government to establish conditions of world-peace.

In order to avoid any possibility of misconception, His Majesty’s
Government desire to repeat the assurance which has more than once been
given to the United States Government that no alteration has been made in
the elevation of the turret guns of any existing British capital ships since
they were first placed in commission.

His Majesty’s Government desire, therefore, to propose that the
Government of the United States, the Japanese Government and His
Majesty’s Government (the Governments of France and Italy are not
directly concerned in view of the special provision of the Treaty allowing
them to increase the calibre of the guns of their retained capital ships),
should each undertake not to make, during the term of the Treaty, any
increase in the elevation of the turret guns of their existing capital ships.
In making this communication I am to explain that His Majesty’s
Government intend to make a similar proposal to the Japanese Government,
but have thought it well to lay their views before the Government of the
United States without delay.

I have [etc.]

H. G. CHILTON

[Document 8]
The Secretary of the Navy (Denby) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON [undated].

[Received March 6, 1924.]
1. At the suggestion of The President I am writing this letter to inform you
of the meaning and present status of the Gun-Elevation question in order
that you may be in a position fully to advise The President regarding the
rights and duties of the United States Government in the premises.
2. I desire first of all to state my very firm belief that a decision adverse to
our right to increase the elevation of the turret guns of 13 of our present
capital ships would permanently and irrevocably consign our present
capital-ship fleet to a position of insuperable inferiority to the British
capital-ship fleet. Such a position of inferiority was never contemplated by
the terms or by the spirit of the Washington treaty. Equality in capital-ship
strengths of the American and British fleets was the basis and backbone of
that treaty. No other interpretation of the intent of the treaty is possible.
3. The following statement of the extreme ranges of British and American
battleships and battle cruisers is official except as to the battleships Rodney
and Nelson now building; these latter ships are expected to mount 16–inch
guns; I assume they will have a maximum range equal to the range of the
16–inch guns on our Maryland class of ships:—
Name
Maximum Range Name
Maximum Range
Nelson
34,300
West Virginia 34,500
Rodney
34,300
Colorado
34,500
Hood
30,300
Maryland
34,300
Royal Sovereign 24,300
California
35,000
Royal Oak
24,300
Tennessee
35,700
Resolution
24,300
Idaho
24,000

Ramillies
24,300
Mississippi
24,000
Revenge
24,300
New Mexico 24,000
Queen Elizabeth 24,300
Pennsylvania 21,000
Warspite
24,300
Arizona
20,900
Valiant
24,300
Nevada
21,000
Barham
24,300
Oklahoma
21,000
Malaya
24,300
Texas
21,000
Reknown
23,800
New York
21,000
Repulse
23,800
Arkansas
24,350
Benbow
23,800
Wyoming
23,500
Emperor of India 23,800
Utah
21,600
Iron Duke
23,800
Florida
22,000
Marlborough
23,800
Tiger
23,800
4. From the above table it will be seen that the British capital-ship fleet
enjoys a very marked superiority in the number of ships that may be
brought into action at the moderate and decisive ranges between 21,000 and
24,000 yards. This superiority is shown in the following table:
Range in
yards
No. of British ships in
action
No. of American ships in
action
24,000
23,000
22,000
21,000
I do not need to point out to you the very grave import of these
comparisons.
5. I have been criticized in British papers for using the British navy for
purposes of comparison. Such action is obviously unavoidable. Naval
strengths are always relative, not absolute. We are strong or weak by
comparison only. The friendly treaty that we made with Great Britain and
other powers recognized our right to a parity in capital-ship strengths with

Great Britain. We cannot determine if that parity is being attained or
maintained unless definite comparisons are made. No criticism can justly lie
against us or our motives if we strive towards a position definitely laid
down in the treaty.
6. The table given in paragraph 4 above shows that at present there is no
parity of the British and American fleets but rather a very great superiority
of the British capital-ship fleet at vital and presumably decisive ranges. It is
true that at ranges in excess of 25,000 yards advantage lies at present with
American ships but the highest ranges are not decisive ranges. The
consensus of present opinion is that decisive ranges in favorable weather
are the very ranges where our inferiority is greatest, viz., between 20,000
and 25,000 yards. This fact makes the gun-elevation question one of
commanding importance to the Navy.
7. Joined to the present British superiority of range of guns is a superiority
in speed of their capital ships which enables the British fleet in comparison
with our own to make full use of their superiority of range of guns. Nothing
that we could do would bring our ships to an equality of speed with British
ships so that should the unhappy event arise of the two fleets being engaged
in battle under present conditions, the British fleet would by its superior
speed be able to choose the range at which it would fight. Sound tactics
would, of course, dictate the very ranges at which we are weakest, that is,
the ranges between 20,000 and 25,000 yards. Illustration of the use of this
advantage is to be had in the Battle of the Falkland Islands. Admiral Sturdee
had under his command ships of speed superior to the speed of the German
squadron under Von Spee. Admiral Sturdee deliberately chose to fight the
German squadron at so great a range that the German fire was ineffective
against the British ships. These sound tactics on Admiral Sturdee’s part
enabled him to achieve victory with practically no injury to the personnel or
ships under his command. I do not desire that the American Navy should
ever be placed in a position at all corresponding to that of the German
squadron at Falkland Islands.
8. I might elaborate farther upon the disadvantages under which our fleet
suffers at present but will not do so. Such further information as you may
desire on this subject will be gladly furnished.

9. The question of the legality of increasing the elevation of our turret guns
to 117, to which reference is made above. The views therein expressed are
carefully considered views to which I ask your attention without repeating
them here.
10. Some suggestions have appeared in the press to the effect that the
elevation of our turret guns should be increased just sufficiently to equal the
elevation of the British guns. This is an impracticable suggestion, first,
because there is no treaty arrangement by which there is an exchange of
information between the British and American navies on the subject of the
extreme range of their guns; second, because there would be no assurance
that equality once having been established would not be upset by still
further increases either by one power or another; and third, our relations
under the treaty are not only with Great Britain but also with three other
signatory powers. My opinion is that there is only one satisfactory solution
to the question and that is for each power to feel itself free and unhampered
as to the extent to which it may increase the elevation of its turret guns. If
each power gives to its turret guns the maximum elevation which it
considers suitable and advisable, no other power can make any complaint or
criticism regarding that act. But if one power increases to meet the
elevations of another power and then after completing the work is again
confronted with further increases of elevation, the task of maintaining a
parity would be too complicated and expensive for all parties.
11. I have noted in the British Press statements to the effect that the treaty
does not forbid increasing the elevation of our turret guns. I also have
reason to believe that the professional opinion both in France and Italy is in
agreement with this position, although in the case of France and Italy their
interest is academic, those two powers being permitted under the treaty to
re-arm their vessels with guns not exceeding 16 inches in caliber and,
presumably, giving to those guns whatever elevation they deem most
desirable. In order to illustrate more precisely the advantage which would
accrue to our ships if the elevation of our turret guns were increased, I
caused to be prepared a memorandum in which our fleet as at present is
compared with our fleet as it might be if the elevation of the turret guns
were increased. That memorandum is attached to this letter.

[Document 9]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
MANCHESTER, MASS., August 8, 1924.

[Received August 11.]

No. 718
SIR: In his note No. 146 of February 14th Mr. Chilton had the honour to
draw the attention of the United States Government to the views of His
Majesty’s Government as to the bearing of the Washington Naval Treaty on
the proposals published in the Annual Report of the Secretary of the Navy
in regard to the increase of the elevation of the turret guns of thirteen capital
ships of the United States Navy. At the same time Mr. Chilton drew
attention to the larger aspects of the question and pointed out that whatever
arguments might be put forward in support of the contention that such
alterations are in accordance with the letter of the Treaty, it cannot be
doubted that they would involve a renewal of competition in armaments,
with the resultant burden upon the peoples of the countries concerned, and
would thus be in direct opposition to the objects of the Naval Treaty as
expressed in the Preamble.

It was added that His Majesty’s Government therefore proposed that the
United States Government and the Japanese Government and His Majesty’s
Government should each undertake not to make, during the term of the
Naval Treaty, any increase in the elevation of the turret guns of their
existing capital ships.

I have the honour, under instructions from my Government, to inform you
that, in the absence of a reply on the part of the United States Government
on this question, His Majesty’s Government have now made a similar
proposal to the Japanese Government, as foreshadowed in the last
paragraph of Mr. Chilton’s note, and that His Majesty’s Government have
further suggested, in connection with the undertaking above referred to,

that, should any increase in the elevation of the turret guns have already
been made in any capital ship, by any of the signatories of the Washington
Naval Treaty, the other signatories should be informed.
In this connection I would draw your attention to a statement which
appeared in an editorial article in the Washington Post of July 31st in the
following terms:
“It is asserted that both Great Britain and Japan have elevated
some of their big guns since the Treaty became effective; but this
has been denied and the point is in doubt”.

In view of the explicit assurance contained in the seventh paragraph of Mr.
Chilton’s note, the latter part of the above quotation is a mis-statement of
fact. Such statements by influential newspapers are all the more unfortunate
in that they inspire other sections of the press with erroneous ideas. For
instance, since the above article appeared in the Washington Post the St.
Louis Star in its issue of August 4th has stated editorially in describing the
Washington Conference and its results:
“Britain accepted the limitations as to the great line battleships
and in a way persuaded the United States and Japan to make the
most sacrifices. She then proceeded to modernize her fleet, and
when the United States and Japan announced a similar
programme raised numerous technical objections.”
In acquainting you with the above, I have the honour to emphasize once
more the unfortunate and widespread results which the elevation of turret
guns on the 13 capital ships above referred to would have upon the
competition in armaments, and to express the hope that you will be so good
as to communicate to me in due course an expression of the views of the
United States Government.

I have [etc.]

ESME HOWARD

[Document 10]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Kellogg)
[Paraphrase]
443. In view of current statements in the press I may state my attitude as
follows regarding change of gun elevation on the capital ships which are
retained under the Washington Treaty.

To the best of my knowledge there was nothing said at the Conference on
the Limitation of Armaments concerning gun elevation. Subdivision (d),
section I, part 3, chapter II of the naval treaty is in substance as drafted by
agreement among the naval experts. It appears from detailed information
supplied by the Navy Department that comparatively slight changes are
involved in the proposals to elevate the guns on our ships and that these
changes could not be considered either as alteration in the general type of
mounting for the main armament or as a reconstruction of the ships.
Assuming, however, that the proposed changes would not violate the treaty,
a practical question remains involving economic considerations. We retain
18 capital ships. The guns of 5 of these now outrange the British. The
difference with respect to 5 more is negligible. The remaining 8 capital
ships have a shorter range than the British ships. These 8 ships will be
replaced, however, within ten or a dozen years. Ships built to replace these
may have any gun elevation desired. It is then a practical question whether
the money required should be spent on the old ships or could be used more
advantageously for other purposes.

In my campaign speeches I replied to misleading statements by Davis12 by
saying that the question was a practical one to be decided by Congress. I did
not specifically state that in my opinion it would not violate the naval treaty
to change the gun elevation. However, as I said it was a practical economic

[Document 11]
The Chairman of the House of Representatives Committee on
Naval Affairs (Butler) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, December 30, 1924
DEAR MR. SECRETARY: I have the honor to transmit herewith on behalf of the
Committee on Naval Affairs of the House of Representatives (H. Res. 387)
requesting certain information, and to request that same be furnished if not
incompatible with the public interest.

Believe me [etc.]

THOMAS S. BUTLER
[Enclosure]
Resolved, That the Secretary of State be, and he is hereby, authorized and
directed, if not incompatible with the public interest, to furnish to the House
of Representatives at the earliest date possible such data, information, or
objections which he may have from any foreign government in connection
with the modernization of certain capital ships of the United States Navy by
increasing the elevation and range of turret guns.

[Document 12]
The Secretary of State to the Chairmam of the House of
Representatives Committee on Naval Affairs (Butler)
WASHINGTON, January 6, 1925.

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your communication on
behalf of the Committee on Naval Affairs of the House of Representatives,
transmitting House Resolution 387 and requesting that the information
therein described should be furnished if not incompatible with the public
interest.

The proposed resolution asks for “such data, information or objections”
which the Secretary of State “may have from any foreign Government in
connection with the modernization of certain capital ships of the United
States Navy by increasing the elevation and range of turret guns”.
While I understand that the resolution has not been passed there is no
objection to giving to your Committee the information desired. The only
“data, information and objections” which the Department of State has
received from any foreign Government relating to the increase of the
elevation and range of turret guns is as follows: In a communication under
date of March 15, 1923, the British Ambassador at Washington reviewed
the reports that had been made as to the increase in the elevation of the
turret guns of British ships, and made the categorical declaration that no
alteration had been made in the elevation of turret guns of any British
capital ships since they were first placed in commission.

In subsequent communications from the British Ambassador at Washington
it has been stated to be the view of His Majesty’s Government that an
increase in the elevation of turret guns is not permissible under the terms of
the Naval Treaty, with special reference to Chapter II, Part 3, Section I (d)

which prohibits, subject to certain exceptions expressly provided for, any
reconstruction of retained capital ships or of aircraft carriers, except for the
purpose of providing means of defense against air and submarine attack. As
regards the question whether such increase in the elevation of turret guns
involves any “reconstruction”, it is stated to be the view of the British
Government that the increase of the elevation of guns, together with
consequential alterations such as scrapping or replacement of existing fire
control systems, et cetera, involves considerable “reconstruction” in the
fullest sense of the term. The British Government lay particular emphasis
upon what is described as a larger aspect of the question, that is to say that
one of the objects of the Treaty is to reduce the burdens of competition in
armament, and the British Government feel that action by the United States
in the elevation of turret guns would tend to defeat this object to a
considerable extent. In these circumstances the British Government make
an earnest appeal that the Government of the United States should not
impose upon the peoples of the countries concerned the burdens of
competition in armament which are deemed to result from the execution of
the proposal to elevate the turret guns on retained capital ships of the United
States, it being considered that even if arguments can be found in support of
the contrary interpretation of the Treaty, the effect of carrying out such
proposals would be incompatible with its intentions. The assurance is
repeated that no alteration has been made in the elevation of the turret guns
of any existing British capital ships since they were first placed in
commission. It was further proposed that the Government of the United
States, the Japanese Government and the British Government (the
Governments of France and Italy not being deemed to be directly concerned
in view of the exceptions of the Treaty) should undertake not to make
during the term of the Treaty any increase in the elevation of the turret guns
of their existing capital ships.

I have been informed by the Japanese Government that it was not the view
of the Japanese Government that a change in the gun elevations, which did
not require changes of the prohibited sort in the ships themselves, would be
a violation of the Naval Treaty.

[Document 13]
The Minister in Switzerland (Grew) to the Secretary of State
informally inquired whether the United States Government has decided to
accept the Council’s invitation addressed to the Secretary of State by the
Acting Secretary General in December, 1923, to appoint representatives
to cooperate with the Temporary Mixed Commission for the preparation of
a new convention relating to traffic in arms, to be held at Geneva on
February 4th. I am informed further that a draft convention has already been
prepared for the consideration of the Commission to replace the Convention
of Saint Germain19 and has been drawn to overcome the objection
previously raised by the United States.

GREW

[Document 14]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Grew)
You may inform Secretariat in reply that you will attend the meeting of the
Temporary Mixed Commission on February 4th for the purpose of being
fully advised as to proposals and particularly to receive information
respecting the draft convention which it is understood will be considered by
the Commission. While you will have no authority to bind this Government,
you will be in a position to explain its attitude as disclosed in
correspondence relating to Convention of Saint Germain, and you will
make immediate and full report. You may add that you will be glad to
transmit any recommendations that may be formulated by the Commission,
and that in case any appropriate plan is devised the question of securing
necessary legislation will have proper consideration.

Further telegraphic instructions will follow.

HUGHES

[Document 15]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Grew)
In the event that you should be requested to express your views respecting
the regulation of the traffic in arms you should refer to the Department’s
note to the British Embassy of August 5, 1922, and the communication to
the League of Nations dated September 12, 1923, copies of both of which
are in the files of the Legation. You may also in your discretion explain the
scope of the joint resolutions mentioned in Department’s telegram No. 53 of
September 12, 1923, as well as the policy of this Government not to
encourage the sale of military supplies or the shipment of war material to
the troubled areas of the world. (See Department’s telegram No. 61 of
September 27th last. ) You may point out that the Saint Germain
Convention was not drawn on the theory of limitation of armament and that
it imposed on the signatories no restriction on production or on the supply
of arms inter se. You may also say that you understand that your
Government would not be willing to restrict its entire freedom of action
respecting the shipment of military supplies to countries of Latin America.
In connection with matters of administration, the fact that the United States
is not a member of the League of Nations should not be overlooked.
[Paraphrase.] It is the view of this Government that the Convention of Saint
Germain is a political arrangement for the protection of existing
governments, leaving them free to make and supply all the arms they wish
as between themselves, and that it does not represent a bona fide effort to
restrict the arms traffic. This Government has not been led to any different
conclusion by the endeavor to arouse favor for such a convention by
representing it as a genuine attempt to fulfill the wishes of those who are
anxious to have the arms traffic restricted. Congress cannot be expected to

pass legislation limiting the manufacture of arms in this country in the
interest of any arrangement like that of Saint Germain. It should be
observed in the meantime that the Government of the United States is doing
very little in furnishing other countries with arms. Power vested in the
President gives him strict control over such traffic with other countries in
this hemisphere.

With the exception of one or two instances there is but a very small
exportation of arms to countries in Europe. In 1922 the number of machine
guns exported was 1,309, of which Sweden bought 749. With that
exception, Great Britain and France have been the markets for the largest
sales to Europe. The following statistics give the value of American sales of
arms and ammunition to the territories which are indicated in the sixth
1922; Persia, no sales during time under consideration; Belgian Congo, $64
1922; British Africa, including British East and British West Africa,
the country of destination. Statistics for the years mentioned do not indicate
any exportation of machine guns or heavier armament to any of these
territories. Items sold to the territories include pistols, rifles, shotguns, and
cartridges.

Should it be the real intention of the Governments represented in the
Temporary Mixed Commission to place a substantial restriction upon the
production of and traffic in arms with the purpose of bringing about a
reduction in the weapons of war, this Government will take any
arrangement with that objective under most careful consideration and will
find out as soon as possible whether Congress would pass such legislation
as would be necessary to make it effective.

[Document 16]
The Minister in Switzerland (Grew) to the Secretary of State
1. Opening plenary session of Temporary Mixed Commission for the
reduction of armaments took place this afternoon with Schanzer of Italy
presiding. After initial business and announcement that the United States
had sent representative, the chairman, followed by several of the delegates,
made speeches eulogistical of the late President Wilson. It, therefore,
became essential that I should respond. I said that as an American citizen I
could not fail to acknowledge the tribute that had been paid to the memory
of the late President and after speaking briefly of Mr. Wilson’s personal
qualities, I expressed my appreciation of the action of the Commission in
thus participating in our national sorrow. At the desire of the chairman, I
then defined my status precisely as outlined in the Department’s number 8
to Berne, after which the meeting adjourned for 15 minutes in deference to
the memory of Mr. Wilson.

The meeting then continued for 3 hours in a futile discussion of the mutual
relation of functions as between Temporary Mixed Commission and the
Permanent Advisory Commission. The next items on the agenda are the
control of the traffic in arms and the private manufacture of arms and
munitions. Although these items were originally listed separately, it is now
proposed, on the motion of the French member, Colonel Fabri, to consider
them simultaneously. If tomorrow it appears to be the intention of the
Commission to combine these two subjects in a single convention, I shall
make it clear that my instructions do not authorize me to entertain any
subject other than that of the traffic in arms and munitions.
The texts of two draft conventions for the control of the traffic in arms have
been circulated to the members of the Commission. One of them has clearly
been drawn with a view to meeting our objections, although certain

alterations would still have to be made. However, I consider it useless to
telegraph it to the Department until the general attitude of the meeting
towards its provisions is revealed.

[Paraphrase.] The indications are that the French members privately are
opposed to any solution in which the questions of private manufacture of
arms and the traffic in arms are not combined. Private information indicates
the difficulty, and probably the impossibility, of obtaining consideration of
any convention which will completely separate from the League of Nations
the supervision of the control over the traffic in arms. [End paraphrase.]
GREW

[Document 17]
The Minister in Switzerland (Grew) to the Secretary of State
GENEVA, February 5, 1924—midnight.
2. At the opening of today’s meeting it was tacitly agreed on the proposal of
Lord Cecil that discussion on the traffic in arms and on the private
manufacture of arms should be conducted simultaneously but that separate
conventions should be drawn to cover the two subjects. Later developments
indicated, however, that French members still hoped to conclude one
convention combining the two subjects.

In a later address Cecil stated that “The League has the greatest amount of
authority in the world,” and that for this reason the machinery of the League
should be used for the supervision of the control of the traffic in arms. This
was obviously an attempt to dissuade the United States from insisting on
the supervision of this control by any other body. With this object in view
he quoted Congressman Porter as having said that for this same reason the
control of the traffic in opium should be supervised by the League. These
two subjects will be referred to a subcommittee tomorrow presided over by
Lebrun, one of the French members.

Cecil then proposed the following draft resolution intended to cover the
nonconflicting general principles in the Convention of Saint Germain and in
addition two drafts already prepared in order to guide the subcommittee in
its labors:
“1. It is desirable that the international traffic in arms
should be controlled and for that purpose a distinction
should be established between weapons and munitions
of war and other weapons.

2. Weapons and munitions of war should only be sold to
governments or bodies recognized as belligerents.
3. Whatever other steps may be taken for the control of
the traffic in arms, full publicity should be secured for
all international dealings.
4. Special regulations should apply to certain territory
restricting or prohibiting altogether all traffic in arms.”

This resolution evoked the opposition of the French members, the Italian
member and the chairman and a serious effort was made by them to prevent
a vote from taking place on the resolution. The vote was postponed.
The afternoon meeting was chiefly devoted to an inconclusive discussion of
the duties which should devolve upon the subcommittee upon which I have
been requested to sit. It will probably consider in detail the various drafts
already laid before the commission after they have been [apparent
omission] and freely discussed by the plenary commission tomorrow
morning.

[Paraphrase.] I have received private information that the lengthy
parliamentary discussion of today and yesterday has taken place because of
the fact that members of the Permanent Advisory Commission are
attempting to bring about the dissolution of the Temporary Mixed
Commission, not wishing to cede to it any privilege.

Despite Cecil’s emphatic statement that the League of Nations should have
the supervision of the traffic in arms, apparently his resolution is an effort to
meet our views. The reason for the French opposition to this proposal
appears to be that France either does not wish any convention at all for the
traffic in arms to be adopted or else wants to have one convention cover
both the traffic in arms and the private manufacture of arms. [End
paraphrase.]

GREW

[Document 18]
The Minister in Switzerland (Grew) to the Secretary of State
[Received 10: p.m.]
3. The following draft convention for the international control of the traffic
in arms and munitions has been submitted to the Temporary Mixed
Commission by Admiral the Marquis Magaz, a Spaniard, in his personal
capacity. This draft is now under general discussion in the Commission,
after which it is proposed to refer it to the subcommittee for more detailed
discussion. The comments of the Commission upon its provisions will be
reported to the Department in separate telegrams. If the Department desires
to express any opinions for my guidance in the subcommittee, it would be
helpful to receive them immediately. This is the only draft submitted which
would appear to tend to meet our views.

The explanatory preamble begins as follows:
“The Council, acting in pursuance of a recommendation of the
Assembly, has invited our Commission to prepare draft
conventions in such a form that they might be accepted by the
governments of all countries which produce arms and munitions
of war. We have also been asked to make alternative proposals for
a convention or conventions which might be adopted by some of
the producing powers, even if the others refused their
cooperation.

In preparing the following draft, account has been taken of both
the above recommendations. Care has been taken to avoid the
insertion of any clause which might render it difficult for the
Government of the United States to ratify the convention, while at
the same time the draft has been conceived in such a way that it

could if necessary be ratified by all the producing countries, even
if the United States should refuse to adhere to it.”
The text of the draft convention is as follows:
“The high contracting parties being desirous of establishing an
international regime to control the traffic in arms, have agreed on
the following provisions:
Article 1. The present convention shall apply to three categories
of material, arms and munitions, namely,
Category 1. To war material, which term shall be
understood for the purpose of this convention to include
all arms, munitions, chemical products and other
objects appearing in the list annexed to the present
treaty. Modifications, in the form of a list, omissions
from or interpretations of this list, may be made at any
time at the request of a high contracting party and shall
become binding on all the high contracting parties as
soon as they have been ratified by two-thirds of them.
Category 2. To sporting weapons and ammunition,
which expression shall be understood, for the purposes
of this convention, to mean all arms, ammunition and
similar materials which do not appear in the annex
referred to in the last paragraph, and which are
recognized as such by the national sporting associations
recommended for this purpose by at least half the
governments of the high contracting parties.
Category 3. To other arms, including, in particular,
pocket firearms employed for personal defense, et
cetera.

Article 2. A central international office shall be established for the
purpose of collecting and preserving documents of all sorts
exchanged by the high contracting parties with regard to the trade

in and distribution of the arms and ammunition specified in the
present convention.

Each of the high contracting parties shall publish an annual report
showing the imports and exports of arms of all kinds which have
taken place through its customs offices, specifying the place of
departure and destination and the quantities and natures of the
material thus imported or exported. Each of the high contracting
parties shall send this report in triplicate to central international
office.

FIRST CATEGORY, Article 3. The high contracting parties undertake not to
permit the sale or export of material of the first category except to
governments recognized by at least half of the high contracting
parties.

Article 4. Material of the first category shall be exported by virtue
of a license issued to the exporter by the exporting high
contracting party. If the exporting high contracting party is not the
state in whose territory the material has been manufactured, the
export license must contain all the data necessary in order to
trace, for the purposes of this convention, the movements of the
material in question from the time of its leaving the factory until
it was acquired by the exporter.

The export license must contain a certificate from the diplomatic
or consular representatives of the purchasing government,
granting the exporter official authorization to proceed with the
export on behalf of the said government.

Article 5. With a view to rendering more effective the supervision
of the limitations placed on export and sale by article 3, the high
contracting parties undertake to prohibit the import of material of
the first category, with the exception of material acquired for the
government of the high contracting party concerned.

SECOND CATEGORY, Article 6. The high contracting parties undertake to
prohibit the sale of material of the second category by any person

not furnished with a license issued by the proper authorities. The
latter shall only issue such licenses to persons who can show that
they belong to sporting associations recognized by the competent
authorities of the high contracting parties concerned.
Article 7. The high contracting parties undertake not to allow
material of the second category to be exported except by persons
holding a license issued by the competent authorities of the
exporting high contracting parties. This license must include an
authorization to import issued by the government which exercises
sovereignty over the territory of destination.

Article 8. Each high contracting party shall draw up authentic
copies of the export licenses referred to in the two preceding
articles with a view to the transmission of copies to the high
contracting party which exercises sovereignty over the territory of
destination and to all the governments, whether of high
contracting parties or not, through whose territory the material
would have to pass in transit. These copies must be despatched in
sufficient time to enable the governments to supervise the
transport of the material.

THIRD CATEGORY, Article 9. The high contracting parties undertake to
exercise supervision over the national and international traffic in
arms of the third category and to take all necessary measures to
prevent illicit stocks and traffic.

Article 10. With the above object in view, the high contracting
parties undertake:
To provide for close cooperation among the respective national
administrations and between these administrations and the
international office referred to in article 2;
To institute a system of registration and licenses which shall make
it possible at any time to trace arms which are in the possession of
individuals;

To communicate to each other and to the international office
referred to in article 2 any information calculated to facilitate this
control.

Article 11. The high contracting parties undertake to apply to
arms in the third category the regime laid down in articles 7 and 8
of the present convention in regard to arms of the second
category.

GENERAL PROVISIONS, Article 12. The high contracting parties undertake to
assist each other mutually in bringing to light any infractions of
the rules of this convention. They recognize in advance the
jurisdiction of the Permanent Court of International Justice for all
international investigation concerning negligence or connivance
on the part of a government administration concerned with these
matters. They further undertake to impose penalties of a uniform
character on their nationals (individuals, associations or firms)
who may be found guilty of [violating] the national laws passed
in execution of the provisions of the present convention. These
penalties shall be codified by common agreement between the
national administrations, and the code shall appear as an annex to
the present convention.

Article 13. The present convention shall come into force when it
has been ratified by 4 of the states mentioned in the Covenant of
the League of Nations as permanent members of the Council and
by 16 other states. The international office referred to in article
[2] shall be organized by the Belgian Government as soon as the
convention has been thus ratified.

Article 14. The duration of the present convention shall be for 15
years. It shall remain in force for all states which have not
notified the international office of their intention to denounce it 2
years before the expiration of the above period, unless, as a result
of successive denunciations, the number of high contracting
parties shall have been reduced to 10, including 2 of the nations
entitled, under the Covenant, to be permanently represented on
the Council.”

Grew

[Document 19]
The Minister in Switzerland (Grew) to the Secretary of State
5. [Paraphrase.] I reminded the Commission today that I was not authorized
to state views on any subject but the traffic in arms. I did this because of
Government was not in a position to secure the passage of legislation
establishing effective control of the traffic in arms by imposing penalties
applicable to private companies engaged in arms production. The occasion
for my statement was the proposal that the subcommittee should discuss the
private manufacture of arms with the idea of including both production of
and traffic in arms in one convention. It seems to me difficult to reconcile
the instruction referred to above with the reference in your telegram 9,
February 2, 6 p.m., to “restriction on production.” With this in mind, and
because the trend of discussion today indicates that it is possible that no
distinction may be made between state and private manufacture of arms, I
have left myself in a position to give a more detailed explanation of our
views should I receive further instructions. It would be helpful to me to be
informed whether any distinction is made by the Department between state
and private production of arms. [End paraphrase.] In connection with the
discussion of a central international office of control, I furthermore
explained fully to the Commission the attitude of our Government towards
the intertwining of the Convention of Saint Germain with the League of
Nations, at the same time making it clear that other points of objection
would be touched upon at the appropriate moment.

At the opening of the meeting this morning the Commission began the
reading and discussion of the draft convention proposed by Magaz.
During my absence discussion of the first article Lebrun supported26 Cecil
expressed the view that he saw no reason why the objections raised by me

should not be given satisfaction. Cecil added that I had explained the great
objections of the United States to the ratification of the Convention of Saint
Germain, whereupon I remarked that I did not wish to leave the impression
that these were the only objections of the United States.

In the discussion on article 2 Cecil stated that to adopt an international
bureau of control would be very difficult and unwise, particularly in that it
would constitute a retrograde step in the principles of the League. In order
to meet the views of the United States, however, he suggested the
compromise that article 5 of the. Convention of Saint Germain, omitting
paragraph 1 thereof, should be used in lieu of article 2 of the draft
convention under discussion and that the article should be complemented
by the statement that a copy of this report should be sent to the League of
Nations only by states members of the League, and that states not members
should merely publish such reports. The Italian member, Lebrun, and
Branting indicated support of this suggestion. The French labor member,
Jouhaux, implied opposition, however. In explanation Cecil stated that the
germ of his proposal was that it should be obligatory for all states signifying
[sic] the convention to make public statistics regarding the traffic in arms,
and added that “the final control of the traffic in arms is not the League of
Nations but public opinion.” The chairman stated that he believed the
proposal of Cecil would satisfy the League as well as states not members of
the League, and expressed the hope that the suggestion would be adopted.
Jouhaux then stated that he regretted to see the apparent tendency of certain
opportunist elements of opinion in the League which are willing to make
any sacrifice of the prestige of the League to secure the cooperation of the
United States.

During the discussion of article 12 of the Magaz draft I furthermore took
occasion to call the attention of the Commission to the fact that certain
states were not members of the Permanent Court of International Justice.
GREW
supra.

© Opening phrases apparently garbled.

[Document 20]
The Minister in Switzerland (Grew) to the Secretary of State
[Received February 7—6 p.m.]
6. Commission adjourned this evening. Subcommittee meets Paris, March
24. I return to Berne tomorrow and shall forward full written report with
documents as soon as possible. In my final remarks today I reserved the
decision of our Government regarding American participation in the
subcommittee and in reply to a specific request for the objections of states
which failed to ratify the Convention of Saint Germain I made a statement
GREW

[Document 21]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Geneva (Haskell)
[Paraphrase]
1. Please deliver the following immediately to Mr. Grew:
has not been my intention to suggest that only control of traffic in arms
should be covered by the convention. Supposedly the control of
manufacture would be in order to facilitate the control of traffic. The point I
wish to make is that the American Government would not feel free to enter
into any convention for the control of either the manufacture of or traffic in
arms, or both, without being reasonably sure that Congress would pass the
necessary legislation. It was quite evident that Congress would not do so in
the interest of a convention like that of Saint Germain. Whether it would do
so in the interest of a new convention will depend upon the character of the
convention, and this Government must reserve decision on this until it
understands the full scope of the proposals and has an opportunity to
consult leaders in Congress. The basic objections to the Saint Germain
Convention would have been equally strong whether the control of traffic or
of manufacture was intended. The wish of this Government was to have you
in a position to learn the nature of the proposals, to explain the position of
the American Government as previously expressed regarding the Saint
Germain Convention, and to refer proposals to the Department with
complete information for consideration. In this respect it was not intended
to make a distinction between manufacture and traffic. Regarding the
former a separate question might arise, of course, regarding the extent of
control.

It has been stated in press reports that you have indicated that this
Government’s basic objection was to the proposal to vest administrative
control in the League of Nations. This is incorrect. Although difficulties for
this Government would arise through administration by the League of
Nations, as the United States is not a member, the basic difficulties to which
we called attention in our note regarding the Convention of Saint Germain
would have existed had the League not been charged with its
administration. Our basic objections were with respect to the freedom of
parties to the convention to sell to each other and the prohibition against
selling to others. After the extent and nature of control are decided upon, the
question of administration is a subordinate one. We must reserve opinion as
to whether any supervision satisfactory to the League authorities would be
satisfactory to our Government until we see the actual plan. In the
meantime, however, we do not want a mere question of administration
given chief attention as if that were the difficulty in the way. It may well be
that some form of administration acceptable to all could be found should
the fundamental difficulties be removed.

As the Commission is probably about to adjourn, I shall not try to discuss
that it would be difficult, if not impossible, aside from other objections, for
the United States to agree to refrain from selling arms to a government in
this hemisphere not recognized by European powers but recognized by our
Government.

Before giving further instructions as to attending meeting of the proposed
subcommittee we will await your complete report and the text of the
proposed convention or conventions.

HUGHES

[Document 22]
The Minister in Switzerland (Grew) to the Secretary of State
[Received 11: p.m.]
11. I regret that the Temporary Mixed Commission had adjourned before
With regard to the question of the private manufacture of arms, my
statement to the Commission on February 6th was as follows:
“The second point that I have in mind was a reference in this
Commission to the possible desirability of combining in one draft
convention the two questions of the control of the traffic in arms
and the control of the private manufacture of arms and of
munitions of war. So far as my own position on this subject is
concerned, I believe I should remind the members of this
Commission that my instructions do not authorize me to entertain
any subject other than the traffic in arms. It will be recalled that
the invitation addressed to the Government of the United States
on December 14th last28 mentioned this subject only and that it
was on this understanding that the Government accepted the
invitation in question.”
[Paraphrase.] I can inform the Commission that in view of the discussions
on February 6 I asked for further instructions from my Government
concerning its position with respect to the question of private production
and as far as seems desirable I can set forth the views of the Department.
There are two ways by which I suggest that this might be done: (1) I can
write to the Secretary General of the League of Nations that my
Government declines to participate in the meeting of the subcommittee on
March 24 in Paris and in the same letter I can ask him to convey these
further views of my Government; (2) we can be represented in the meeting

of the subcommittee. When forwarding my complete written report I shall
venture to include my recommendations on this point.

Commission that administration of the control of the traffic in arms was but
one of several objections of my Government. I clearly set forth the other
objections at the final session. The question of administration came up at
the start, which was the reason I raised objection on that point first. Lord
Cecil remarked that I had presented the chief American objection to the
Saint Germain Convention. Cecil added that this objection was entirely
legitimate and that in his opinion it could be met. I arose at once and stated
that I did not want to have an incorrect impression left and that I wished to
have it clearly understood this was only one of the objections which had
kept us from ratifying. I do not believe that the members of the Commission
retained the impression that this was the all important objection.
especially hope that the publicity given has not embarrassed you. The
matter can be satisfactorily straightened out as far as the Commission is
concerned. [End paraphrase.]

GREW

[Document 23]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Grew)
[Paraphrase]
22. Invitation extended to you to participate in the coming meeting of the
Temporary Mixed Commission’s first subcommittee has been given careful
consideration by the Department. You should attend meeting of the
subcommittee for the same purposes for which you attended the meeting of
the Commission, thus making it possible for our Government to be kept
fully informed regarding proceedings in the subcommittee. You will not, of
course, take part in the actual drafting of the convention which is proposed.
You should inform M. Lebrun, therefore, that you will gladly attend the
Paris meeting to give information and appropriate explanations respecting
the attitude of the United States as occasion may require.
With the above and previous instructions in mind you may use the
following as occasion arises:
1. Regarding the manufacture of arms. Production or manufacture
in itself is not commerce and the interstate commerce power does
not give Congress the power to control mere production or
manufacture within a State. Congress, however, has power:
(a) To control the manufacture of arms in the Territories
and possessions of the United States and within the
District of Columbia;
(b) To prohibit except under Federal license the
shipment of arms in foreign or interstate commerce.

2. Regarding the traffic in arms. Foreign or interstate commerce is
subject to the control of Congress. As a possible basis for
cooperation with other powers the following points are suggested:
(a) Through a license system the Federal Government
could control arms traffic in foreign commerce.
(b) Adequate publicity could be given.

(c) This Government could make or allow sales only to
governments or belligerents recognized by it.
3. The following are matters to be reserved:
(a) There must be no restriction upon this Government
in supplying its own wants.

(b) The right of the United States Government in its
discretion to sell or allow sales to other American
governments whether such governments are parties to
the convention or not must not be restricted.
(c) The American Government cannot place itself under
the supervision or direction of the League of Nations, of
which it is not a member, in any manner. It should also
be noted that this country has not given its adherence to
the protocol of the Permanent Court of International
Justice.

(d) If the United States signed or adhered to a
convention, legislation by Congress would be necessary
to make it effective. For this reason this Government
cannot finally commit itself without some reservation as
to action by Congress or some assurance which will
satisfy the President that Congress will pass the
necessary legislation.

4. It is understood that in the above the word “arms” means arms
and munitions of war, mere sporting or commercial munitions not
being included.

Make a full report on proceedings of the subcommittee. Telegraph at your
discretion.

HUGHES

[Document 24]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
143. From Grew. First day of subcommittee on traffic in arms was devoted
to a general discussion of a new draft convention drawn up with the
expressed view of amending and amplifying the convention of Saint
Germain in order to secure the adhesion of the United States. Control of
production or manufacture not included. In reply to a specific request for a
statement I indicated our position on the basis of the Department’s 22,
March 7, 5 p.m., to Berne. The desire to meet our views appears to be
almost unanimous.

HERRICK

[Document 25]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
1. Subcommission adjourned today after eight meetings. Draft convention
for the control of the traffic in arms and munitions has been revised
substantially to meet the views expressed in the Department’s several
instructions. This effort culminated in the unanimous adoption of an
amendment proposed by Cecil providing that,
“Any state may with the consent of the other High Contracting
Parties notify its partial or conditional adherence to the provisions
of the treaty provided that such conditions or partial adherences
do not affect the effectiveness of the supervision of the traffic in
arms.”
This draft convention will be further considered and if necessary revised by
the plenary session of the, Temporary Mixed Commission which meets at
Geneva on June [12?] before being submitted to the Council of the League
and eventually to an international conference for the purpose of negotiating
a final convention.
2. Separate draft convention for the control of private manufacture of arms
and munitions was only briefly discussed. It was referred for further
revision to a small drafting committee which will report to the Temporary
Mixed Commission on June 30. During this brief discussion I explained our
constitutional limitations as indicated in point 1 of the Department’s 22 to
Berne. Cecil asked if there were any constitutional difficulties which would
prevent Federal legislation in the United States with a view to obtaining for
publication statistical information respecting production by private

[Document 26]
The Chargé in Switzerland (Magruder) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, May 12, 1924.

[Received May 26.]

No. 1504
SIR: With reference to Mr. Grew’s despatch dated Paris, March 29, 1924,31
reporting his attendance at the meetings of the first subcommittee of the
Temporary Mixed Commission for the Reduction of Armaments of the
League of Nations which met at Paris on March 24, 1924, to consider the
control of the traffic in arms and ammunition, I have the honor to enclose
herewith … the “Draft Convention amending the Convention signed at St.
Germain-en-Laye September 10, 1919, for the Control of the trade in Arms
and Ammunition” …
I have [etc.]

ALEXANDER R. MAGRUDER
[Enclosure]
Draft Convention Amending the Convention Signed at St. Germainen-Laye September 10, 1919,
for the Control of the Trade in Arms and Ammunition
PARIS, March 27, 1924.

(Here will follow the names of the H. C. P. signing the new Convention).
Whereas the Convention of St. Germain was signed by the H. C. P. therein
mentioned Whereas certain of them were not able to ratify such

Convention.

Whereas for this and for other reasons it is desirable to amend such
Convention; Whereas it is necessary to exercise a general supervision over
the trade in arms and ammunition, with the object of securing the fullest
possible publicity in regard to such trade, thereby drawing attention to the
danger of the accumulation, in peace time, of stocks of munitions; Whereas
it is necessary to institute a uniform procedure for the supervision over the
trade in firearms and ammunition which are capable of both warlike and
other uses; Whereas the existing treaties and conventions, and particularly
the Brussels Act of July 2, 1890, regulating the traffic in arms and
ammunition in certain regions, no longer meet present conditions, which
require more elaborate provisions applicable to a wider area in Africa and
the establishment of a corresponding regime in certain territories in Asia;
Whereas a special supervision of the maritime zone adjacent to certain
countries is necessary to ensure the efficacy of the measures adopted by the
various Governments both as regards the importation of arms and
ammunition into these countries and the export of such arms and
ammunition from their own territory.

Have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries:
(Here will follow the names of the Plenipotentiaries of the new H. C. P.)
who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form,
Have agreed as follows:— ARTICLE 1
This Convention applies to the following arms and munitions:
Category I. Arms and munitions of war, as follows:
a) Ships of war of all kinds, including submarines and
submersibles.
b) Airships, aeroplanes and seaplanes for use in war.
c) Tanks and armoured cars.
d) Artillery of all kinds.

e) Apparatus for the discharge of all kinds of projectiles, and for
the discharge of all kinds of bombs, torpedoes and depth charges.
f) Flame throwers.
g) Mines whether for land or water.
h) Torpedoes and depth charges of all kinds.
i) Bombs and grenades of all kinds.
j) Machine guns and rifled smallbore breech-loading weapons of
all kinds.
k) Pistols and revolvers of all kinds.
l) Ammunition of all kinds for use with any of the above.
m) Explosives and propellants of all kinds for use in war.
n) Component parts of any of the above including mountings.
Category II. Fire arms and ammunition for purposes of sport or personal
defence.

In order to prevent the export and import of firearms and ammunition
intended for warlike purposes though described and sold as articles of sport
or personal defence and in order at the same time not to hamper unduly the
legitimate trade in firearms and ammunition intended to be used only for
sport and personal defence the H. C. P. hereby undertake that they will use
their best endeavours to agree upon a uniform definition of
1) Military rifles, revolvers and pistols and the ammunition
thereof.
2) Rifles, revolvers and pistols capable of use for both military
and other purposes and the ammunition thereof.

3) Rifles, revolvers and pistols regarded as of no military value
and the ammunition thereof.

ARTICLE 2
The H. C. P. undertake not to export themselves and to prohibit the export
of arms and munitions of war in Category 1 except on the conditions
mentioned in Article 3. This prohibition of exportation shall apply to all
such arms and ammunition whether complete or in parts.
ARTICLE 3
Nevertheless, notwithstanding this prohibition, the H. C. P. reserve the right
to grant in respect of arms and munitions of war whose use is not prohibited
by international law licences for the export of arms and munitions of war in
Category I, but such licences are only to be granted on the following
conditions:
1. No licence is to be granted except for a direct supply to a
Government recognised as such by the Government of the
exporting territory.

The Form in which this licence shall be given shall, so far as
practicable, resemble that given as an annex to the present
Convention.
2. The Government acquiring the consignments must act through
a duly accredited representative, who shall produce his
credentials.
3. Such representative must produce a written authority from his
Government for the acquisition of each consignment, which
authority must state that the consignment is acquired for the use
of that Government and not for transfer and will be delivered to
them and to no one else.
4. Each licence must contain a full description of the arms and
munitions of war to which it relates, and the names of the

exporting and acquiring Governments, ports of embarkation and
disembarkation, means of transport, route and destination.
5. A separate licence shall be required for each separate shipment
which crosses the frontier of the exporting country whether by
land, water or air.

ARTICLE 4
Without prejudice to any obligations to which they may have subscribed
under international conventions dealing with transit, the H. C. P. undertake
to take such steps as they reasonably can to supervise and prohibit the
transit of the arms and munitions of war in Category I which are not
accompanied by a licence made out in the proper form, as laid down in
Article 3.

A copy of the licence shall be sent by the exporting State to the central
international body referred to in Article 9 of the present Convention before
the goods pass the frontier of the exporting country; a second copy shall be
sent to the same international body by the importing country, if one of the
H. C. P. within a month of the receipt of the consignment, mention being
made of the heading under which the imported goods will appear in its
imports statistics.

ARTICLE 5
Firearms and ammunition in Category II may, if the exporting country so
desires, be exported without licence except to the prohibited areas and zone
mentioned in Article 10. Provided nevertheless that in the case of firearms
and ammunition adapted both to warlike and also to other purposes, the H.
C. P. hereby undertake to determine from the size, destination and other
circumstances of each shipment for what uses it is intended and to decide in
each case whether such shipment falls properly under Category II, or
whether it ought to be considered to belong to Category I and in the latter
case they undertake that it shall become subject to Articles 2 and 3 hereof.
ARTICLE 6

The H. C. P. undertake in addition to prohibit the export both of arms and
munitions of war in Category I and also of firearms and ammunition in
Category II whether complete or in parts, to the areas and zone specified in
Article 10. Nevertheless, notwithstanding this prohibition, the High
Contracting Parties reserve the right to grant export licences on the
understanding that such licences shall be issued only by the authorities of
the exporting countries. Such authorities must satisfy themselves in advance
that the arms or ammunition for which an export licence is requested are not
intended for export to any destination or for disposal in any way contrary to
the provisions of this Convention.

ARTICLE 7
Shipments to be effected under contracts entered into before the coming
into force of the present Convention shall be governed by its provisions.
ARTICLE 8
The H. C. P. undertake to grant no export licences covering either Category
I or Category II for delivery to any country which after having been placed
under the tutelage of any Power, may endeavour to obtain from any other
Power any of the arms or munitions of war in Category I or of the firearms
or ammunition in Category II.

ARTICLE 9
A Central International Body shall be established by the Council of the
League of Nations for the purpose of collecting and preserving documents
of all kinds exchanged by the H. C. P. with regard to the trade in and
distribution of the arms and ammunition in Category I and Category II
specified in the present Convention, as well as the texts of all laws orders
and regulations made for the carrying out of the present Convention.
Each of the H. C. P. shall publish an annual report showing the export
licences which it may have granted in respect of arms and munitions in
Category I or Category II together with the quantities and destination of the
arms and munitions to which the export licences refer. A copy of this report
shall be sent to the Central International Body.

Movements of arms and munitions made by a Power within territories
placed under its sovereignty or authority, and for the use of its own military
forces, will not be included in this report.

ARTICLE 10
The H. C. P. undertake, each as far as the territory under its jurisdiction is
concerned, to prohibit the importation of arms and munitions of war in
Category I and of firearms and ammunition in Category II into the
following territorial areas, and also to prevent their exportation to,
importation and transportation in the maritime zone defined below: (Note:
—The Commission is of opinion, in view of the new circumstances which
have arisen since the Convention of St. Germain was drawn up, that the
territories to be included in the restricted areas should form the subject of a
fresh examination by the Council of the League of Nations).
Special licences for the import of arms and ammunition in Category I or
Category II into the areas defined above may be issued. In the African area
they shall be subject to the regulations specified in Articles 11 and 12 or to
any local regulations of a stricter nature which may be in force.
In the other areas specified in the present Article, these licences shall be
subject to similar regulations put into effect by the Governments exercising
authority there.

ARTICLE[S] 11–25
Identical with Articles 7–21 of the Convention of St. Germain.
(Note:—These Articles are referred to the P. A. C. for technical
examination.) ARTICLE 26
The H. C. P. who exercise authority over territories within the prohibited
areas and zone specified in Article 10 agree to take so far as each may be
concerned, the measures required for the enforcement of the present
Convention, and in particular for the prosecution and repression of offences

against the provisions contained therein. They shall communicate these
measures to the Central International Body and shall inform it of the
competent authorities referred to in the preceding Articles. Such of them as
are members of the League of Nations shall at the same time transmit this
information to the Secretary-General of the League.

ARTICLE 27
The H. C. P. will use their best endeavours to secure the accession to the
present Convention of other States whether members of the League of
Nations or not.

This accession shall be notified through the diplomatic Channel to the
Government of the French Republic, and by it to all the signatory or
adhering States. The accession will come into force from the date of such
notification to the French Government.

Any State may, with the consent of the H. C. P. notify its partial or
conditional adherence to the provisions of the present Convention, provided
that such conditions or partial adherence do not affect the effectiveness of
the supervision of trade in arms and ammunition.

ARTICLE 28
The H. C. P. agree that if any dispute whatever should arise between them
relating to the application or interpretation of the present Convention which
cannot be settled by negotiation, this dispute shall be submitted to the
International Court of Justice, or alternatively to a Court of Arbitration.
ARTICLE 29
All the provisions of former general international Conventions, relating to
the matters dealt with in the present Convention, shall be considered as
abrogated in so far as they are binding between the Powers which are
Parties to the present Convention.

The present Convention shall in no way affect the rights and obligations
which may arise out of the provisions either of the Covenant of the League

[Document 27]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland
(Gibson)
WASHINGTON, June 17, 1924.

No. 16
SIR: Under date of May 13th the Legation at Berne, in its despatch No.
150732 advised the Department that information had been received from the
Secretariat of the League of Nations that the first sub-committee as well as
the Temporary Mixed Commission of the League of Nations, which is
considering the control of the traffic in arms and ammunition, was to
convene at Geneva on July 7th. The Department assumes that the
Commission will also take up the question of the control of the private
manufacture of munitions and implements of war on the basis of the report
Pursuant to the invitation which was extended by the Acting Secretary
General of the League of Nations in December 1923, the Department
desires you to attend the meeting of the Commission on July 7th in the
same capacity and for the same purpose as earlier meetings of this
Commission and its sub-committee were attended by your predecessor.
In previous communications, as listed below, the Department has outlined
in some detail its attitude with regard to the various proposals which have
been considered by the T. M. C. for the control of traffic in, and the
production of, arms and ammunition. It is desired that you should carefully
review these instructions …
It is not the Department’s desire that you should take an active part in the
discussions of the T. M. C. or that you should directly participate in the

framing of the Convention. The reasons for this are obvious. The
Department cannot undertake to state at this time whether a Convention
along the lines now being considered by the T. M. C. would be likely to
receive the requisite approval of the Senate or whether legislation to put
such a Convention into effect could be obtained. Such being the case the
Department does not desire that the impression should be created as a result
of your participation in the discussions at Geneva that a convention of the
character proposed would necessarily be presented to the Senate by this
Government or legislation to give it effect would be requested. Whether this
action will be taken will depend in large measure upon the character which
the Convention assumes as finally drafted.

After you have made this position clear to the Commission it is felt that it
would be entirely appropriate, if inquiry is made of you as to the attitude of
this Government, to point out to the T. M. C. the features of the Convention
as indicated which might occasion difficulty in this country and thus render
less probable the cooperation of the United States in this matter, a
cooperation which this Government would be glad to be in a position to
extend for the control of the improper traffic in arms in case a practical
basis for such cooperation were presented; such a basis for example as is
indicated in sub-headings (a), (b) and (c) under point 2 in the Department’s
telegram of March 7.

In indicating informally the Department’s position with respect to certain
points of the Convention which may come under discussion, it is not
desired that you should press your views upon the Commission further than
to make clear the position of this ‘Government.

It is the Department’s understanding that at its July meeting the T. M. C. of
the League of Nations will devote its attention to the draft convention
which was considered at Paris by the sub-committee and of which the
revised text was submitted with the Legation’s despatch No. 1504 of May
12, 1924. In the instructions which follow the Department will therefore
take this draft as a basis and submit certain comments which may be helpful
to you during the discussion of the draft convention.

PREAMBLE

It would appear unnecessary to refer in the Preamble to the Contention of
St. Germain and to the fact that certain powers did not ratify this
convention. It is the Department’s understanding that the convention was
not ratified by Great Britain, France, Italy or Japan, in addition to the
United States. It seems both unnecessary and ambiguous to state that certain
powers were not able “to ratify” this convention.

It is assumed that the sixth paragraph of the Preamble which relates to the
barred zone will be subject to any modification necessary to bring it in line
with the provisions of Article 10 of the Convention as finally determined,
which is to define the zone. This article will be discussed in further detail
below.

ARTICLE 1
Category I (a) of Article 1, which defines the arms and munitions to which
the convention is to be applicable includes vessels of war. This provision
taken in conjunction with Article 3 might be interpreted as sanctioning the
export under license of naval vessels and as a result a case might be
presented where there would be a conflict with the provisions of Article 18
of the Treaty on the Limitation of Naval Armament, signed at Washington
discussion of Article 3.

An obvious difficulty arises in connection with the definition of firearms
and ammunition for sport or personal defense and the distinguishing of such
arms from those essentially for war purposes. From the discussions of the
Temporary Mixed Commission it appears that this difficulty has not been
overlooked by the Commission and that the effort has been made not to
interfere unduly with the legitimate trade in sporting arms.

ARTICLE 2
The Department assumes that the reference in Article 2 to the export of
arms and munitions is designed to cover consignments of arms which may
be presented by the government of one country as a subsidy or gift as well
as the export of arms and munitions through purchase by the acquiring
government. The Department would be glad if you could ascertain during

the course of the discussions whether such is in fact the understanding of
those who have drafted the convention.

ARTICLE 3
In order that the provisions of Article 3 should in no way conflict with the
provisions of treaties drawn up at the Washington Conference of 1921–1922
(Treaty on the Limitation of Naval Armament and Treaty Relating to The
Use of Submarines and Noxious Gases in Warfare), the Commission might
find it desirable to insert after the words “International Law” in the first
sentence of paragraph one of Article 3 the following words “or treaties, or
of which the disposal by gift, sale or any mode of transfer has not been
restricted by treaty, licenses for the export,” etc., etc. This paragraph of
Article 3 would then read in full as follows:
“Nevertheless, notwithstanding this prohibition, the H. C. P.
reserve the right to grant in respect of arms and munitions of war
whose use is not prohibited by international law or treaties or of
which the disposal by gift, sale or any mode of transfer has not
been restricted by treaty, licenses for the export of arms and
munitions of war in Category I, but such licenses are only to be
granted on the following conditions:”
In the following paragraph of Article 3 the Department considers it would
be most desirable to add after “Government” the words “or belligerents”
(see Department’s telegram of March 7th). It appears from page 8 of your
predecessor’s report from Paris of March 2934 that the insertion of this word
was considered at the Paris meeting but not accepted by the Commission.
Mr. Grew indicated, however, that if there had been further opportunity for
the consideration of the point the change might have been made. It is
therefore possible that this question may again be raised at Geneva and in
this case, if an opportunity is presented, you should not fail to indicate this
Government’s view.

The Department has noted in the minutes of the discussion of the T. M. C.
the Legation at Berne34 ) that consideration was given to the effect upon

neutrality of the issuance by a government of licenses for the export of arms
to belligerents. This question would arise in a particularly acute form in a
situation where, as during the World War, shipments to only one group of
belligerents were possible.

The Department has also noted the statement of Lord Cecil “that he desired
to allow sale in war time to belligerents without the violation of neutrality
by the governments which granted the licenses.” To this end Lord Cecil
proposed the insertion of the following provision after Article 3:
“It is hereby declared that nothing in this article shall affect the
rule of international law permitting the sale of munitions of war
by the subject of a non-belligerent state to the Government of a
belligerent state without breach of the neutrality of the non-
belligerent state and the grant of a license under this article for
such a sale shall not be deemed to be a breach of neutrality.”
Lord Cecil also proposed the following “Questions for Decision” to the
legal section of the Secretariat:
“(1) Would the grant of a license for export of arms to a
belligerent be a breach of neutrality by the granting
Power?

“(2) If the answer to the first question is in the
affirmative, would this result be best prevented:
(i) By a declaration in the convention that
such a breach of neutrality was not to occur,
or
(ii) By a suspension of the operation of the
convention during the war?”
The amendment suggested by Lord Robert Cecil would tend to meet the
difficulty in so far as the parties to the Convention are concerned and would
therefore be a desirable addition to Article 3.

The Department would be glad to have you report fully any discussion of
this point, which it considers of particular importance, and one which
should be given most careful consideration before any convention is
concluded.

ARTICLE 4
The first paragraph of Article 4 refers to the control of the transit of arms
and ammunition and contains a reservation with respect to “international
conventions” to which the H. C. P.’s may have subscribed. In order that
there should be no misunderstanding as to the international conventions to
which this Article has reference, it might be desirable that such international
treaties and conventions respecting transit should be listed in the annex to
page 736 ).

In this connection the Department is enclosing for your information copies
of two conventions to which the British Government is a party, one with
Afghanistan37 and one with Nepal, which relate to the transit in arms and
ammunition.

The second paragraph of Article 4 refers to the “exporting state.” It would
seem preferable that this expression should read “state from which the
material originated,” as it is understood that the convention contemplates
that exports may be made by nationals of the H. C. P. under governmental
license to recognized foreign governments (or belligerents) and that it is not
intended that the exportation under license should be restricted to the export
by governmental agencies or political divisions of the state from which the
arms or ammunition are sent.

ARTICLE 5
Article 5 relates to the export without license of firearms and ammunition in
Category II (sporting arms, etc.) “except to the prohibited areas and zones
mentioned in Article 10.” From Article 6, however, it would appear that the
export to the prohibited areas of arms in Category II would be permitted

under licenses and under the safeguards outlined in that article. Article 10
refers to “special licenses for the import of arms and ammunition in
Category I or Category II” into the prohibited areas.

The Department does not find these various references entirely clear and
does not fully understand the regime which it is contemplated should be
applied to the export and import of sporting arms in the case of the
prohibited areas. In reporting on the meeting of the T. M. C. it would be
helpful to receive further information on this point.

In the consideration of Articles 1 and 8 the Department briefly referred to
this government’s view that the legitimate trade in sporting arms should not
be unduly restricted and that the principle of equality of opportunity should
not be impaired in regulating such trade.

ARTICLE 6
The statement in this article that licenses for export to the ‘barred’ zone
“shall be issued only by the authorities of the exporting countries” is not
understood as the Department had assumed from earlier provisions of the
draft convention that such licenses were in all cases to be issued only by
authorities of the exporting state.

ARTICLE 7
This article appears to be retroactive in effect and as such might impair the
obligation of contracts entered into in good faith by the nationals of the H.
C. P. in the event that agreements for the shipments of arms by private
agencies to private agencies abroad had been entered into. In such cases the
requirement of export licenses might be considered. As now drawn the
provision is too sweeping in character.

ARTICLE 8
In this article.

“The High Contracting Parties undertake to grant no export
licenses covering either Category I or Category II for delivery to

any country which after having been placed under the tutelage of
any Power, may endeavor to obtain from any other Power any of
the arms or munitions of war in Category I or of the firearms or
ammunition in Category II.”
The effect of this article would apparently be to limit the trade in arms and
ammunition with states under mandate or “tutelage” to the mandatory
power or to the power exercising the so-called “tutelage.” The article is
very similar to Article 4 of the St. Germain convention. In so far as this
provision relates to the control of the export of arms and ammunition under
Category II of which the export to private individuals without license,
except with respect to certain defined areas, is to be permitted, the provision
would appear to impair the freedom of economic opportunity and the
equality of treatment as between the mandatory powers and other states.
This equality of opportunity is guaranteed under the terms of the several
mandates and should not be impaired by collateral agreements.
In so far as the article relates to the export of arms and ammunition in
Category I the provision already contemplated under article 3, in limiting
the export of arms and ammunition to recognized governments (or
belligerents) tends to meet the purpose of the present article (Article 8)
while avoiding its objectionable features.

For your personal and confidential guidance it may be added that in the
view of this Department the provisions of Article 8 would be the subject of
grave objection in this country. The primary purpose of the article appears
to be to prevent the introduction of arms into certain areas and zones,
including mandate regions, protectorates and territories occupied by
backward peoples in which Great Britain, France, Italy and other countries
are particularly interested. Such a provision might prevent this government
from permitting the shipment of munitions of war to any oppressed peoples
who might be endeavoring to free themselves from oppression, however
worthy the cause or however desirable it might be that our market should be
available to them. However remote the practical exigency may be, being
ourselves a nation born of revolution this provision would, I believe, be
open to serious objection and might, under given circumstances, prove to be
unfortunate.

If such a provision had been in force at the time of the Cuban war of
independence against Spain or for that matter at the time of the American
Revolution it might have seriously affected the natural and proper
development of large bodies of people. While it is recognized that
conditions
have
very
fundamentally
changed
since
the
events
abovementioned, nevertheless the Department could not undertake to state
that the present colonial situation is such that it should necessarily be
continued indefinitely or that this Government should subscribe to a
provision which would make it well nigh impossible for a change in the
situation to be brought about should justice require. In this connection your
attention is directed to the form of the Senate’s approval of the Brussels
Convention of 1890 for the repression of the African Slave-trade which
contains in articles 8 to 13 certain provisions which were introduced with
modifications into the St. Germain Convention and also into the present
draft. You will find the Senate Resolution mentioned above on page 1991 of
Malloy, Volume 2. Paragraph 3 of the Resolution reads as follows:
Resolved further, as a part of this act of ratification, That the
United States of America, having neither possessions nor
protectorates in Africa, hereby disclaims any intention, in
ratifying this treaty, to indicate any interest whatsoever in the
possessions or protectorates established or claimed on that
Continent by the other powers, or any approval of the wisdom,
expediency or lawfulness thereof, and does not join in any
expressions in the said General Act which might be construed as
such a declaration or acknowledgment; and, for this reason, that it
is desirable that a copy of this resolution be inserted in the
protocol to be drawn up at the time of the exchange of the
ratifications of this treaty on the part of the United States.

ARTICLE 9
With respect to the provision in article 9 for the establishment of a Central
International Body by the Council of the League of Nations, your attention
is directed to Mr. Grew’s statement on page 10 in his report of March 29

from Paris39 to the sub-committee of the T. M. C. to the effect that while
this government was already voluntarily and in a purely informal way
furnishing the League of Nations with information and statistics on a
variety of subjects neither he nor his government could undertake to
indicate whether or not the Congress would bind itself to a treaty provision
of this nature. The Department also desires to call your attention to its
instruction to Mr. Grew, through the American Consul at Geneva, under
date of February 7 with reference to the supervision of the League of
Nations in the matter of arms traffic. Your attention is also directed to the
statements in the Department’s instruction of March 7 … that “this
government cannot place itself in any manner under the direction or
supervision of the League of Nations, of which it is not a member.”
While the Department does not desire that objection in matters of
administration should be given undue prominence, the provision in Article 9
that the “Central International Body shall be established by the Council of
the League of Nations” would increase the opposition in this country to
American adherence to the convention—opposition which might be
obviated on this point by providing that the Central International Body in
question should be established by agreement among the High Contracting
Parties ratifying or adhering to the convention. (In this connection see
The Department of course appreciates that if, as suggested, the Central
International Body should be selected by the H. C. P. those powers would
be free to designate the organization which they might consider best suited
to perform the duties prescribed.

ARTICLE 10
In connection with this article, which relates to the prohibition of
importation of arms and ammunition in the barred areas, as well as the
prevention of such “exportation to, importation and transportation” in a
certain maritime zone the Department calls your attention to the provisions
of Article 6 under which the H. C. P. reserve the right to grant export
licenses for the barred zone. The provisions of these two articles do not
appear to be entirely consistent.

It is difficult to submit detailed comments on Article 10, in view of the fact
that the extent of the barred area is a matter for further examination. It may
be suggested, however, that there are obvious objections to including in this
area sovereign states.

Under the licensing system outlined in earlier articles of the Convention it
would appear that means had been provided to deal with the situation of
sovereign states which it might otherwise be contemplated to place in the
barred zone. If conditions requiring more drastic treatment should be
presented in a certain area, the powers could agree, if occasion arose, to put
a stop to all shipments to such an area by declining to issue licenses for
export to this destination.

As was indicated, however, in the Department’s instruction of March 7th,
this Government will give proper consideration to any proposal as to
limitations in the shipment of armament respecting Europe, Asia and Africa
to which the other governments declare themselves willing to submit. But
this Government would hardly be disposed to undertake to participate in the
enforcement of regulations within the barred area or in the waters
contiguous thereto. Its action would be limited to the restriction which
might be possible under law upon the export of arms and ammunition from
this country to such an area.

With reference to the second paragraph of Article 10 it is not entirely clear
to the Department in what respect “the special licenses” there mentioned
differ, in so far as the exporting country is concerned, from the licenses
referred to in Article 3.

ARTICLES 11 TO 26
25 with ocean surveillance, within the so-called barred area. These articles
particularly concern the powers which have possession either within these
areas or immediately contiguous thereto, and relate chiefly to matters for
domestic legislation or regulation on the part of the powers which have

colonies, dependencies or which exercise mandates or supervision within
the area.

Article 26 is of a general character relating to the adoption of the measures
for the enforcement of the preceding articles.

Certain of the provisions contained in these articles are based on articles 8
to 13 of the General Act for the repression of the African Slave-trade signed
note, the United States was a party to this convention and the form of the
Senate’s concurrence therein has already been brought to your attention.

In a communication from the Navy Department of April 4, 1922, in reply
to an inquiry from this Department for an expression of views with regard
to certain features of the convention of St. Germain, the Secretary of the
Navy in dealing particularly with the articles of that Convention which have
been taken over into the present draft states:
“The convention permits visit to certain classes of vessels in
certain waters and provides that, the visit having been made, a
definite obligation to bring in the vessel visited may follow. (See
article 20). No other duty for vessels of the United States Navy is
stated or implied in the convention.

“There is one other naval aspect of the convention. It extends in
time of peace and for a new purpose the right of visit to certain
classes of vessels on certain parts of the high seas.”
In commenting on this extension of the “right of visit” the Secretary of the
Navy (writing in April 1922) expressed the view that it was undesirable.
In view, however, of the treaties recently concluded by this Government
with certain foreign powers for the prevention of the smuggling of
intoxicating liquors, which permit the boarding of private vessels outside
the limits of territorial waters for certain defined purposes, the Department
does not consider that a provision along similar lines with respect to the

prevention of the smuggling of arms and ammunition would be
objectionable. In this connection, however, you will note that the limit
within which such boarding of private vessels is permitted under the liquor
smuggling treaties is defined (i. e. one hour’s steaming distance from the
shore in the British Treaty). Such a limitation does not appear to be
provided with respect to the boarding of private vessels to search for arms
and ammunition. It would appear desirable that some limit should be placed
upon this privilege which might otherwise lend itself to abuse.
ARTICLE 27
The last paragraph of this article, which provides that a state may, with the
consent of the H. C. P., notify its partial or conditional adherence to the
convention provided such partial adherence does “not affect the
effectiveness of the supervision of trade in arms and ammunition,” is
doubtless intended to be a helpful provision and it may be one which would
tend to make it more likely that the convention could be given full
consideration by this Government.

ARTICLE 29
The second paragraph of this article, which relates to the Allied Peace
Treaties with the Central Powers, was apparently added to the draft
subsequent to the sub-committee meeting at Paris, and the discussions
which led up to its adoption have not been found in the Department’s files.
However, in view of the concluding phrase of the second paragraph it is not
considered that this provision affords any ground for objection.
ARTICLE 30
With reference to Article 30 your attention is called to the comments given
above with respect to Article 9. It is suggested that the International Body
which might be set up under Article 9 could publish the annual report which
under the present draft is proposed should be published under the direction
of the Council of the League of Nations.

ARTICLE 32
This article relates to the coming into force of the convention when ratified
by certain powers among which figure the United States and, as now drawn,
would appear to be inconsistent with Article 27 as now proposed, which
provides for adherence as well as ratification.

CONTROL OF THE PRIVATE MANUFACTURE OF MUNITIONS AND IMPLEMENTS OF WAR
In addition to the draft convention relating to the traffic in arms and
ammunition which has been discussed above, the Department has also
given its attention to the report of the special committee appointed by the
first sub-committee of the T. M. C. which met at Prague in April last. This
report was transmitted with the Legation’s despatch No. 1508 of May 13,
1924. In connection with this report your attention is called to the
Department’s instruction of February 7th last to Mr. Grew, through the
American Consul at Geneva, and to point one of the Department’s
instruction of March 7th …
The latest figures available to the Department do not indicate that this
country is in any sense taking the lead in the production of arms and
ammunition. In fact the figures given in the enclosed pamphlets issued by
the Census Bureau44 which contain comparative statements respecting the
manufacture of arms and munitions in the United States for the period prior
and subsequent to 1914, including the year 1921, indicate that in the
number of establishments manufacturing arms, the number of persons
employed in this trade and the value of the production, the United States in
1921 was substantially on the same basis as in 1909. It would be interesting
if comparative figures of this character could also be obtained with respect
to the important arms producing countries of Europe.

Further, with respect to the production of arms it should be recalled that the
situation of this country differs from that of certain of the powers
represented on the T. M. C. in view of the fact that there are in the United
States no important government munition factories. The United States is
therefore dependent for its needs both in time of peace and in time of war
largely upon private manufacturers.

In view of the fact that the recommendations of the Committee which met
at Prague, and which it is understood are to be considered by the T. M. C,
have not assumed definite form, the Department does not consider that it is
feasible to send you further instructions on this phase of the subject at the
present time. As has already been pointed out in previous instructions (See
telegram of March 7th) manufacture or production is not per se commerce
and Congress under the power to regulate interstate commerce cannot
control mere manufacture or production within the states. The power of
Congress could, however, be exerted, if Congress were so disposed, to
control production of arms in the District of Columbia and in the territories
and possessions of the United States.

In a telegram from Paris of March 28 Mr. Grew reported that Lord Cecil
had inquired whether there were any constitutional difficulties which would
prevent federal legislation in the United States with a view to obtaining for
publication statistical information respecting production by private
manufacturers in the various states of the union.

The Department has given careful consideration to this question and while
it cannot undertake to speak with finality on the constitutional question
involved it is of the opinion that federal legislation to secure such statistics
would be constitutional. In fact in paragraph 32 of the Act of the 65th
decennial censuses it is provided:
“That the Director of the Census be, and he is hereby, authorized
and directed to collect and publish, for the years nineteen hundred
and twenty-one, nineteen hundred and twenty-three, nineteen
hundred and twenty-five, and nineteen hundred and twenty-seven,
and for every tenth year after each of said years, statistics of the
products of manufacturing industries; and the director is hereby
authorized to prepare such schedules as in his judgment may be
necessary.”
Acting under the authority of this Act statistics covering the private
manufacture of arms and ammunition have been compiled and the
pamphlets mentioned above have been issued dealing specifically with such
manufacture. Copies in duplicate of the pamphlet giving the figures for the

year 1921, as well as a comparison with the figures of certain preceding
years, are enclosed herewith in duplicate. You may, if you consider it
desirable, file one copy with the T. M. C. The Department understands that
the material for the publication of a similar pamphlet covering the year
1923 is now being collected and will be available in a comparatively short
time. This information will also be sent you as soon as received by the
Department.

From informal inquiry of the Census Bureau, which prepares these reports,
the Department understands that the Bureau sends representatives to the
various munition plants in this country to collect the information desired.
An effort is made to reach every establishment having an annual production
value of $5,000 or more and in the opinion of the Census Bureau no
establishment of any consequence has been overlooked. As stated in the
publication of the Census Bureau it is believed that the inclusion of all
establishments having an annual production of less than $5,000 would
affect the figures in the enclosed pamphlet to the extent of less than one-
tenth of 1 percent.

The report of the Census Bureau does not include government
establishments. With respect to such establishments the Department has
informally obtained the following information through the courtesy of the
War Department.

In 1914 the government owned and operated six plants and it has the same
number of plants today. The production of military equipment in
government owned and operated establishments is less than half of what it
was in 1914. In 1914, for instance, the government employed
approximately 7,500 people in its plants and today the Department
understands the number employed is less than 4,000. Most of these persons,
furthermore, are engaged in storage plants and not in the production of arms
and ammunition as the only material manufactured by the Government
today is a small quantity of small arms (rifles) and some experimental
material for coast defense.

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS

1. Experience has shown the difficulty of making effective any
control of the arms traffic as long as there is over-production. It
does not appear that there is such over-production in the United
States.
2. The United States has not contributed to any considerable
extent in the traffic in arms with countries in Europe, Asia or
Africa. Certain recent figures in this respect were included in
Department’s telegram No. 9, February 2. Shipments from the
United States to countries in this hemisphere and to countries
where the United States enjoys extraterritorial rights can, as
occasion requires and as has often been done, be placed under
strict control at the points of shipment. The shipments which have
been made recently to Mexico and Cuba have been in the interest
of the maintenance of peace and order and the results amply
justified these shipments. (See enclosed statements with respect to
the shipment of arms to Mexico45 ).
3. A licensing system and proper publicity are steps with which
this Government is in general accord and if a convention giving
effect to these principles should be drawn up which did not
involve the supervision or control of the League of Nations and if
other provisions of an objectionable character should not be
included, this Government would give such a convention most
careful consideration.
4. As a possible addition to the principles already included in the
convention it is suggested that you might be in a position to
suggest informally the inclusion of a provision to the effect that
the High Contracting Powers agree to withhold diplomatic or
other support from their nationals in respect to any claim against a
foreign government or national based on an arms shipment which
shall not have been made under proper license where such license
is required and further that the High Contracting Powers serve
notice upon other governments that they will not entertain any
claim presented by another government with respect to any arms

shipment which likewise shall not have been made under proper
license.

There is enclosed, for convenient reference in connection with this
instruction, a copy of the draft convention45a in the form in which, the
Department understands from the reports of the Legation at Berne,
mentioned above, it is to be considered by the T. M. C. on July 7th. In case
the Department’s understanding on this point is incorrect and if the draft
which is to be considered by the T. M. C. differs in any material respects
from that enclosed herewith the Department desires to be informed by
telegraph.

The Department desires you to summarize by telegraph the discussions of
the T. M. C. and to submit a full written report with the text of the minutes
of the various meetings with your comments thereon.

Subsequent to the preparation of the foregoing instructions the Department
has received your despatch No. 20 of May 2746 enclosing the minutes of the
meeting of the Permanent Advisory Commission for military, naval and air
questions of the League of Nations which, together with the Naval Sub-
Committee of this Commission, considered certain features of the draft
convention for the control of the traffic in arms and ammunition as prepared
by the T. M. C. and as enclosed herewith. The Department understands
from these minutes that the Permanent Advisory Commission has suggested
certain modifications in the draft convention particularly with respect to the
categories of arms and ammunition with which the convention is to deal.
From the minutes it appears that three categories have been suggested to
replace the two categories of the draft of the T. M. C. and in addition the
instruments of warfare listed under these categories differ slightly from
those listed under the two categories of the earlier draft. The Department
has particularly noted that the enumeration under Category I of the list
prepared by the P. A. C. does not appear to include naval vessels. If the
Department’s understanding on this point is correct and if the
recommendations of the P. A. C. are adopted it might not be necessary for
you to call the attention of the Commission to the possible effect of the

convention upon the Treaty for the Limitation of Naval Armament which
was discussed above under Article 1.

The Department has further noted recommendations of the P. A. C. with
regard to Articles 11 to 26 which are taken from the St. Germain
Convention. The proposed modifications in these articles do not appear to
call for further comment at this time.

Finally the Department has noted the suggestion of the British delegation on
the P. A. C. “that, instead of a single arms traffic convention of a general
nature being prepared, two separate conventions should be drawn up: one
dealing with the general or world-wide traffic in arms, and the other, of
more limited scope, dealing with the supply of arms to certain territories
such as are dealt with in Article 6 of the St. Germain Convention.” (C. P.
League of Nations, dated Paris, May 20, 192447 ).

The Department considers that from the point of view of the United States
the suggestion of the British delegation might have certain advantages. As
already indicated the proposed regulations with regard to the “prohibited
area” (area defined in Article 6 of the Treaty of St. Germain) particularly
concern the countries possessing colonies or exercising authority within that
area. It is believed that a convention containing the detailed provisions for
supervision which are a part of the present draft convention would be more
likely to meet with objection in this country than a convention of a more
general and less technical character which would deal with the general
question of the traffic in arms, which under the British proposal would be
the subject of the first of the two conventions.

If therefore the suggestion of the British delegation is considered by the
Temporary Mixed Commission the Department considers that you might
appropriately express this view, should occasion arise.

JOSEPH C. GREW

[Document 28]
The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 2: p.m.]
58. On July 12 the Temporary Mixed Commission adjourned. The draft
convention which the Commission drew up will be submitted in September
to the Assembly of the League of Nations. The draft convention as
approved by the Assembly will be submitted later to an international
conference for negotiation. An invitation will be given to the interested
governments to attend this conference.

The draft as approved by the Commission seems to be in harmony with the
Department’s views as indicated by its instructions.
GIBSON

[Document 29]
The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, July 23, 1924.

[Received August 5.]

No. 79
SIR:
The draft convention as drawn up by the Commission, with textual
corrections, has now been printed in final form by the Secretariat of the
League as document C. T. A. 433 (1) entitled “The Draft Convention for the
Control of the International Trade in Arms, Munitions and Implements of
War.” Two copies of this document are transmitted herewith for the
Department’s information. …
I have [etc.]

For the Minister:
ALAN F. WINSLOW
2nd Secretary of Legation
[Enclosure]
Draft Convention Adopted by the Temporary Mixed Commission for the Reduction of Armaments,
July 12, 1924
PREAMBLE

Whereas the Convention of St. Germain signed by the H. C. P. therein
mentioned has not entered into full force and effect, Whereas it is necessary
to exercise a general supervision over the international trade in arms,
munitions and implements of war, with the object of securing the fullest
possible publicity in regard to such trade, Whereas the existing treaties and
conventions, and particularly the Brussels Act of July 2nd, 1890 regulating
the traffic in arms and munitions in certain regions, no longer meet present
conditions, Whereas a special supervision of the maritime zone adjacent to
certain countries is necessary to ensure the efficacy of the measures adopted
by the various Governments both as regards the import of arms,
ammunition and implements of war into those countries and their export
from their own territory Have appointed:
CHAPTER I.—Definition of the arms, munitions and implements of war the
international trade of which is to be controlled ARTICLE 1
This Convention applies to the following arms, munitions and implements
of war: Category I.
1. Arms and munitions, assembled or component parts, exclusively
designed for land, sea or aerial war, whatever their mode of employment.
(a)—All arms and ammunition which are or shall be comprised in the
equipment of the armed forces of the different states, including:
—Pistols and revolvers, automatic or self-loading, and
developments of the same, designed for single-handed use or
fired from the shoulder, of a calibre greater than 6. mm. and
length of barrel greater than 10 cm.
—rifles, muskets, carbines;
—machine guns, interrupter gears, mountings for machine guns;
—aerial gun sights;
—infantry apparatus for the discharge of projectiles;

—flame throwers;
—cannon, long or short, bomb throwers and mortars of all kinds
and their carriages, mountings, recuperators, accessories for
mounting and sighting apparatus;
—apparatus for the discharge of all kinds of projectiles, bombs,
torpedoes, depth charges, etc;
—grenades, bombs, land mines, submarine mines fixed or
floating torpedoes, depth charges;
—projectiles of all kinds;
—ammunition and appliances for the above arms and apparatus.
—bayonets, swords and lances;
—all arms and ammunition which, after having been employed in
the service of the different States, are no longer part of their
equipment but remain capable of being utilised for military
purposes to the exclusion of any other utilisation.
2. Implements of war hereafter enumerated and component parts which are
only capable of being utilised in the manufacture of the said material.
Ships of all kinds designed exclusively for war, including submarines and
submersibles; Airships, aeroplanes and seaplanes designed exclusively for
war;
Tanks;
Armoured cars.

Category II. Arms and munitions, assembled or component parts, capable of
use both for military and other purposes
(1) Firearms, designed or adapted for non-military purposes, that
will fire cartridges that can be fired from firearms in Category I.

(2) All other rifles, or firearms, firing from the shoulder, of a
calibre of 6 mm. or above, not included in Category I.
(3) Ammunition for the arms enumerated above.
(4) Gunpowder and explosives.

Category III. Arms and munitions having no military value.

All the arms and munitions other than those defined in Categories I and II
such as:
—rifled weapons of a calibre of less than 6 mm. designed for
firing from the shoulder;
—revolvers and automatic pistols of a calibre of 6. mm. or less
and length of barrel of 10 cm. or less;
—smooth-bore shot guns;
—double-barrelled shot-guns of which one barrel is rifled, the
other smooth-bore;
—single-shot pistols;
—firearms firing rimfire ammunition;
—muzzle loading firearms;
—life-saving rockets;
—guns for whaling or other fisheries;
—signal and saluting guns;
—humane cattle-killers of all sorts;

—ammunition for the above.

NOTE.—The above three categories do not include arms the use of which is
prohibited by International Law, since it is clearly understood that all traffic
in these arms must be prohibited and that no licence can be issued for such
traffic.

CHAPTER II.—Export and transit of arms, munitions and implements of war
ARTICLE 2
The H. C. P.’s, undertake not to export themselves, and to prohibit the
export of arms, munitions and other implements of war enumerated in
Category I, whether complete or in parts, except on the conditions
hereinafter mentioned.

ARTICLE 3
Notwithstanding this prohibition, the High Contracting Parties may grant in
respect of arms, munitions and implements of war whose use is not
prohibited by international law, licenses for the export of arms, munitions
and implements of war enumerated in Category I, in the following
conditions:—
1) Licenses are not to be granted except for a direct supply to a
Government recognised as such by the Government of the
exporting country.
2) The Government acquiring the consignment must act through a
duly accredited representative.
3) Such representative must produce a written authority from the
Government he represents for the acquisition of each
consignment, which authority must state that the consignment is
required for delivery to that Government for its own use.
4) The form in which this license shall be given shall, so far as
practicable, be that given as an annex to the present Convention,
(page …) Each license must contain a description sufficient for

the identification of the arms, munitions and implements of war to
which it relates and the names of the exporter and the acquiring
Government, ports, of embarkation and disembarkation, means of
transport, intended route and destination.
5) A separate licence shall be required for each separate
consignment which crosses the frontier of the exporting country,
whether by land, water or air, and shall accompany each separate
consignment.
6) A return of the licence granted shall be sent quarterly to the
Central International Office referred to in Article 8 of the present
Convention by the issuing Governments; importing Governments,
when H. C. P.’s, shall also forward quarterly to the C. I. O. a
return of the same licences enclosing particulars of the heading
under which the imported goods will appear in their imports
statistics.

ARTICLE 4
Further, licences for the export to private individuals of component parts
covered by Category I may be granted on the following conditions:— The
said component parts must be exported direct to a recognised manufacturer
of war material, duly authorised by his own Government, on a declaration
from him to the effect that the said component parts are required by him.
The Government which grants the licence and the Government of the
importer’s country shall take all adequate precautions to ensure that the said
component parts are sent direct to their destination.
The licences granted in the terms of the present Article shall, so far as
practicable, be drafted according to the form annexed to the present
Convention, and shall conform to the provisions of the present Convention,
and particularly to those of Article 8.

ARTICLE 5

Without prejudice to any obligations to which they may have sub scribed
under international conventions dealing with transit, the H. C. P., when they
have reason to believe that any consignment of arms, munitions or
implements of war in transit through their territory does not conform to the
provisions of the present Convention, undertake to investigate the
circumstances and if necessary to prohibit the transit.

ARTICLE 6
Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 7, arms and munitions in
Category II and III may, if the exporter’s country so desires, be exported
without licence. Provided, nevertheless, that in the case of arms and
munitions of Category II the H. C. P.’s hereby undertake to determine from
the size, destination and other circumstances of each consignment whether
these arms and munitions are intended for war purposes. If such is the case,
the H. C. P.’s undertake that the shipments shall become subject to Articles
ARTICLE 7
The H. C. P. further undertake to prohibit the export of arms, munitions, and
implements of war enumerated in Article 1, to the maritime or territorial
zones specified in Article 9.

Nevertheless, the H. C. P. may grant export licences, notwithstanding this
prohibition provided that they conform to the provisions of Articles 3 to 5.
The competent authorities must satisfy themselves, before issuing them that
the arms, munitions or implements of war are not intended for export to any
destination or for disposal in any way contrary to the provisions of this
Convention.

ARTICLE 8
A Central International Office shall be established by the Council of the
League of Nations for the purpose of collecting, preserving and publishing
documents of all kinds exchanged by the H. C. P.’s with regard to the trade

in and the distribution of arms, munitions and implements of war, as well as
the text of all laws, orders and regulations made for the carrying out of the
present Convention.

Each of the H. C. P.’s shall publish an annual return of the export licences
which each may have granted in respect of arms, munitions and implements
of war in pursuance of the present Convention, mentioning the quantities
and destination of the arms, munitions and implements of war to which the
export licences refer. A copy of this return shall be sent to the Central
International Office.

The H. C. P.’s further undertake to forward to the Central International
Office all information which they will be in a position to provide relating to
consignments under contracts entered into before the coming into force of
the present Convention.

CHAPTER III.—Import of Arms, Munitions and Implements of War, Prohibited
Zones ARTICLE 9
The H. C. P. undertake, each as far as the territory under its jurisdiction is
concerned, to prohibit the importation of arms, munitions and implements
of war into the following territorial zones, and also to prevent their
exportation to, importation and transportation in the territorial zones as well
as in the maritime zones defined below.

Special licences for the import of arms, munitions and implements of war
into the zones defined above may be issued. In the African zone they shall
be subject to the regulations specified in Article[s] 10 and 11 or to any local
regulations of a stricter nature which may be in force.

In the other zones specified in the present Article, these licences shall be
subject to similar regulations put into effect by the Governments exercising
authority there.

CHAPTER IV.—Supervision on Land ARTICLE 10

Arms, ammunition and implements of war exported under licence into the
prohibited zones shall be admitted only at ports, or other places of entry,
designated for this purpose by the authorities of the State, Colony,
Protectorate or territory under mandate concerned.

Such arms, ammunition and implements of war must be deposited by the
importer at his own risk and expense in a public warehouse under the
exclusive custody and permanent control of the Authority and of its agents,
of whom one at least must be a civil official or a military or naval officer.
No arms or ammunition shall be deposited or withdrawn without the
previous authorisation of the administration of the State, Colony,
Protectorate or territory under mandate, unless the arms, ammunition and
implements of war to be deposited or withdrawn are intended for the forces
of the Government or the defence of the national territory.
The withdrawal of arms, ammunition or implements of war deposited in
those warehouses shall be authorised only in the following cases:—
1. For despatch to places designated by the Government where
the inhabitants are allowed to possess arms, under the control and
responsibility of the local Authorities, for the purpose of defence
against robbers or rebels.
2. For despatch to places designated by the Government as
warehouses and placed under the supervision and responsibility
of the local Authorities.
3. For individuals who can show that they require them for their
legitimate personal use.

ARTICLE 11
In the prohibited zones specified in Article 9, trade in arms, munitions and
implements of war shall be placed under the control of officials of the
Government and shall be subject to the following regulations:
1. No person may keep a warehouse for arms, munitions or
implements of war without a licence.

2. Any person licenced to keep a warehouse for arms, munitions
or implements of war must reserve for that special purpose
enclosed premises having only one entry, provided with two
locks, one of which can be opened only by the officers of the
Government.

The person in charge of a warehouse shall be responsible for all
arms, munitions or implements of war deposited therein and must
account for them on demand. For this purpose all deposits or
withdrawals shall be entered in a special register, numbered and
initialled. Each entry shall be supported by references to the
official documents authorising such deposits or withdrawals.
3. No transport of arms, munitions or implements of war shall
take place without a special licence.
4. No withdrawal from a private warehouse shall take place
except under licence issued by the local Authority on an
application stating the purpose for which the arms or ammunition
are required, and supported by a licence to carry arms or by a
special permit for the purchase of ammunition. Every arm shall be
registered and stamped, the Authority in charge of the control
shall enter on the licence to carry arms the mark stamped on the
weapon.
5. No one shall without authority transfer to another person either
by gift or for any consideration any weapon or ammunition which
he is licenced to possess.

ARTICLE 12
In the prohibited zones specified in Article 9 the manufacture and
assembling of arms, munitions or implements of war, shall be prohibited,
except at arsenals established by the local Government or, in the case of
countries placed under tutelage, at arsenals established by the local
Government, under the control of the Mandatory Power, for the defence of
its territory or for the maintenance of public order.

No arms shall be repaired except at arsenals or establishments licensed by
the local Government for this purpose. No such licence shall be granted
without guarantees for the observance of the rules of the present
Convention.

ARTICLE 13
Within the prohibited zones specified in Article 9, a State which is
compelled to utilise the territory of a contiguous State for the importation of
arms or ammunition, whether complete or in parts, or of material or of
articles intended for armament, shall be authorised on request to have them
transported across the territory of such State.

It shall, however, when making any such request, furnish guarantees that
the said articles are required for the needs of its own Government, and will
at no time be sold, transferred or delivered for private use nor used in any
way contrary to the interests of the High Contracting Parties.
Any violation of these conditions shall be formally established in the
following manner:— (a) If the importing State is a Sovereign independent
Power, the proof of the violation shall be advanced by one or more of the
Representatives accredited to it of contiguous States among the High
Contracting Parties; After the Representatives of the other contiguous States
have, if necessary, been informed, a joint enquiry into the facts by all these
Representatives will be opened, and if need be, the importing State will be
called upon to furnish explanations. If the gravity of the case should so
require, and if the explanations of the importing State are considered
unsatisfactory, the Representatives will jointly notify the importing State
that all transit licences in its favour are suspended and that all future
requests will be refused until it shall have furnished new and satisfactory
guarantees.

The forms and conditions of the guarantees provided by the present Article
shall be agreed upon previously by the Representatives of the contiguous
States among the High Contracting Parties. These Representatives shall
communicate to each other, as and when issued, the transit licences granted
by the competent authorities.

(b) If the importing State has been placed under the mandatory system
established by the League of Nations, the proof of the violation shall be
furnished by one of the High Contracting Parties or on its own initiative by
the Mandatory Power. The latter shall then notify or demand, as the case
may be, the suspension and future refusal of all transit licences.
In cases where a violation has been duly proved, no further transit licence
shall be granted to the offending State without the previous consent of the
Council of the League of Nations.

If any proceedings on the part of the importing State or its disturbed
condition should threaten the public order of one of the contiguous State
signatories of the present Convention, the importation in transit of arms,
ammunition, material and articles intended for armament shall be refused to
the importing State by all the contiguous States until order has been
restored.

CHAPTER V.—Maritime Supervision ARTICLE 14
Subject to any contrary provisions in existing special agreements, or in
future agreements, provided that in all cases such agreements otherwise
comply with the provisions of the present Convention the Sovereign State
or Mandatory Power shall carry out the supervision and police measures
within Territorial waters in the prohibited zones specified in Article 9.
ARTICLE 15
Within the prohibited zones specified in Article 9, no native vessel of less
than 500 tons (net tonnage) shall be allowed to ship, discharge or tranship
arms, munitions or implements of war.

A ship shall be deemed to be native if she is either owned by a native, or
fitted out, or commanded by a native, or if more than half of the crew are
natives of the countries included in the prohibited zones specified in Article
9.

This provision does not apply to lighters or barges, nor to vessels which are
engaged exclusively in the coasting trade between different ports of the

same state, colony, protectorate or territory under Mandate, where
warehouses are situated.

All cargoes of arms, munitions or implements of war shipped on the vessels
specified in the preceding paragraph must obtain a special licence from the
territorial authority, and all arms, munitions and implements of war so
shipped shall be subject to the provisions of the present Convention.
This licence shall contain all details necessary to establish the nature and
quantity of the items of the shipment, the vessel on which the shipment is to
be loaded, the name of the ultimate consignee and the ports of loading and
discharge. It shall also be specified thereon that the licence has been issued
in conformity with the regulations of the present Convention.
The provisions of this Article do not apply
(a) to arms, munitions and implements of war conveyed on behalf
of a Government either under that Government’s authorisation or
accompanied by a duly qualified official.

(b) to arms and munitions in the possession of persons provided
with a licence to carry arms, provided such arms are for the
personal use of the bearer and are accurately described on his
licence.

ARTICLE 16
To prevent all illicit conveyance of arms, munitions and implements of war
within the prohibited zones defined in Article 9, native vessels of less than
500 tons, net tonnage, (a) if not exclusively engaged in the coasting trade
between different ports of the same State, colony, protectorate or territory
under Mandate or
(b) if not engaged in carrying on behalf of a Government as permitted by
Article 15, paragraph (a), and proceeding to or from any point within the
said zones, —must carry a manifest of their cargo or similar document
specifying the quantities and nature of the goods on board, their origin and
destination.

The provisions as to the above-mentioned document shall not apply to
vessels only partially decked having a maximum crew of ten men and
exclusively employed in fishing within territorial waters.
ARTICLE 17
Authority to fly the flag of one of the H. C. P. within the prohibited zones
defined in Article 9, shall not be granted to native vessels of under 500 tons,
net tonnage as defined in Article 15 unless they satisfy all the three
following conditions:
(1) The owners must be nationals of the Power whose flag they
claim to fly or a company duly registered under the laws of that
Power.

(2) They must furnish proof that they possess real estate in the
district of the authority to which their application is addressed or
must supply a solvent security as a guarantee for any fines to
which they may become liable.

(3) Such owners as well as the captain of the vessel must furnish
proof that they enjoy a good reputation, and especially that they
have never been convicted of illicit conveyance of the articles
referred to in the present Convention.

The authorisation must be renewed every year. It shall contain the
indications necessary to identify the vessel, the name, tonnage type of
rigging, principal dimensions, registered number and signal letters. It shall
bear the date on which it was granted and the status of the official who
granted it.

The initial letters of the port of registration of the native vessel followed by
the vessel’s registration number in the serial port numbers must be incised
and painted in white on black ground on both quarters of each vessel.
The same marks may be painted in Black on the sails.

The net tonnage of the native vessel shall also, if practicable, be incised and
painted in a conspicuous position inside the hull.

ARTICLE 18
The High Contracting Parties agree to apply the following rules in the
maritime zone specified in Article 9.

(1) When a warship belonging to one of the H. C. P. encounters outside
territorial waters a supposed native vessel of less than 500 tons burden (net
tonnage)
(a) Flying the flag of one of the H. C. P.

(b) Flying the flag of a recognised nation.

(c) Flying no flag.
and the Commander of the warship has good reason to believe that the
supposed native vessel
(d) is flying a flag without being entitled to do so
(e) is not lawfully entitled to fly the flag of any recognized nation
(f) is illicitly conveying arms or ammunition
he may proceed, subject to the conditions indicated in the paragraphs below
to verify the nationality of the vessel by examining the document
authorising the flying of the flag, if this document exists, and also the
manifest referred to in Article 16.

Any vessel which presents the appearance of a native build or rig may be
presumed to be a native vessel.

(2) With this object, a boat commanded by a commissioned officer in
uniform, may be sent to visit the suspected vessel, after she had been hailed
to give notice of such intention. The officer sent on board the vessel shall
act with all possible consideration and moderation: before leaving the

vessel the officer shall draw up a process-verbal in the form and language in
use in his own country. This proces-verbal shall state the facts of the case
and shall be dated and signed by the officer.

Should there be on board the warship no commissioned officer, other than
the commanding officer, the above-prescribed operations may be carried
out by the warrant, petty or non-commissioned officer at the discretion of
the commanding officer.

The captain or master of the vessel visited, as well as the witnesses, shall be
invited to sign the proces-verbal, and shall have the right to add to it any
explanations which they may consider expedient.
right to fly the flag can be established the vessel shall be conducted to the
nearest port in the zone where there is a competent authority of the Power
whose flag has been flown and shall be handed over to such authority.
Should the nearest competent authority representing the Power whose flag
the vessel has flown be at some port at such a distance from the point of
arrest that the warship would have to leave her station or patrol, to escort
the detained vessel to that port, the foregoing regulation need not be carried
out. In such a case, the vessel may be taken to the nearest port where there
is a competent authority of one of the H. C. P. of nationality other than that
of the warship, and handed over to such authority, and steps shall at once be
taken to notify the detention to the competent authority representing the
Power concerned.

No proceedings shall be taken against the vessel or her crew until the arrival
of the representative of the Power whose flag the vessel was flying or
without authority from him.

The suspected vessel may also be handed over to a warship of the nation
whose flag she had flown, if the latter consents to take charge of her.

(4) The procedure laid down in Para. 3 may be followed if after the
verification of the flag and in spite of the manifest being in order the
Commander of the Warship continues to suspect the native vessel of
engaging in the illicit conveyance of arms, munitions, or implements of
war.

(5) In the cases referred to in para. 1 (c) of this Article, if it is ascertained as
a result of the visit made on board the native vessel that whereas it flew no
flag, it was also not entitled to fly the flag of a recognized State, the native
vessel, shall, unless the innocent nature of her cargo can be established to
the satisfaction of the Commanding Officer of the warship, be conducted to
the nearest point in the zone where there is a competent authority of the
Power to which the warship which effected the capture belonged, and shall
be handed over to such authority.

If it is established that the vessel was engaged in the illicit conveyance of
arms, munitions and implements of war, the vessel and all cargo carried in
addition to the arms, munitions and implements of war shall be seized by
such authority and disposed of according to its own laws—the destruction
of the illicit cargo of arms, munitions and implements of war may be
ordered according to the same laws.

ARTICLE 19
The authority before whom the suspected vessel has been brought shall
institute a full enquiry in accordance with the laws of his country in the
presence of an officer of the detaining warship.

If, however, owing to the duties upon which the warship is engaged it is not
practicable for an officer of this warship to attend this enquiry, an affidavit
sworn by the commanding officer of the warship shall be accepted by the
authority holding the enquiry in place of the verbal evidence of an officer of
the warship.

If it is proved at this enquiry that the flag has been illegally flown but that
the vessel is entitled to fly the flag of a recognised State she shall, if that

State is one of the H. C. P. be handed over to the nearest authority of that
State and in all other cases shall be disposed of by agreement between the
State responsible for her detention and the State whose flag she is entitled to
fly, and pendingsuch agreement shall remain in the custody of the
authorities of the nationality of the detaining warship.

If it is established that the use of the flag by the detained vessel was correct,
but that the vessel was engaged in the illicit conveyance of arms, munitions
or implements of war, those responsible shall be brought before the courts
of the State under whose flag the vessel sailed. The vessel herself and her
cargo shall remain in charge of the authority directing the enquiry. The
illicit cargo of arms, munitions or implements of war may be destroyed in
accordance with the laws and regulations drawn up for the purpose.
ARTICLE 20
The H. C. P. agree to communicate to the Central International Office,
ARTICLE 21
Any illicit conveyance or attempted conveyance legally established against
the captain or owner of a vessel authorised to fly the flag of one of the
signatory Powers, or holding the licence provided for in Article 15, shall
entail the immediate withdrawal of the said authorisation or licence.

The H. C. P. will take the necessary measures to ensure that their territorial
authorities or their consuls shall send to the Central International Office
certified copies of all authorisations granted under this Convention to fly
their flag as soon as such authorisation shall have been granted, as well as
notice of withdrawal of any such authorisation. They also undertake to
communicate it to the said Office copies of the licences provided for under
Article 15.

ARTICLE 22

The commanding officer of a warship who may have detained a vessel
flying a foreign flag shall in all cases make a report thereon to his
Government, stating the grounds on which he acted.

An extract from this report, together with a copy of the process-verbal
drawn up by the Officer, warrant officer, petty or non-commissioned officer
sent on board the vessel detained shall be sent as soon as possible, to the
Central International Office and at the same time to the Government whose
flag the detained vessel was flying.

ARTICLE 23
If the authority entrusted with the enquiry decides that the detention and
diversion of the vessel or the measures imposed upon her were irregular, he
shall fix the amount of the compensation due. If the capturing officer or the
authorities to whom he is subject, do not accept the decision or contest the
amount of the compensation awarded, the dispute shall be submitted to a
Court of Arbitration consisting of one arbitrator appointed by the
Government whose flag the vessel was flying, one appointed by the
Government of the capturing officer, and an umpire chosen by the two
arbitrators thus appointed. The two arbitrators shall be chosen, as far as
possible, from among the diplomatic, consular or judicial officers of the H.
C. P. These appointments must be made with the least possible delay, and
natives in the pay of the H. C. P. shall in no case be appointed. Any
compensation awarded shall be paid to the person concerned within six
months at most from the date of the award.

The decision shall be communicated to the Central International Office.
CHAPTER VI.—General Provisions ARTICLE 24
The H. C. P. who exercise authority over territories within the prohibited
areas and zones specified in Article 9, agree to take, so far as each may be
concerned, the measures required for the enforcement of the present
Convention, and in particular for the prosecution and repression of offences
against the provisions contained therein and to appoint the necessary
territorial and consular officers or special representatives competent for this
purpose.

They shall communicate these measures to the Central International Body
and shall inform them of the competent authorities referred to in the
preceding Article.

ARTICLE 25
from operation until the restoration of peace so far as concerns any export
and transit of arms, munitions or implements of war to or on behalf of any
of the belligerents recognised as such by the exporting country and the
countries of transit, provided such recognition has been previously
communicated to the other H. C. P.

ARTICLE 26
Any Government may on signing or adhering to the present Convention
declare that it accepts its provisions partially or conditionally provided that
the H. C. P. consent, and that it does not thereby affect the effectiveness of
the supervision of the trade in arms, munitions, and implements of war.
Nevertheless the Convention shall only apply to Powers availing
themselves of the option provided in the previous paragraph if within the
period of one year from the notification by the French Government of the
deposit of their ratification (or adherence), partial or conditional, no
opposition to such ratification (or adherence) has been raised by any of the
Contracting Parties.

ARTICLE 27
All the provisions of the former general international Conventions, relating
to the matters dealt with in the present Convention included the convention
for the control of the trade in arms and ammunition and the protocol signed
at Saint Germain-en-Laye September 10th, 1919, shall be considered as
abrogated in so far as they are binding between the Powers which are
Parties to the present Convention.

The present Convention shall in no way affect the rights and obligations
which may arise out of the provisions either of the Covenant of the League

of Nations or of the Treaties of Peace signed in 1919 and 1920 at Versailles,
Neuilly, St. Germain and Trianon or the Treaty limiting naval armaments
signed at Washington on February 6th, 1922, and the provisions of
Agreements registered with the League of Nations and published by the
League up to the date of the coming into force of the present Convention, so
far as the Powers which are signatories of or benefit by the said Treaties or
Agreements are concerned.

ARTICLE 28
The Council of the League of Nations shall cause to be published an annual
report on the operation of the present Convention.

This report shall be presented to the Assembly of the League of Nations.
ARTICLE 29
The present Convention of which the French and English texts shall both be
authentic, is subject to ratification. It shall bear today’s date and shall be
open for signature by the Powers until . . . . . . (date).

Each Power shall address its ratification to the French Government, which
shall at once notify the deposit of ratification to each of the other signatory
Powers.

The instruments of ratification shall then remain deposited in the archives
of the French Government.

ARTICLE 30
The H. C. P. will use their best endeavours to secure the accession to the
present Convention of the other States, whether Members of the League or
not. On and after . . . . . . (date) the present Convention may be acceded to
by any Power. Accession shall be effected by an instrument communicated
to the French Government, which shall at once notify such deposit to all
Powers which are signatories of or accede to the Convention.

The instruments of accession shall remain deposited in the archives of the
French Government.

ARTICLE 31
Disputes between the parties relating to the interpretation or application of
this Convention shall, if they cannot be settled by direct negotiation, be
referred for decision to the Permanent Court of International Justice. In case
either or both of the Parties to such a dispute should not be parties to the
protocol of signature of the Permanent Court of International Justice, the
dispute shall be referred, at the choice of the Parties, either to the Permanent
Court of International Justice or to a court of arbitration.

ARTICLE 32
The present Convention will not come into force until it has been ratified by
which it was received.

A denunciation shall take effect two years after the date on which the
notification thereof was received by the French Government, and shall
operate only in respect of the notifying State.

ARTICLE 34
The H. C. P. agree that, at the conclusion of a period of 5 years, the present
Convention shall, in the light of the experience then gained, be subject to
revision upon the request of a third of the said H. C. P.
[Annex]
LICENCE TO EXPORT ARMS, MUNITIONS AND IMPLEMENTS OF WAR
(Name and Address of Exporter)
is hereby authorised to export the following Arms and Munitions of War.
(Here will follow a full description of the Arms and Munitions, their
number, weight and other necessary data, including the heading under
which the exported goods will appear in the export statistics of the
exporting country).

To (Name of Importing Government)
The above Arms and Munitions of War will be sent by (Here state whether
by sea, rail or air), by the proposed following route or routes.
(Here give Port or Station of Embarkation and Disembarkation, Route and
Destination, including last Port or Station of consignment).

(Name and address of Purchasing Agent of the Importing Government).
(Signature of Proper Authority of Government of Exporting country).

[Document 30]
The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
76. Drummond’s communication to you dated August 18th is as follows:
“At its coming meeting the Council of the League of Nations will
consider the report and draft convention prepared by the
Temporary Mixed Commission for the reduction of armaments as
a result of the following resolution of the Fourth Assembly:
‘The Assembly recommends that the Temporary Mixed
Commission should be invited to prepare a new
convention or convention[s] to replace that of St.
Germain for the control of the traffic in arms.
The Temporary Mixed Commission should be requested
to draw up the draft convention or conventions in such
a form that they might be accepted by the
government[s] of all countries which produce arms or
munitions of war.

The Temporary Mixed Commission should however
also make alternative proposals for a convention or
conventions which might be adopted by some of the
producing powers even if others refused their
cooperation.

The Assembly recommends that the Council should
invite the United States Government to appoint
representatives to cooperate with the Temporary Mixed

Commission in preparing the draft convention or
conventions.’
Following upon an invitation extended by the Acting President of
the Council your Government was good enough to delegate its
representative in Berne to attend the meeting of the Temporary
Mixed Commission in order to receive information with regard to
the proposals made respecting this draft convention.
The Temporary Mixed Commission in its report expressed their
appreciation of the valuable assistance afforded to them by Mr.
Grew and later by Mr. Gibson in the carrying out of the task
entrusted to it by the Assembly and the Council. Special stress is
laid in this report on the study given by the commission to the
views of the Government of the United States with reference to
the Convention of St. Germain and to the means by which, in the
draft prepared by it, such views might be so far as possible met.
The draft convention prepared by the Temporary Mixed
Commission together with the report at present under
consideration by the Council will in due time be discussed at the
Assembly with a view to considering whether the draft
convention affords a sufficient basis to convoke an international
conference for the purpose of adopting such a convention as has
been contemplated. In view of the fact that the position of the
United States in this matter has been considered as an important
factor by the Assembly, the Council and its expert commissions,
the members of the Council feel that the fullest opportunity
should be afforded to your Government to follow every step in
the development of this question and therefore that it would be of
the greatest importance for the success of the work that a
representative of the Government of the United States should be
present during the meetings of the third committee of the coming
Assembly which is to discuss the matter, and that his presence
would be very highly appreciated by the third committee.
To this end, therefore, I am directed by the acting President of the
Council to state that the members of the Council are in agreement

that the presence of a representative of the United States
Government at the time of the meetings of the third committee of
the Assembly would be of great value, and to extend to the
Government of the United States, an invitation in this sense.
I have the honor to enclose herewith for your information two
copies of the report of the Temporary Mixed Commission to
which reference is made above.”
My reply to Drummond dated today is as follows:
“I beg leave to acknowledge the receipt of your note of August
18th and to inform you that I did not fail to transmit immediately
to the Secretary of State the communication from the Council of
the League of Nations inviting my Government to have a
representative present at the meetings of the third committee of
the forthcoming Assembly which is to discuss the question of the
control of the traffic in arms.

I am now in receipt of a reply from the Secretary of State
desiring me to express, on behalf of my Government, its cordial
appreciation of the courtesy shown by the Council in extending
this invitation.

The Government of the United States has been happy to be
represented at the meetings of the Temporary Mixed Commission
and of its sub-committee. Its views have been fully explained on
those occasions, and it is felt that they could not be usefully
amplified by having a representative present at the meeting of the
third committee.

It is observed from the invitation that the third committee will
discuss this matter with a view to considering whether the draft
convention affords a sufficient basis to convoke an international
conference for the purpose of adopting such a convention as has
been contemplated.

[Document 31]
The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, October 14, 1924.

[Received October 28.]

No. 170
Secretariat of the League of Nations and embodying a resolution adopted by
the Assembly and Council, requesting the interested governments to inform
the Secretary General, before the Council meets in December 1924,
whether they are prepared to take part in a conference to be convened in
April or May 1925 for the purpose of discussing the Draft Convention for
the Control of the International Traffic in Arms, Munitions and Implements
of War.

I have now received a letter, dated October 9, 1924, from the Secretary
General of the League, enclosing a communication (C.L.140.1924.IX)
addressed to the Secretary of State in the sense of the above mentioned
resolution. This communication, as well as a copy of Sir Eric Drummond’s
letter to me, is transmitted herewith.

I have [etc.]

HUGH GIBSON
[Enclosure]

The Secretary General of the League of Nations (Drummond) to the Minister in Switzerland
(Gibson)
GENEVA, October 9, 1924.

MY DEAR GIBSON: I am enclosing, herewith, an official letter to the Government
of the United States, with reference to the proposed International
Conference for the purpose of concluding a convention on the control of the
international trade in arms and munitions.

The despatch of this letter is, of course, in execution of the general
instructions of the Council, and you will, I am sure, understand that the
Council did not overlook the fact that your Government has already,
through your letter to me of August 29th, declared that it would be disposed
to give favorable consideration to an invitation to participate in an
appropriate international conference for this purpose.

As you will see, the suggestion now made is that the Conference should be
held in April or May, 1925, and I hope to hear from you, in due course, that
the proposed date is acceptable to Washington.

Believe me [etc.]

ERIC DRUMMOND

[Subenclosure]
The Secretary General of the League of Nations (Drummond) to the Secretary of State
GENEVA [, October 7, 1924].

SIR: At its meeting held on September 30th, the Council adopted the
following Resolution:—
“On the proposal of the Assembly the Council decides to
authorise the Secretary-General to submit to the Governments of

the States Members and non-Members of the League of Nations
the draft Convention relating to the Control of the International
Trade in Arms, Munitions and Implements of War drawn up by
the Temporary Mixed Commission, and to request these
Governments to inform him, before the Council meets in
December, whether they are prepared to take part in a Conference
to be convened in April or May, 1925, for the purpose of
discussing the draft Convention.

“The Secretary-General will communicate to the various
Governments the report of the Temporary Mixed Commission,
the minutes of that Commission and the Minutes of the
Permanent Advisory Commission relating to the discussion of
Article 9, together with the minutes of the present meeting of the
Council, in order that the representatives of the Governments on
the International Conference may have the requisite information
to enable them to come to a decision on the problems raised on
this question during the present meeting.”
In execution of this decision I have the honour to enclose herewith the draft
Convention on the control of the International Trade in Arms, Munitions
and Implements of War which was drawn up by the Temporary Mixed
The next meeting of the Council is to be held on December 8th 1924, and I
should [be] grateful if you would kindly inform me, if possible before that
date, whether the United States Government would be prepared to take part
in an International Conference to be held in April or May 1925 for the
purpose of discussing this draft and concluding a Convention on the control
of the International Trade in Arms, Munitions and Implements of War.
The exact date of this Conference will be fixed by the Council at its
December session.

In accordance with paragraph 2 of the Council’s Resolution I am also
enclosing herewith the report of the Temporary Mixed Commission for the
reduction of armaments and the report of the 3rd Committee of the
Assembly.

[Document 32]
The Secretary of War (Weeks) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, October 25, 1924.

MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: With reference to your letter of September 10, 1924, (NE
convention of July 16, 1924, amending the Convention of St. Germain, I am
pleased to advise you that in so far as the contents thereof concern matters
properly within the purview of the War Department, a careful consideration
of the same raises serious doubt as to the advisability of the United States
being a party to the draft convention in its present form.

The international control of the trade in arms, munitions, and implements of
war, along the lines indicated in the draft convention herewith, would result,
in so far as the United States is concerned, in the international control of
production and sources of supply of means vitally necessary to our national
defense. This result would follow from the fact that the United States in
time of war is almost wholly dependent upon the private manufacture of
munitions. This private munitions industry, in time of peace, keeps
munitions plants in existence, and holds together the trained technical
personnel necessary for war time production. In time of peace, the private
manufacture of munitions, in order to exist as an industry, must have a
market for its production, which market, in so far as the United States is
concerned, is found in:
a. Supply of the current needs of our military forces, which, on
account of their small size, is comparatively negligible.
b. Supply of domestic needs.
c. Export to foreign countries, which, while not large, is an
important factor in maintaining the existence of our munitions
industry.

In this connection it should be noted that of the H. C. P. specifically
mentioned in Article 32, the United States is the only nation that does not
maintain government arsenals for the supply of its own war time needs, and
in consequence the provisions of the convention as regards trade may place
the United States in an extremely disadvantageous position in so far as the
acquisition of items included in Category I are concerned, at a time when
such procurement through normal trade channels may be vitally necessary
for national defense, or for the preservation of our national sovereignty.
While the United States maintains six so-called manufacturing arsenals,
these plants are in reality little more than experimental laboratories, and in
consequence the war time needs of our government must be supplied by
private manufacture. The present state of our private manufacture is such
that at the beginning of an emergency a portion of the raw materials and
component parts of our munitions needs must be obtained from abroad
through normal trade channels, in order to provide for the necessary
expansion of our private munitions industry. It should further be noted that
our present small private munitions plants are partially dependent for their
peace time existence on foreign trade, namely, on exports to other nations.
A limitation of these exports would inevitably result in the restriction of this
industry in the United States and consequently in an alarming situation as
regards the procurement of munitions in the event of a national emergency.
objectionable in that they might unduly hamper the United States in its
preparations to meet a clearly foreseen national emergency. Article 9 is
objectionable in not definitely defining and designating the zones and areas
to which the draft convention is to be applicable.

The United States has already complied with the spirit of the Convention of
St. Germain, and has gone further by drastically reducing its armed forces,
by practically dismantling its war time munitions plants, by restricting the
shipment of arms and ammunition to legitimate fields, and by prohibiting
the sale of surplus war material to all foreign powers.

At present the United States maintains an extremely small and weak
military force, our war reserves are entirely inadequate to meet war
requirements under the General Mobilization Plan, and we possess no large

government owned manufacturing arsenals. If we should be solely
dependent upon newly constructed munitions plants in event of national
emergency, it would require from twelve to twenty-four months before the
rate of production would approximate our war time requirements.
The other great powers mentioned in Article 32 are in a totally different
situation. They maintain comparatively large military forces, they possess
large war reserves of materiel, and have large government owned or
subsidized munitions plants. In event of an emergency, involving hostile
action against this country, their situation in this regard alone is so infinitely
superior to ours that we could not hope for even successful defensive
operations, without the aid of our now existing private munitions industry.

Any acquiescence by the United States at this time in an international
agreement to limit in any manner whatsoever the private or other
manufacture of munitions, would in effect perpetuate the present
disproportion existing between the munitions producing industry here and
abroad, and this is a condition to which the War Department cannot in
conscience subscribe. Any international agreement which would produce a
universal proportional reduction or limitation, if based on present
conditions, would quite naturally affect the United States more adversely
than any other great power, since the United States, as stated above, has
already so drastically cut down its defensive means. To reduce these or to
limit them still further, by direct or by indirect action, would produce a
situation in which I should be very loath to assume any responsibility for
the national safety.

When the other great powers mentioned in Article 32 of the draft
convention have given proof of their sincerity of purpose by reducing their
armed forces, reserves of munitions, and munitions production capacity to
the approximate level of that of the United States, the War Department
would enthusiastically support any effort to solve on a universal and
permanent basis, the problem of the limitation of the manufacture, storage,
and traffic in arms, munitions, and implements of war. Until such action on
the part of the other great powers mentioned is assured, it appears
advisable, from the sole viewpoint of national defense, for the United States

to reserve to itself full freedom of action as regards the control of the traffic
in arms.

In view of the terms of the draft convention of July 16, 1924, I am
constrained to reiterate the views expressed in my letter of September 26,
1923, on the matter of private manufacture of arms and munitions and the
international control of the arms traffic.

Sincerely yours,
JOHN W. WEEKS

[Document 33]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Gibson)
WASHINGTON, June 16, 1924.

No. 14
SIR: I enclose, for transmission by you in the usual manner, a
communication to the Secretary General of the League of Nations, in reply
requesting, in conformity with a direction of the Council of the League, the
views of the Government of the United States as a Government not a
member of the League of Nations, respecting a draft Treaty of Mutual
Assistance.

For the Secretary of State:
JOSEPH C. GREW
[Enclosure]
The Secretary of State to the Secretary General of the League of Nations (Drummond)
The Secretary of State of the United States of America has the honor to
acknowledge the receipt of a communication of the Secretary General of the
League of Nations, submitting, by direction of the Council of the League of
Nations, the draft Treaty of Mutual Assistance proposed by the Third
Committee to the Fourth Assembly, and requesting the expression of the
views of the Government of the United States.

In reply it may be said that the Government of the United States is most
desirous that appropriate agreements should be reached to limit armament
and thus to reduce the heavy burdens of expenditure caused by unnecessary

and competitive outlays in providing facilities and munitions of war. The
desire and purpose of this Government were fully manifested when the
great military and naval Powers were invited by the President of the United
States to send representatives to meet in conference at Washington in 1921,
for the purpose of considering the limitation of armament. While that
conference resulted in the conclusion of an important naval Treaty between
the United States of America, the British Empire, France, Italy and Japan
for the limitation of capital fighting ships, it was found to be impossible to
obtain an agreement for the limitation of the tonnage of auxiliary naval craft
or to make any progress in the direction of limitation of land forces. The
Government of the United States, having reduced its own armament,
continues to cherish the hope that the desired result in the case of other
Powers may be achieved, and it notes with keen and sympathetic interest
every endeavor to that end. In this spirit the draft Treaty submitted has been
carefully considered.

It appears from the preamble of the Treaty that it has been formulated with
the desire “of establishing the general lines of a scheme of mutual
assistance with a view to facilitate the application of Articles 10 and 16 of
the Covenant of the League of Nations, and of a reduction or limitation of
national armaments in accordance with Article 8 of the Covenant ‘to the
lowest point consistent with national safety and the enforcement by
common action of international obligations.’”
The following provisions of the draft Treaty may be especially noted:
ARTICLE 2
“The High Contracting Parties, jointly and severally, undertake to
furnish assistance, in accordance with the provisions of the
Present Treaty, to any one of their number should the latter be the
object of a war of aggression, provided that it has conformed to
the provisions of the present Treaty regarding the reduction or
limitation of armaments.

ARTICLE 3

In the event of one of the High Contracting Parties being of
opinion that the armaments of any other High Contracting Party
are in excess of the limits fixed for the latter High Contracting
Party under the provisions of the present Treaty, or in the event of
it having cause to apprehend an outbreak of hostilities, either on
account of the aggressive policy or preparations of any State party
or not to the present Treaty, it may inform the Secretary-General
of the League of Nations that it is threatened with aggression, and
the Secretary-General shall forthwith summon the Council.
The Council, if it is of opinion that there is reasonable ground for
thinking that a menace of aggression has arisen, may take all
necessary measures to remove such menace, and in particular, if
the Council thinks right, those indicated in sub-paragraphs (a),
(b), (c), (d) and (e) of the second paragraph of Article 5 of the
present Treaty.

The High Contracting Parties which have been denounced and
those which have stated themselves to be the object of a threat of
aggression shall be considered as especially interested and shall
therefore be invited to send representatives to the Council in
of their representatives shall, however, not be reckoned when
calculating unanimity.

ARTICLE 4
In the event of one or more of the High Contracting Parties
becoming engaged in hostilities, the Council of the League of
Nations shall decide, within four days of notification being
addressed to the Secretary-General, which of the High
Contracting Parties are the objects of aggression and whether they
are entitled to claim the assistance provided under the Treaty.
The High Contracting Parties undertake that they will accept such
a decision by the Council of the League of Nations.

The High Contracting Parties engaged in hostilities shall be
regarded as especially interested, and shall therefore be invited to
send representatives to the Council (within the terms of Articles 4,
13 and 17 of the Covenant), the vote of their representative not
being reckoned when calculating unanimity; the same shall apply
to States signatory to any partial agreements involved on behalf
of either of the two belligerents, unless the remaining Members of
the Council shall decide otherwise.

ARTICLE 5
The High Contracting Parties undertake to furnish one another
mutually with assistance in the case referred to in Article 2 of the
Treaty in the form determined by the Council of the League of
Nations as the most effective, and to take all appropriate measures
without delay in the order of urgency demanded by the
circumstances.

In particular, the Council may:
(a) decide to apply immediately to the aggressor State
the economic sanctions contemplated by Article 16 of
the Covenant, the Members of the League not signatory
to the present Treaty not being, however, bound by this
decision, except in the case where the State attacked is
entitled to avail itself of the Articles of the Covenant;
(b) invoke by name the High Contracting Parties whose
assistance it requires. No High Contracting Party
situated in a continent other than that in which
operations will take place shall, in principle, be required
to co-operate in military, naval or air operations;
(c) determine the forces which each State furnishing
assistance shall place at its disposal;
(d) prescribe all necessary measures for securing
priority
for
the
communications
and
transport

connected with the operations;
(e) prepare a plan for financial co-operation among the
High Contracting Parties with a view to providing for
the State attacked and for the States furnishing
assistance the funds which they require for the
operations;
(f) appoint the Higher Command and establish the
object and nature of his duty.

The representatives of States recognised as aggressors under the
provisions of Article 4 of the Treaty shall not take part in the
deliberations of the Council specified in this Article. The High
Contracting Parties who are required by the Council to furnish
assistance, in accordance with sub-paragraph (b), shall, on the
other hand, be considered as especially interested, and, as such,
shall be invited to send representatives, unless they are already
represented, to the deliberations specified in sub-paras (c), (d), (e)
Without attempting an analysis of these provisions, or of other provisions of
the draft Treaty, it is quite apparent that its fundamental principle is to
provide guarantees of mutual assistance and to establish the competency of
the Council of the League of Nations with respect to the decisions
contemplated, and, in view of the constitutional organization of this
Government and of the fact that the United States is not a member of the
League of Nations, this Government would find it impossible to give its
adherence.

The Government of the United States has not failed to note that under
Article 17 of the draft Treaty “Any State may, with the consent of the
Council of the League, notify its conditional or partial adherence to the
provisions of this Treaty, provided always that such State has reduced or is
prepared to reduce its armaments in conformity with the provisions of this
Treaty”, but it would not serve a useful purpose to consider the question of
a conditional or partial adherence on the part of the Government of the

[Document 34]
The Russian Financial Attaché (Ughet) to the Chief of the
Division of Eastern European Affairs, Department of State
(Poole)
NEW YORK, September 22, 1922.

[Received September 23.]

MY DEAR MR. POOLE: I am in receipt of the text of the arrangement with regard to
the issue of Certificates of Identity to Russian refugees, adopted by the
Governmental Conference convened by Dr. Nansen, High Commissioner
herewith enclosed.

It occurred to me that in case the procedure recommended by the
Conference is going to be adopted by the European Governments, we may
be confronted with the case of Russian citizens bearing these certificates
and presenting them to be visa’ed for entrance into this country. Therefore, I
take the liberty in writing to you informally to find out what in your opinion
will be the attitude of the American Government towards this arrangement.
This question is of a great practical importance, as it is quite probable that
many Russian refugees will exchange their present passport for these
Certificates, thinking that the possession of the latter will assure the
protection of the League of Nations. It seems to me that it is our duty to
prevent possible misunderstandings in this matter.

Hoping that you will appreciate the reasons for my letter and will find it
possible to fulfill my request, I remain [etc.]
S. UGHET

[Document 35]
The Chief of the Division of Eastern European Affairs,
Department of State (Poole) to the Russian Financial Attaché
(Ughet)
WASHINGTON, October 30, 1922.

MY DEAR MR. UGHET: I am sorry that an answer to your letter of September 22,
1922, concerning the certificates of identity proposed to be issued to
Russian refugees has been so long delayed. I postponed an answer in the
thought that the question might be presented to the Department in some
practical way. So far, however, the matter has not been brought before us
except through your letter.

While the action of the Department cannot be anticipated with respect to
such concrete cases as may arise, I believe that I am justified in saying to
you that there is nothing in the situation to cause apprehension on behalf of
the Russian refugees. I do not see how they can be placed in a worse
situation with respect to travel and visas as a result of new provisions made
in other countries on the suggestion of the League. There have been many
cases since the war of persons holding no passports or the passports of non-
recognized governments. To care for this the Department has provided a
form (No. 228) which is in effect a declaration by the applicant for a visa as
to the facts of his identity and nationality. If a regular passport is lacking,
the visa, when granted, is affixed to this form.

I think that it is clear that under this procedure Russian refugees will not
suffer any new or undue hardship in the matter of obtaining visas. Any
document which they may have in the nature of certificates of identity of
the kind proposed by the League of Nations will, presumably, only improve
their situation by providing additional, though not necessarily conclusive,
evidence of their identity and nationality.

D.C. Poort

[Document 36]
The Secretary General of the League of Nations (Drummond) to
the Secretary of State
GENEVA [, June 10, 1924].

[Received June 26.]

SIR: The Council of the League of Nations, at its meeting on September 28th
last, had its attention called to the situation of some thousands of Armenian
refugees in various countries who are gravely handicapped by the lack of
any documents enabling them to establish their identity, or to travel freely
in pursuance of their normal occupations.

In its desire to contribute towards the removal of this disability, the Council
requested Dr. Nansen, the High Commissioner for refugees,
“to consider the possibility of having the necessary arrangements
made for the issue of identity certificates to Armenian refugees.”
Dr. Nansen has made a careful study of this problem, in consultation with
the Secretariat of the League and with representatives of the refugees, and
has reached the conclusion that effect could best be given to the Council’s
recommendation by the general adoption by interested governments of a
form of certificate for Armenian refugees identical, mutatis mutandis, with
the certificates established for Russian refugees under the Arrangement
The thirty-five States shown in the annexed list66 —two of which, Germany
and Mexico, are not Members of the League—are now parties to the
Geneva Arrangement which has, in practice, yielded very satisfactory
results. The principles laid down in the Arrangement would, it is thought,

apply, with only minor modifications, to the proposed certificate for
Armenian refugees.

In response to a communication enquiring whether, in the event of an inter-
governmental conference being convened to consider the present question,
it would be willing to send a representative, the Turkish Government has
stated that there is no reason for it to take part in any arrangements
concerning Armenian refugees as there are no such refugees from other
countries in Turkey.

Dr. Nansen has prepared, and at his request I forward to you for
consideration by your Government, a plan for the introduction, by
agreement between interested governments, of an identity certificate for
Armenian refugees.

The plan contains similar rules to those laid down in the Geneva
Arrangement relating to Russian refugees and the certificate is substantially
identical with the certificate now employed for the latter. The only
modification made is the insertion on the certificate of a space authorising
its use for the purpose of returning to the country issuing it and the
inclusion in the plan of a recommendation that such authorisation should be
given if possible. This modification, which in no way binds the hands of
any government which may participate in the plan, is made because Dr.
Nansen’s experience has convinced him of the great importance of
facilitating, as far as possible, free movement by refugees.
It has been found that if the refugee certificate authorises return to the
issuing country, the economic position of the holder is improved by the
facilities which he thus obtains for visiting temporarily other countries,
which may offer him opportunities for employment or business, and his
ultimate emigration to another country is in fact encouraged. It is thought
that it would be very advantageous if governments felt themselves able to
agree in principle to grant the right of return when issuing the refugee
certificate. Dr. Nansen has not, however, ventured to make the certificate
available for return in all cases.

The plan has been framed in a form which makes it possible for it to be
brought into operation, without the convening of a special conference,

[Document 37]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland
(Gibson)
WASHINGTON, August 5, 1924.

No. 41
SIR: I enclose, for transmission in the usual informal manner, a
communication to the Secretary General of the League of Nations in reply
to a Note, dated June 10, 1924, concerning a plan for the issuance of
certificates of identity to Armenian refugees in order that they might
establish their identity and travel freely in pursuit of their normal
occupations.

In transmitting this Note you should request the appropriate authorities of
the League of Nations to inform you when the text of this communication
will be released to the press. This information should be cabled to the
Department in order that a simultaneous release may be effected here.
For the Acting Secretary of State:
LELAND HARRISON
[Enclosure]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary General of the League of Nations (Drummond)
The Acting Secretary of State of the United States of America has received
the communication of the Secretary General of the League of Nations,
dated June 10, 1924, transmitting a plan for the issue of certificates of
identity to Armenian refugees in order that they may establish their identity
and travel freely in pursuance of their normal occupations.

The American Government is not in a position to issue travel documents to
aliens. It does not require certificates of identity of aliens sojourning within
its territory or of those desiring to depart therefrom. For entry into the
United States alien immigrants are required to present an immigration visa
issued by the appropriate American Consul. The American Consuls will
accept from aliens unable to present passports in connection with their
applications for immigration visas appropriate documents of identity in lieu
of passports. The Nansen certificates issued to Russian refugees have been
considered to fall within the category of documents in lieu of passports.
Similarly, non immigrant aliens are granted passport visas upon personal
affidavits or other documents in lieu of passports when they are unable to
present passports. Aliens resident in the United States who desire to depart
temporarily, may obtain from the Commissioner General of Immigration,
Washington, D. C, permits to return valid for six months, capable of further
extension in the discretion of the Commissioner General of Immigration.
WASHINGTON, August 5, 1924.

[Document 38]
The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, September 24, 1924.

[Received October 6.]

No. 142
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s instruction No. 41, of
August 5, 1924, enclosing a communication to the Secretary General of the
League of Nations in reply to a note, dated June 10, 1924, concerning a plan
for the issuance of certificates of identity to Armenian refugees in order that
they might establish their identity and travel freely in pursuit of their
normal occupations.

There is enclosed herewith the reply from the Secretary General of the
League to the Department’s communication referred to above.
With reference to the second paragraph of the Department’s instruction
under reference, I have the honor to transmit herewith a copy of a letter,
dated September 19, 1924, from Mr. Huntington Gilchrist, of the
Secretariat of the League, stating that the Department’s communication to
the Secretary General would be released to the press in Geneva on October
conveying this information to the Department, was based on this letter.
I have [etc.]

HUGH GIBSON
[Enclosure]
The Secretary General of the League of Nations (Drummond) to the Acting Secretary of State

[Document 39]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Gibson)
You may inform the Secretary General of the League of Nations that the
Department of State will be willing for all practical purposes to consider the
identity certificates for Armenian refugees as appropriate documents in lieu
of passports.

HUGHES

[Document 40]
The Secretary General of the League of Nations (Drummond) to
the Netherland Minister of Foreign Affairs (Van Karnebeek)
[Translation ]
GENEVA, October 18, 1923.

MR. MINISTER: The Assembly of the League of Nations, at its recent session,
considered and adopted the report of the Advisory Committee on Opium
and Other Dangerous Drugs (A. 13) and passed certain resolutions in
connection therewith. Of these, two resolutions, nos. 5 and 6, deal with the
calling by the Council of the League of two conferences and read as
follows: RESOLUTION 5: The Assembly approves the proposal of the Advisory
Committee that the governments concerned should be invited immediately
to enter into negotiations with a view to the conclusion of an agreement as
to the measures for giving effective application in the Far Eastern territories
to part II of the Convention72 and as to a reduction of the amount of raw
opium to be imported for the purpose of smoking in those territories where
it is temporarily continued, and as to the measures which should be taken
by the Government of the Republic of China to bring about the suppression
of the illegal production and use of opium in China, and requests the
Council to invite those governments to send representatives with
plenipotentiary powers to a conference for the purpose and to report to the
Council at the earliest possible date.

RESOLUTION 6: The Assembly, having noted with satisfaction that, in accordance
with the hope expressed in the fourth resolution adopted by the Assembly in
1922, the Advisory Committee has reported that the information now
available makes it possible for the governments concerned to examine, with
a view to the conclusion of an agreement, the question of the limitation of

the amounts of morphine, heroin, or cocaine and their respective salts to be
manufactured; of the limitation of the amounts of raw opium and the coca
leaf to be imported for that purpose and for other medicinal and scientific
purposes; and of the limitation of the production of raw opium and the coca
leaf for export to the amount required for such medicinal and scientific
purposes: requests the Council, as a means of giving effect to the principles
submitted by the representatives of the United States of America, and to
the policy which the League, on the recommendation of the Advisory
Committee, has adopted, to invite the governments concerned to send
representatives with plenipotentiary powers to a conference for this
purpose, to be held, if possible, immediately after the conference mentioned
in Resolution 5.

The Assembly also suggests, for the consideration of the Council, the
advisability of enlarging this conference so as to include within its scope all
countries which are members of the League or parties to the Convention of
1912, with a view to securing their adhesion to the principles that may be
embodied in any agreement reached.

The Council, at its meeting on September 29th, considered these two
resolutions, and adopted the following resolution, which decides the place
where the Conference is to be held and fixes the provisional date:
The Council of the League of Nations, while reserving until its
December session the final fixing of the conferences provided for
by the Assembly in connection with the traffic in opium and other
dangerous drugs, decides, provisionally, that the first conference
of countries having possessions where the smoking of opium is
still continued should be convoked at Geneva in July 1924, the
second conference to follow immediately afterwards.

The Secretary General has the honor to request the Government of the
Netherlands to bring this information to the notice of the Governments of
the United States of America, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, and
Mexico, with a view to enabling them to make such preliminary
arrangements as they may deem advisable to obtain the data which they
may wish to place at the disposal of the conference.

[Document 41]
The Secretary General of the League of Nations (Drummond) to
the Secretary of State
GENEVA, January 14, 1924.

[Received January 30.]
the honour to inform you that the following Resolution was adopted by the
Council at its meeting on December 13th, last:—
“The Council notes the adoption by the Assembly of the Report
and Resolutions of the Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium
and the Resolutions of the Fourth Assembly. It instructs the
Secretary-General to take all the action required by these
Resolutions and decides that the First Conference consisting of
countries having possessions where the smoking of opium is
continued should be convoked at Geneva on the 1st Monday in
November 1924 and the Second Conference in Geneva on the 3rd
Monday in November 1924”.

The special purpose of the Second Conference is set forth in Assembly
Resolution VI, a copy of which is attached for purposes of reference.
As regards the question of what States should be invited to take part in this
Conference, the Council after considering the suggestion of the Assembly
adopted the following further Resolution:—
“The Council is convinced that the extension of the Second
Conference to include all countries which are members of the

League or Parties to the Convention of 1912 would result in a
correspondingly wider acceptance of the principles embodied in
any agreement reached. It therefore instructs the Secretary-
General to invite to this Conference all Members of the League
and Parties to the Convention of 1912”
I accordingly have the honour, on behalf of the Council, to invite your
Government to be represented at the Second Conference, which will take
place on the 3rd Monday in November 1924, by a delegate, or delegates,
having plenipotentiary powers.

I have the honour further, to inform you that at its meeting on December
13th, the Council decided that a preparatory Committee should be set up to
prepare a draft programme for the Conference in question. This Committee
is to be nominated by the Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium, and
will consist of six members, including one representative of the United
States and the two European Assessors on the Advisory Committee.
The Council further resolved as follows:—
“The Council feeling that the success of the Conference depends
on the cooperation of the Governments, instructs the Secretary-
General to invite the Governments to make proposals for the
carrying out of Assembly Resolution VI; such proposals to be
considered by the preparatory Committee.”
This Resolution was adopted by the Council in the earnest hope that the
Governments, by their cooperation, would make it possible to bring about
the suppression of the abuse of Opium and other dangerous drugs.
I accordingly have the honour, on behalf of the Council, to invite the
Government of the United States of America to forward to the Secretariat
any relevant proposals it may be disposed to make for the consideration of
the preparatory Committee, which is being entrusted with the preliminary
work of the Conference.

I have [etc.]

ERIC DRUMMOND

[Document 42]
The Minister in Switzerland (Grew) to the Secretary of State
[Received 9: p.m.(?)]
League of Nations that the Preparatory Committee on Opium will be
summoned within the next few days to meet on March 5th, and that it is
regarded as essential to have the American delegation in Geneva at that
time especially as the foundations laid by the Preparatory Committee will
greatly influence the work of the later conference.

I am asked to inform the Department that the Advisory Committee has
selected by ballot the representatives of France, Great Britain, and the
Netherlands as members of the Preparatory Committee. In addition the two
European assessors, Sir John Jordan and Monsieur Brenier have accepted
the invitation to serve. There thus remains for the full constitution of the
Committee only that representative to be nominated by the United States.
The opinion in Geneva seems to be that the success of this Preliminary
Committee lies largely in the choice of the American delegate and that if the
program of the later conference and the tentative draft agreement is to be
thoroughly comprehensive it is highly desirable that the Preparatory
Committee as at present constituted be aided by the very best technical
experts available in the United States. While no official suggestion was
made it was clear in conversation that it was felt that the best could be
secured, particularly from the point of view represented by the United
States, if the first American delegate were a man thoroughly familiar with
the opium situation and highly trained in negotiation aided by an internal
enforcement officer from the Federal Narcotic Board and a customs officer
who has had experience pertaining to customs, steamers, bonded
warehouses, et cetera.

GREW

[Document 43]
The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the
Preparatory Committee (Neville78 )
WASHINGTON, February 21, 1924.

SIR: The United States has been invited to send a representative to attend the
meetings of a Preparatory Committee at Geneva, Switzerland, which has
been called by the League of Nations to prepare a draft program for the
Narcotics Conference in November, 1924. You are instructed to proceed to
Geneva, Switzerland, and attend these meetings in a consultative capacity.
There are enclosed certain suggestions, the international adoption of which,
this Government believes, would be of material value in lessening the
world-wide traffic in harmful drugs. You are authorized to bring these
suggestions to the notice of the Preparatory Committee and to explain that
the suggestions are tentative in character and are intended to serve as a basis
for discussion.

You will be careful to avoid any attempt to commit this Government in your
discussion, as the Department understands that the work of this Committee
is purely suggestive and not final. Any recommendations or conclusions
which may be reached by the Committee will, therefore, not be binding on
the Governments which are represented there.

It is assumed that much of the work will be of a technical character and will
involve discussion of the narcotics laws of many nations of the world. The
Department has, therefore, requested the Treasury Department to allow an
officer from the Narcotics Section who is familiar with the actual operation
of the several Statutes of the United States on this subject to proceed with
you. That Department has also been requested to authorize the presence of
the Treasury agent in Switzerland at Geneva during your stay there, as it is
probable that the discussions will involve questions affecting the shipment,

trans-shipment and bonding practices of the nations concerned. In view of
the questions of hygiene which may arise, the Department is requesting the
Public Health Service to authorize the Surgeon in charge at Paris to proceed
to Geneva in case of necessity.

CHARLES E. HUGHES
[Enclosure]
Suggestions of the United States To Be Presented to the Preparatory Committee
The Resolution calling the Narcotics Conference reads as follows:
“The Assembly, having noted with satisfaction that in accordance
with the hope expressed in the fourth resolution adopted by the
Assembly in 1922, the Advisory Committee has reported that the
information now available makes it possible for the Governments
concerned to examine with a view to the conclusion of an
agreement, the question of the limitation of the amounts of
morphine, heroin or cocaine and their respective salts to be
manufactured; of the limitation of the amounts of raw opium and
the coca leaf to be imported for that purpose and for other
medicinal and scientific purposes, and of the limitation of the
production of raw opium and the coca leaf for export to the
amount required for such medicinal and scientific purposes.
“Requests the Council, as a means of giving effect to the
principles submitted by the representatives of the United States of
America
and
the
policy
which
the
League,
on
the
recommendation of the Advisory Committee has adopted, to
invite the Governments concerned to send representatives with
plenipotentiary powers to a Conference for this purpose, to be
held, if possible, immediately after the Conference mentioned.
“The Assembly also suggests for the consideration of the Council,
the advisability of enlarging this Conference so as to include

within its scope all countries which are Members of the League,
or Parties to the Convention of 1912, with a view to securing their
adhesion to the principles that may be embodied in any agreement
arrived at.”
It is assumed that all suggestions for the practical application thereof should
be in accordance with its terms.

The Government of the United States believes that the following
suggestions should be considered, but does not commit itself thereby to a
definite plan, reserving the right to add to, alter or propose other
suggestions in the light of proposals from other Powers.

A. PRODUCTION
1. The cultivation of the opium poppy and the coca leaf plant to
be reduced to the amount required for the production of opium
and coca leaves sufficient for medicinal and scientific
requirements only, as determined by proper authority. As a
preliminary measure no increase of poppy or coca leaf plant to be
permitted, and those nations in whose territory these articles are
not produced to prevent their introduction.
2. No encouragement to be given to poppy or coca leaf cultivators
by the State.
3. The acceptance of the principle that no state should rely upon
the revenue from the control of opium and the coca leaf for
purposes of operating the Government, beyond the expenses
incident to controlling the narcotics traffic.
4. Consideration of difficulties arising out of treaty obligations
which prevent certain states from raising increased revenues from
Customs taxes as a substitute for the tax on opium or coca leaf
and their derivatives.

Convention to be applied to coca leaves.

B. TRANSPORTATION
1. Opium to be exported only upon license from the importing
country which must be party to The Hague Opium Convention,
issued upon prescribed rules and regulations showing that it is
imported either for purposes temporarily permissible under
Chapter II of the Convention or for medicinal purposes. The
exportation of opium of less than 9% morphine content, or for
purposes under Chapter II of the Convention to cease after a fixed
period, say ten years.
2. Coca leaves to be exported only upon permit issued upon
prescribed rules and regulations for medicinal purposes, from the
importing country, which must be party to the Hague Opium
Convention.
3. Derivatives or preparations of opium and the coca leaf to be
exported solely for medicinal or scientific purposes.
4. No vessel or other common carrier to receive for transport any
opium, coca leaf or derivative of either, which is not accompanied
by a certificate from the country of destination showing that it
may be lawfully imported, and, by a document from the country
of export showing that it may lawfully be exported. Reciprocal
right of search on the high seas in regions agreed upon from time
to time, to enforce this provision.
5. Transshipment and bonding privileges to be restricted, to the
end that, as a general rule, there shall be no re-export of opium,
coca leaf or their derivatives and preparations.

C. MANUFACTURE
Opium Convention to apply to all derivatives or preparations of

opium and coca leaf with suitable exceptions for small quantities
in medicines.
2. Countries with well developed chemical and pharmaceutical
facilities to prohibit the importation of narcotic drugs, derivatives
of opium and the coca leaf, permitting only raw opium and the
coca leaves to be imported, except small quantities for scientific
purposes.
3. The export of manufactured drugs preparations or derivatives
of opium or the coca leaf to be permitted only to nations which
are party to The Hague Opium Convention and which have
adequate systems of domestic control, except that medicines in
small quantities may be exported.

D. ADMINISTRATION
1. A consideration of the administrative features of the
Convention with a view to prescribing definite powers for a
permanent central organization.
2. Annual Reports to be submitted by all Powers party to the
Convention. The reports should show the amount of opium and
coca leaves produced, imported, exported or used for local
consumption; the amounts of derivatives or preparations made
therefrom, imported, exported or used for local consumption, and
should cover the same periods of time.
3. Illegal possession of opium coca leaf or their preparations or
derivatives to be a penal offense.

E. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1. The foregoing provisions to be applied to all drugs which might, after
generally recognized scientific investigations give rise to similar abuses and
result in the same injurious effects.

MANAGEMENT OF CONFERENCE

1. Day for hearing petitions and suggestions.
2. Order of business.
3. Place of Conference.

[Document 44]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
153. The British Embassy has left an aide mémoire79 at the Department
asking whether this Government would be willing to join with the British
Government in making representations at Paris in regard to proposals made
at the Committee of preparation for the forthcoming international opium
conference.

This Government is of the opinion that international measures must be
taken which will have the effect of limiting the quantities of opium and
coca leaves in international traffic and the quantities of drugs manufactured
therefrom if the present illicit traffic in dangerous drugs is to be dealt with
in an effective manner.

You may informally invite the attention of the French Government to the
views expressed above, adding that it is hoped that the Government will
find it possible to cooperate upon that basis.

Repeat to London for its information.

HUGHES

[Document 45]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
PARIS, May 21, 1924—noon.

[Received 9: a.m.]
was informed by Péan, who has charge of these matters at the Foreign
Office, that the French proposals were now ready and would be submitted
as soon as possible to the different governments so as to give the latter time
to examine them before the next preparatory meeting at The Hague.
The French experts are apparently of the opinion that it would be very
difficult if not impossible to limit the production of raw opium throughout
the world. They seem to think that if the powers principally interested agree
on a limitation of production it will merely incite other countries not parties
to the agreement to increase their production. The French proposals are
therefore presumably designed to overcome this objection.

I had already on May 2 after a conversation with Neville discussed the
French attitude with Péan and obtained assurances then that we could
continue to count on French support. He renewed these assurances
yesterday saying that there was every reliance desired on the part of the
French Government to cooperate with the other powers. Copy to European
Information Center.

HERRICK
copies of telegrams and despatches from the chiefs of missions in Europe to
the Department were sent for distribution to other interested missions.

[Document 46]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Perú (Poindexter)
41. There will be an international conference in Geneva in November, 1924,
to consider measures for the further restriction of the traffic in opium and
other dangerous drugs. It is the hope of this Government that the
participation in the work of this conference be very general, and particularly
that those countries which produce the raw product from which morphine
and cocaine are made will be adequately represented. The Department
understands that the Government of Perú has been invited to attend the
Conference, and trusts that it will be represented there.
One of the vital questions for consideration is the problem of controlling the
production of coca leaves. This Government believes that it is only by
reducing the quantity of the raw material produced that effective control can
be obtained. Accordingly the Government of the United States hopes that
the Government of Perú will find it possible to prevent the cultivation of the
coca leaf plant in quantities larger than are required for medicinal or
scientific
purposes
Unrestricted
production
means
uncontrollable
consumption, especially when the product enters into international
channels.

You should invite the attention of the Government of Perú to this question,
and ask for a frank statement of its views, and an exposition of any
difficulties which are anticipated in putting a program of this character into
effect. The complete acceptance of the Hague Convention by the
Government of Perú leads this Government to believe that Perú will be
willing to cooperate further in the suppression of the traffic in dangerous
drugs.

Repeat mutatis mutandis to La Paz as No. 19.

H UGHES

[Document 47]
The Secretary of State to the High Commissioner in Turkey
(Bristol)
163. The Department hopes that the Government of Turkey will be
represented at the forthcoming opium Conference at Geneva in November
next. The question of production of raw opium is one of prime importance
and without the cooperation of the producing countries, it will be difficult to
reach a satisfactory conclusion. The Department suggests, therefore, that
you communicate the views of this Government to the Government of
Turkey through appropriate channels in substantially the following form:
“As the Government of Turkey is undoubtedly aware, a
conference to consider measures to restrict the traffic in opium
and other dangerous drugs will be held in Geneva in November of
this year. This is a humanitarian question of world wide
importance in which the Government of the United States has
always been deeply interested, and it is hoped that the Turkish
Government will find it possible to participate in the work of the
Conference.

One of the principal questions to be considered is the production
of raw opium and its transportation in international commerce. It
is the earnest hope of this Government that the Government of
Turkey will cooperate in an international effort to terminate the
production and transportation of raw opium in quantities over and
above those needed for medicinal purposes, thereby attacking the
problem at its source.

The Government of the United States would be glad to have the
views of the Government of Turkey in this regard, and hopes that
the delegates at the Conference will be prepared to discuss

[Document 48]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Persia (Murray)
[Extract ]
83. 1. The Department hopes that the Government of Persia will be
represented at the forthcoming opium conference at Geneva in November
next. The question of production of raw opium is one of prime importance
and without the cooperation of the producing countries it will be difficult to
reach a satisfactory conclusion. The Department suggests, therefore, that
you communicate the views of this Government to the Government of
Persia through appropriate channels in substantially the following form:
“As the Government of Persia is undoubtedly aware, a conference
to consider measures to restrict the traffic in opium and other
dangerous drugs will be held in Geneva in November of this year.
This is a humanitarian question of world-wide importance in
which the Government of the United States has always been
deeply interested, and it is hoped that the Persian Government
will find it possible to participate in the work of the conference.
One of the principal questions to be considered is the production
of raw opium and its transportation in international commerce. It
is the earnest hope of this Government that the Government of
Persia will cooperate in an international effort to terminate the
production and transportation of raw opium in quantities over and
above those needed for medicinal purposes, thereby attacking the
problem at its source.

The Government of the United States would be glad to have the
views of the Government of Persia in this regard, and hopes that
the delegates at the conference will be prepared to discuss

sympathetically this fundamental point, with a view to accepting
the principle.”
HUGHES

[Document 49]
The Minister in Bolivia (Cottrell) to the Secretary of State
[Received 11: a.m.]
informs me delegate has been appointed to opium conference but
impossible to restrict cultivation of coca leaf plant. Full report by mail.
COTTRELL

[Document 50]
The Chargé in Persia (Murray) to the Secretary of State
[Received 10: a.m.]
learned informally this morning from Dr. Millspaugh that the Persian
Government has decided to send Mirza Eissa Khan to represent Persia at
the forthcoming opium conference at Geneva in November. This Persian is
at present the Persian Government Commissioner with the Anglo-Persian
Oil Company in London.

Legation will transmit by next pouch to the Department full report on the
opium situation in Persia based on data Dr. Millspaugh has kindly offered to
supply me.

MURRAY

[Document 51]
The Secretary General of the League of Nations (Drummond) to
the Secretary of State
GENEVA [undated].
yet received. Answer would facilitate preliminary arrangements conference.
DRUMMOND

[Document 52]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland
(Gibson)
78. You may inform the Secretary General of the League of Nations in reply
to his telegram received today that the United States accepts the invitation
to be represented at the Opium Conference on the third Monday in
November, 1924.

GREW

[Document 53]
The Ambassador in Perú (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
LIMA, October 23, 1924.

[Received November 18.]

No. 300
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s cablegram No. 41 of
September 11, 10 p.m., and to transmit herewith in Spanish and translation
copy of a note just received from the Foreign Office, in response to
representations made by the Embassy as directed in the cabled instruction
under acknowledgment.

The Foreign Office note states that Don Glicerio Camino, Peruvian Chargé
d’Affaires at Prague, will represent Perú at the forthcoming conference in
Geneva for the further restriction in the traffic of narcotic drugs; and that
that part of the Embassy’s note relating to restriction in the cultivation of
the coca leaf plant has been communicated to the Ministry of Hacienda with
a request for appropriate action.

I have [etc.]

MILES POINDEXTER

[Document 54]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland
(Gibson)
84. American Delegation to Opium Conference at Geneva will consist of
Honorable Stephen G. Porter, chairman, Eight Reverend Charles H. Brent,
Assistant Surgeon General Rupert Blue, Mrs. Hamilton Wright, Mr. Edwin
L. Neville, delegates, with five assistants and clerks. Please notify Secretary
General of League of Nations and the appropriate Swiss authorities.
GREW

[Document 55]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, November 19, 1924.

No. 1118
SIR: I have the honour to inform you, by direction of Mr. Secretary
Chamberlain, and with reference to previous correspondence regarding the
international control of narcotic drugs, that the Japanese delegation at the
Geneva Opium Conference have proposed that the Powers should be
obliged to allow the export or transhipment of opium on production of
import certificates, and have attacked His Majesty’s Government for
refusing to honour suspicious certificates for export from Hong Kong to
Formosa.

When the British delegate of the Conference above mentioned declared that
His Majesty’s Government could not abandon their right to refuse to
sanction the export of opium at their discretion, the Japanese delegation
stated that they had positive instructions not to sign the Convention unless
their demand was satisfied. The Conference has accordingly been adjourned
until November 21st and is in grave danger of breaking down altogether.
In these circumstances, His Majesty’s representative at Tokio has been
instructed to express to the Japanese Government the surprise which my
Government feel at the attack referred to above and, at the same time, to
urge that the matter is one for negotiation between the two Governments
concerned and not for submission to the Conference. His Majesty’s
Government cannot abandon their right to refuse to sanction the export or
transhipment of drugs in cases where such action is deemed advisable,
especially in view of the unfortunate incidents which have occurred in the
past at Formosa and in Mongolia. My Government realize, however, that
the question of the prestige of the Japanese Government may be thought to

be involved and the former are therefore prepared to consider a compromise
on the following lines.

While reserving their right to scrutinise permits in special cases, His
Majesty’s Government might be disposed to agree to accept such permits as
a matter of usual routine up to a yearly maximum to be decided upon by
mutual agreement, if necessary with the approval of the League of Nations.
This procedure would be an extension of the “Direct Sales Agreements”
which the Government of India already make with other countries and
which His Majesty’s Government have endeavoured to negotiate with
Japan, their efforts in this direction having failed owing to the refusal of the
Japanese Government to furnish information regarding the opium and
morphia industry in Formosa, In bringing this suggestion to the notice of
the Japanese Government, His Majesty’s representative at Tokio has been
instructed to emphasize that, if the plan in question should be , His
Majesty’s Government would require full information such matters.
Government feel that the present opium conference at Geneva , however, be
held up for such negotiations, and the attention of the Japanese Government
is being drawn to the deplorable impression that will be created if the latter
wreck the said conference on such a question, when their record in regard to
the control of drugs remains open to certain criticisms.

In communicating to you the substance of the instructions which have been
despatched to His Majesty’s representative at Tokio, I am directed to
express the hope that the United States Government will be disposed to
support both at Tokio and at Geneva the attitude of His Majesty’s
Government in regard to this question, as Mr. Secretary Chamberlain feels
that American public opinion could justly criticise His Majesty’s
Government were they to contract out of their responsibilities in the manner
desired by the Imperial Japanese Government.

I have [etc.]

(For the Ambassador)
H. G. CHILTON

[Document 56]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, November 25, 1924.

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of
November 19, 1924, concerning certain phases of the opium question now
under discussion at the International Narcotics Conference at Geneva.

In reply it affords me pleasure to inform Your Excellency that the pertinent
portion of your note has been telegraphed to the Chairman of the American
Delegation at Geneva and to the American Ambassador at Tokyo with the
information that since the United States produces no raw opium or coca
leaves, the question of exportation for which import certificates may have
been issued by other governments does not directly concern this country
except as it might involve reexportation in American territory. It has also
been pointed out by the Department that under the construction of existing
law hitherto adopted and embodied in regulations the reexportation of crude
opium from the United States has not been permitted by the Federal
Narcotics Control Board. It was further stated that since this Government
has always taken a leading part in the international control of narcotics, it is
greatly concerned with the success of the Geneva Conference and would
view with deep regret any controversy which might arise there threatening
the success of the Conference and nullifying the efforts of this and other
participating governments towards negotiating an agreement which
effectively regulate the traffic in narcotic drugs. The hope pressed that the
Japanese and British Governments would the question which now threatens
to impair the success of the ence and it was suggested that a solution might
be found through negotiation between the two governments rather than
through an attempt to settle the controversy in the Conference itself. The
American Ambassador at Tokyo was instructed to take early occasion to

intimate the viewpoint set forth above to the Japanese Foreign Minister and
to advise the British Ambassador at Tokyo of his action.
Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 57]
Suggestions of the United States Presented to the Second Opium
Conference
undated
CHAPTER I—RAW OPIUM AND COCA LEAVES
Definitions. By “raw opium” is understood:
The spontaneously coagulated juice obtained from the capsules of the
papaver somniferum, which has only been submitted to the necessary
manipulation for packing and transport.

By “coca leaves” is understood:
The leaves of Erythroxylon Coca and its varieties from which cocaine may
be extracted.

ARTICLE 1
The Contracting Powers Parties shall enact effective laws or regulations for
the control of the production and distribution of raw opium unless laws or
regulations on the subject are already in existence and coca leaves so that
there will be no surplus available for purposes not strictly medical or
scientific*
The foregoing provision shall not operate to prevent the production for
exportation, or exportation, of raw opium for the purpose of making
prepared opium into those territories where the use of prepared opium is
still temporarily permitted under Chapter II of this Convention, so long as
such exportation is in conformity with the provisions of this Convention.

ARTICLE 2
being had to the differences in their commercial condi- Contracting Powers
Parties shall limit the number of towns, or other localities through which
the export or import of raw and coca leaves shall be permitted.
Article 2–A
The Contracting Parties shall require that a separate import license must
be obtained for each importation of raw opium or coca leaves. The license
may allow the importation of the amount for which the license is given in
one or more consignments within a period to be specified in the license.
ARTICLE 3
The Contracting Powers shall take measures:
(a) To prevent the export of raw opium to countries which shall
have prohibited its entry, and
(b) To control the export of raw opium to countries which restrict
its import, unless regulations on the subject are already in
existence.

The Contracting Parties shall require that a separate export license must be
obtained for each exportation of raw opium or coca leaves. The
Contracting Party before issuing such license shall require an import
certificate issued by the authorities having jurisdiction over the territory
into which the importation is made and certifying that the importation is
approved, to be presented by the person applying for the license.

The license may allow the exportation of the amounts for which the license
is given in one or more consignments within a period to be specified in the
license.

Unless a copy of the export license accompanies the consignment, the
authorities issuing the export license shall send a copy to the authorities

having jurisdiction over the territory into which the importation is made.
The authorities having jurisdiction over the territory into which the
importation is made, when the importation has been effected, shall return
the export license with an endorsement to that effect to the Contracting
Party issuing such export license.

In the case of an application to export a consignment to any place: for the
purpose of being placed in a bonded warehouse in that the production of a
special certificate from the authorities jurisdiction over that place,
certifying that they have introduction of the consignment for the said
purpose, cepted by the Contracting Party permitting the export in import
certificate provided for above.

ARTICLE 4
The Contracting Powers Parties shall make regulations requiring that every
package containing raw opium or coca leaves intended for export shall be
marked in such a way as to indicate its contents, provided that the
consignment exceeds 5 kilograms.

ARTICLE 5
The Contracting Powers shall not allow the import and export of raw opium
except by duly authorized persons.

CHAPTER II—PREPARED OPIUM
Definition. By “prepared opium” is understood:
The product of raw opium, obtained, by a series of special operations,
especially by dissolving, boiling, roasting, and fermentation, designed to
transform it into an extract suitable for consumption.

Prepared opium includes dross and all other residues remaining when
opium has been smoked.

ARTICLE 6

The Contracting Powers Parties shall take measures for the gradual and
effective suppression of the manufacture of, internal trade in, and the use of,
prepared opium.

ARTICLE 7
The Contracting Powers Parties shall prohibit the import and export of
prepared opium; these Powers, however, which not ready to prohibit
immediately the export of prepared opium shall prohibit it as soon as
possible.

ARTICLE 8
The Each Contracting Powers Party which are not as yet ready to prohibit
immediately the export of prepared opium:
(a) Shall restrict the number of towns, ports, or other localities
through which prepared opium may fee exported;
(b) Shall prohibit the export of prepared opium to countries which
now forbid, or which may hereafter forbid, the import thereof;
(c) Shall, in the meanwhile, prohibit the consignment of prepared
opium to a country which desires to restrict its entrance, unless
the exporter complies with the regulations of the importing
country;
(d) Shall take measures to ensure that every package exported,
containing prepared opium bears a special mark indicating the
nature of its contents;
(e) Shall not permit the export of prepared opium except by
specially authorized persons.
in whose territory the use of prepared opium is now temporarily permitted
agrees to reduce its imports of raw opium for the purpose of making
prepared opium by 10 percent of its present importation each year for a

period of 10 years beginning with the date of ratification of this Convention
by it, and further agrees not to supplement the reduction by domestically
produced opium; and further agrees that at the end of such period of 10
years it will prohibit the importation of raw opium for the purpose of
making prepared opium. By “present importation” is understood the
importation during the 12 months immediately preceding the date the
Contracting Party ratifies this Convention*
CHAPTER III—MEDICINAL OPIUM, MORPHINE, COCAINE, ETC.

Definitions.—By “medicinal opium” is understood:
Raw opium which has been heated to 60° Centigrade and contains not less
than 10 per cent, of morphine, whether or not it be powdered or granulated
or mixed with indifferent materials.

By “morphine” is understood:
By “cocaine” is understood:
The principal alkaloid of the loavos of Erythroxylon Coca, having the
and all other derivatives of ecgonine, whether occurring naturally or
prepared synthetically, which possess the property of creating addiction by
their use.

By “heroin” is understood:
ARTICLE 9

The Contracting Powers Parties shall enact pharmacy effective laws or
regulations to limit exclusively to medical and legitimate scientific purposes
the manufacture, sale, and use of morphine, cocaine, and their respective
salts and derivatives , unless laws or regulations on the subject are already
in existence. They shall cooperate with one another to prevent the use of
these drugs for any other purpose.

Article 9–A
The Contracting Parties shall enact effective laws or regulations
prohibiting the manufacture and distribution of heroin*
ARTICLE 10
The Contracting Powers Parties shall use their best endeavours to control,
or to cause to be controlled, all persons manufacturing, importing, selling,
distributing, and or exporting morphine, cocaine, and or their respective
salts or derivatives, as well as the buildings in which these persons carry on
such industry or trade.

With this object, the Contracting Parties shall use their best endeavours to
adopt, or cause to be adopted, the following measures, unless regulations on
the subject are already in existence:
(a) To Confine the manufacture of morphine, cocaine, and their
respective salts and derivatives to those establishments and
premises alone which have been licensed for the purpose, or to
obtain information respecting the establishments and premises in
which these drugs are manufactured and to keep a register of
them;
(b) To Require that all persons engaged in the manufacture,
import, sale, distribution, or export of morphine, cocaine, and or
their respective salts or derivatives shall be furnished with obtain
a license or permit to engage in these operations, or shall make to
the competent authorities an official declaration that they are so
engaged;

(c) To Require that such persons shall enter in their books the
quantities manufactured, imports, sales, and all other distribution,
and exports of morphine, cocaine, and their respective salts and
derivatives. This rule shall not necessarily apply to medical
prescriptions and to sales by duly authorized chemists.

ARTICLE 11
The Contracting Powers Parties shall take measures to prohibit, as regards
their internal trade, the delivery of morphine, cocaine, and their respective
salts and derivatives to any unauthorized persons, unless regulations on the
subject are already in existence.

ARTICLE 12
Due regard being had to the differences in their conditions, the Contracting
Powers shall use their best endeavours to restrict to authorized persons the
import of morphine, cocaine, and their respective salts. The Contracting
Parties shall require that a separate import license must be obtained for
each importation of morphine, cocaine, or their respective salts or
derivatives. The license may allow the importation of the amount for which
the license is given in one or more consignments within a period to be
specified in the license.

ARTICLE 13
The Contracting Powers shall use their best endeavours to adopt, or cause to
be adopted, measures to ensure that morphine, cocaine, and their respective
salts shall not be exported from their countries, possessions, colonics, and
leased territory to the countries, possessions, colonies, and leased territories
of the other Contracting Powers except when consigned to persons
furnished with the licenses or permits provided for by the laws or
regulations of the importing country.

With this object each government may communicate from time to time to
the governments of the exporting countries lists of the persons to whom
licenses or permits for the imports of morphine, cocaine, and their
respective salts have been granted.

The Contracting Parties shall require that a separate export license must be
obtained for each exportation of morphine, cocaine, or their respective salts
or derivatives. The Contracting Party before issuing such license shall
require an import certificate issued by the authorities hawing jurisdiction
over the territory into which the importation is made and certifying that the
importation is approved, to be presented by the person applying for the
license.

The license may allow the exportation of the amounts for which the license
is given in one or more consignments within a period to be specified in the
license.

Unless a copy of the export license accompanies the consignment, the
authorities issuing the export license shall send a copy to the authorities
having jurisdiction over the territory into which the importation is made.
The authorities having jurisdiction over the territory into which the
importation is made, when the importation has been effected, shall return
the export license with an endorsement to that effect to the Contracting
Party issuing such export license.

In the case of an application to export a consignment to any place for the
purpose of being placed in a bonded warehouse in that place, the
production of a special certificate from the authorities having jurisdiction
over that place, certifying that they have approved the introduction of the
consignment for the said purpose, may be accepted by the Contracting
Party permitting the export in place of the import certificate provided for
above.

ARTICLE 14
The Contracting Powers Parties shall apply the laws and regulations,
respecting the manufacture, import, sale, distribution, delivery, or export of
morphine, cocaine, and their respective salts and their derivatives;
(a) To medicinal opium;

(b) To all preparations (officinal and non-officinal, including the
so-called anti-opium remedies) containing more than 0. per cent.
of morphine, or more than 0. per cent. of cocaine, morphine,
cocaine, or their salts or derivatives;
(c) To heroin, its salts and preparations containing more than 0.
per cent of heroin;
(d) To all new derivatives of morphine, of or cocaine, or of their
respective salts, and to every other alkaloid of opium or coca
leaves, and to any habit-forming drug which may be shown by
scientific research, generally recognized, to be liable to similar
abuse and productive of like ill-effects.

CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER V
ARTICLE 20
The Contracting Powers Parties shall examine the possibility of enacting
enact laws or regulations making it a penal offense to be in illegal
possession of raw opium, prepared opium, morphine, cocaine, and their
respective salts, unless laws or regulations on the subject are already in
existence. any of the substances to which this Convention applies.
Article 20–A
The Contracting Parties shall furnish annually to the Central Board
hereinafter constituted, not later than April 1st, for the calendar year
beginning January 1st following, in respect of raw opium; coca leaves;
morphine, its salts, derivatives, and preparations containing morphine; and
cocaine, its salts, derivatives, and preparations containing cocaine,
estimates of:
(1) Their import requirements for medical and scientific purposes,
whether for domestic consumption, manufacture, or commerce;
(2) Their total production and requirements:
(a) For all purposes,
(1) For domestic consumption for all
purposes,
(2) For domestic consumption for medical
and scientific purposes,
(3) For export for all purposes,

(4) For export for medical and scientific
purposes.

Article 20–B
The Contracting Parties undertake to prohibit the importation into their
territory of any of the substances mentioned in Article 20–A in excess of the
quantities specified in the estimates furnished in pursuance of Article 20–A
(1) or fixed by the Central Board in pursuance of Article 20–E. The
foregoing provision shall not operate to prevent the importation of raw
opium for the purpose of making prepared opium into those territories
where the use of prepared opium is still temporarily permitted under
Chapter II of this Convention, so long as such importation is in conformity
with the provisions of this Convention.

Article 20–C
A permanent Central Board shall be constituted consisting of one
representative each from-------, --------, --------, --------, -------, --------, ------
The Board shall fix its headquarters, shall determine its procedure, and
shall meet at least once annually beginning the first Monday in May. The
decision of all questions coming before the Board shall be by a majority
vote of those present, but two-thirds of the Board shall be necessary to
Constitute a quorum.

The Board may appoint an Executive Committee of not more than five
persons who shall perform such of the Board’s duties as it may delegate to
the Committee. The members of the Executive Committee need not be
members of the Board.

The expenses of the members of the Board shall be defrayed by the Parties
they represent. The expenses of the Executive Committee and its clerical
staff shall be divided among the Contracting Parties in proportion to their
total imports and exports of raw opium and coca leaves.

Article 20–D
The Contracting Parties, in addition to the estimates called for in Article
20–A, agree to send to the Central Board:
(1) In respect of each of the substances mentioned in Article 20–
A:
(a) Within three months after the end of each quarter
statistics of their imports, specifying their source, and
of their exports and re-exports, specifying their
destination, during that quarter;
(b) If possible, within three months after the end of each
half year the wholesale stocks, whether in Government
or in private hands, at the end of that half year;
(2) In respect of morphine and cocaine and their salts and
derivatives, within three months after the end of each half year,
the statistics of their manufacture during that half-year;
(3) In respect of raw opium and coca leaves, within three months
after the end of each year, the total quantity produced and
consumed during that year.

The Central Board shall communicate periodically to all the parties to this
Convention the situation as regards the quantity and destination of all
exports and re-exports of the substances mentioned in Article 20–A, calling
to their particular attention the fact that, in the case of any territory, the
imports have already reached the amounts to which such territory is
entitled under this Convention.

Article 20–E
If any Contracting Party furnishes no estimate of its import requirements in
pursuance of Article 20–A or furnishes an estimate which appears to the
Central Board upon investigation undertaken on its own motion or on
complaint of any of the Contracting Parties, to be greatly in excess of its

reasonable requirements, the Board shall immediately ascertain the amount
of the reasonable requirements of that Contracting Party for the calendar
year beginning January first following, after taking into account its
population, climatic and hygienic conditions and all other factors which
appear to the Board to be relevant as well as any other special
circumstances which such Contracting Party may be at liberty to submit to
the Board.

The Board shall notify to all Contracting Parties its conclusion as to the
amount so ascertained by it. The Board shall recommend that each
Contracting Party other than that Contracting Party the extent of whose
import requirements has been ascertained by the Board, shall prohibit the
exportation from their respective territories to the territory of that
Contracting Party, amounts of substances specified in Article 20–A which,
taken in conjunction with other exports thereto, will exceed the amount
ascertained as aforesaid by the Board to be the reasonable annual import
requirements of such Party. Due consideration shall be given to the
recommendation of the Board.

Article 20–F
Each Contracting Party shall make it a penal offense for any person within
its jurisdiction to procure or assist the commission, in any place outside its
jurisdiction, of any offense against the laws in force in such place for
controlling or regulating the manufacture, sale, delivery, distribution, use,
possession, export, or import of any of the substances covered by this
Convention.

Article 20–G
Each Contracting Party shall forbid the conveyance in any vessel sailing
under its flag of any consignment of the substances covered by this
Convention,
(1) Unless an export license has been issued in respect of such
consignment in accordance with the provisions of this convention
and the consignment is accompanied by an official copy of such
license;

(2) To any destination other than the destination mentioned in the
license.

Article 20–H
For the purpose of ensuring the full application and enforcement of the
provisions of this Convention in Free Ports and Free Zones, the
Contracting Parties undertake to apply in Free Ports and Free Zones
situated within their territories the same laws and regulations, and to
exercise the same supervision and control in respect of the substances
covered by this Convention as in other parts of their territories.
Article 20–I
The Contracting Parties shall enact effective laws and regulations to
prohibit the transportation through their territory from a place outside
thereof to another plaice outside thereof, of any of the substances covered
by this Convention unless such Contracting Party is advised of the contents
and the destination of the consignment.

Article 20–J
The Contracting Parties shall enact effective laws and regulations to
prohibit the transshipment within their territories of a consignment of any
of the substances covered by this Convention unless such consignment is
accompanied by an official copy of the export license issued by the
authorities having jurisdiction over the territory from which exported or by
an official copy of the import certificate issued by the authorities having
jurisdiction over the territory to which destined. The Contracting Parties
shall also enact effective laws and regulations to prohibit in the territory of
transshipment the diversion of, or attempt to divert, a consignment of any of
the substances covered by this Convention to any destination other than
that named in the official copy of the export license or import certificate,
unless an export license is first obtained from the authorities of the territory
where the transshipment occurs.

Article 20–K

The Contracting Parties shall enact effective laws and regulations to
prohibit a consignment of any of the substances covered by this Convention
which is landed in their territory and placed in a bonded warehouse from
being withdrawn from such warehouse for export, unless an import
certificate issued by the authorities having jurisdiction over the territory to
which the consignment is destined, certifying that the importation is
approved, is presented to the authorities having jurisdiction over the
bonded warehouse.

A special certificate shall be issued by the Contracting Parties in respect of
each consignment so withdrawn and shall take the place of the export
license for the purpose of the preceding provisions of this Convention.
Article 20–L
In the case of a geographical area the Government of which is not a party
to this Convention the Contracting Parties undertake to allow the export to
such geographical area of any of the substances covered by this Convention
only in such amounts as may be fixed by the Central Board as being
reasonably required for the medical and scientific needs of such area. The
Central Board shall communicate periodically to all the Parties to this
Convention the amount fixed in respect of each geographical area and the
situation as regards the exports and re-exports thereto.

ARTICLE 20–M
The present Convention shall come into force three months after the date
mentioned in the notification by the Government of the Netherlands,
referred to in the last paragraph of the preceding Article.
This Convention shall come into force between the Contracting Parties who
have ratified it as soon as it has been ratified by four of the Contracting
Parties.

Deletions from International Opium Convention of 1912 indicated by
canceled type; amendments printed in italics.
* See the report of the Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium and Other
Dangerous Drugs, Fifth Session, Appendix page.
* See speech of the Right Rev. Charles H. Brent on “The opium problem in
the Philippine Islands.” (Hearings of the Congress of the United States, p.
91, accompanying this document.)
* (See Hearings of the Congress of the United States accompanying this
document.)

[Document 58]
The Consul at Geneva (Tuck) to the Secretary of State
[Received 12: p.m.]

From Porter. All the American suggestions except chapter 2 have been
presented and referred to committees. Article 1 was objected to by India as
being outside the call of the conference but on vote of the conference the
objection of India was overruled.

When the agenda of the conference was adopted American delegation
reserved the right to move to amend it in case no agreement or an
unsatisfactory agreement was reached by the first conference. As the first
conference has not yet formally concluded its labors or definitely adopted
an agreement the American delegation has not so far presented its
suggestion for the carrying out of chapter 2 of the Hague Convention. I
understand however that the first conference has confessed itself unable to
set any date for the eventual suppression of the use of prepared opium. I
further understand that the British and Japanese have reached an agreement
in regard to the transit of opium through Hong Kong.

It seems probable that the second conference will not conclude its labors
before the 15th or 20th of December.

TUCK

[Document 59]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Geneva (Tuck)
Your December 4, 11 A.M. For Porter.

The Department has received an Aide Mémoire from the British Embassy at
Washington dated December 3, reading as follows:
“The American Delegation to the Second Opium Conference
which is now proceeding at Geneva have submitted a number of
proposals including two which the British Delegate considers to
be outside the scope of the Conference.

The object of the Conference is to consider measures to limit—
(1) the manufacture of morphine, heroin, cocaine, etc., (2) the
amounts of raw opium and coca leaf to be imported for
manufacture and for other medicinal and scientific purposes and
(3) the production of raw opium and coca leaf for export to the
amount required for medicinal and scientific purposes.
The American proposals in question are—(1) that the contracting
parties shall control the production and distribution of raw opium
so that there will be no surplus available for purposes not strictly
medical or scientific; and (2) that the contracting parties, in whose
territories the use of prepared opium is temporarily permitted,
shall agree to reduce the importation by 10 per cent each year so
as to bring the use of opium to an end within 10 years.
Of these proposals the first raises questions of domestic
consumption in India and His Majesty’s Government fear that
unless it is withdrawn a difficult situation will arise. The question
will be raised whether the Conference is competent to discuss a

matter not specified on the agenda and the decision taken on this
point will have a bearing on the second American proposal above
referred to.

If the American delegates bring forward their second proposal the
course of the proceedings at the Conference will probably be as
follows: The Netherlands Delegation will refuse to take part in the
discussion and some of the other Powers with Far Eastern
territories, if not all, will do the same. The British Delegate will
take the line that the matter is outside the scope of the Conference
and that it was considered by the first Conference (on the control
of opium smoking in the Far East) which reached an agreement as
to the further measures to be taken. The position in British
territories was then fully set out and, apart from the question as to
the competence of the Conference, no useful purpose will be
served by re-opening the matter.

The British Delegate will then propose that the Council of the
League of Nations should be invited to appoint a small impartial
Commission with an American Chairman to visit the territories
concerned of all nationalities as well as any other countries, such
as China, that may be necessary in order to investigate and report
on all relevant facts as affecting further measures of repression. In
the opinion of His Majesty’s Government this Commission
should include no nationals of Powers possessing Far Eastern
territories.

His Majesty’s Government feel that the adoption of this proposal
would disarm criticism in the United States, where British
administrative difficulties in the Far East are naturally not widely
known, and would also convince public opinion generally that
His Majesty’s Government neither shirk impartial investigation
nor desire to take up an obstructive attitude.

In the circumstances His Majesty’s Government hope that the
above proposal will be acceptable to the United States
Government and that they will be disposed to instruct the
American Delegation at Geneva to co-operate with the British

Delegate when he puts it forward, with a view to its being carried
into effect.”
The Department proposes to reply to the British that in view of the
conditions set forth in the preamble of the House Joint Resolution approved
May 15, 1924, authorizing an appropriation for the participation of this
Government in the International Narcotics Conference, and in view of the
further fact that the representatives of the United States are not authorized
to sign any agreement which does not fulfill the conditions Decessary for
the suppression of the habit-forming narcotic drug traffic, as set forth in the
preamble of the Joint Resolution in question, it finds itself unable to
acquiesce in the suggestions made by the British Government as set forth in
the Aide Mémoire. The Department may further suggest to the British that
since all the other participating Governments in the Geneva Conference are
likewise interested in the questions at issue, it would perhaps be better to
have the questions determined by the Conference itself.

The Department is hopeful that no issues will arise at Geneva which will
jeopardize the success of the Conference and with that in mind it suggests
that you may find it advisable not to rigidly adhere to a fixed term of 10
years within which the importation of raw opium for the purpose of making
prepared opium should be discontinued. The Department feels that some
flexibility in this period of time might afford an avenue through which a
compromise might be reached if the differences foreseen by the British
Government, as set forth in its Aide Mémoire, should arise.

The Department desires your comment on the Aide Mémoire and the
proposed reply.

HUGHES

[Document 60]
The Consul at Geneva (Tuck) to the Secretary of State
[Received 11: a.m.]
the British note would materially strengthen our position. I am not disposed
to insist upon a 10–year limit for the suppression of the traffic in prepared
opium but it seems essential that a time limit of some kind should be placed
upon this phase of the general traffic in opium. It is true that conditions in
the Far East are different from an administrative point of view but it seems
essential that something more definite should be agreed upon than appears
from the results of the first conference which makes no provision for
progressive suppression. We hope to obtain a definite recognition of the
necessity of carrying out chapter 2 of the Hague Convention within some
specific time limit. If administrative measures are impossible immediately,
they can be promised upon any improvement of the situation in regard to
illicit production.

I share the Department’s hope that the success of the conference will not be
jeopardized and am prepared to accept any reasonable arrangement which
would prevent compromise our plan, in spite of the technical objection of
jurisdiction which may be raised against bringing up the question of
prepared opium in the second conference.

TUCK

[Document 61]
The Department of State to the British Embassy
MEMORANDUM
The Department of State has received the British Embassy’s memorandum
of December 3, 1924, concerning certain proposals which are to be
advanced by the British delegate to the International Narcotics Conference,
now sitting at Geneva, on the subject of the domestic consumption of
prepared opium in India.

In view of the conditions set forth in the Preamble of the House Joint
Resolution approved May 15, 1924, a copy of which is enclosed herewith
for the British Embassy’s information, authorizing an appropriation for
the participation of the United States in the International Narcotics
Conference, the Government of the United States finds itself unable to
acquiesce in the suggestions communicated by the British Government in
the memorandum under acknowledgment. It would seem also that, since
there are a large number of governments participating in the Geneva
Conference, presumably with a divergence of views on the question at
issue, it would perhaps be advisable to leave the matter entirely to the
determination of the Conference itself.

The Chairman of the American Delegation to the Geneva Conference has
been informed that the Department of State entertains the hope that no
issues will arise at Geneva which will jeopardize the success of the
Conference, and, with that in mind, the Department of State ventures to
assure the British Embassy that the Chairman of the American Delegation
will accord the utmost consideration to any proposals which may be made
by the British delegates at the Conference.

WASHINGTON , December 12, 1924.

[Document 62]
The Chairman of the American Delegation (Porter) to the
Secretary of State
GENEVA, December 17, 1924.

[Received January 2, 1925.]

SIR: Referring to my telegram of this date, I have the honor to enclose a
copy of the agreement which was reached by the First Conference, but
which has not yet been signed, together with commentaries on this
document by Bishop Brent and myself.

I do not feel that this agreement can be considered as a strict compliance
with the intent of Chapter II of The Hague Convention, and I am fearful that
an acquiescence in its terms on the part of the United States would be
construed to mean that we are prepared to accept an interpretation of
Chapter II, which will mean an almost indefinite postponement of the
period when the use of prepared opium should terminate.

For these reasons I feel that our Government should adopt a determined
attitude in this connection. The Japanese have informed me privately that
they do not like this agreement and that it represents much less than they
are already doing, and that they are prepared to accept and enforce complete
prohibition within a definite period of years. The British also were prepared
to go much further than the terms of the document indicate, and the Dutch
occupy a position, so far as their Far Eastern colonies are concerned,
midway between that of the Japanese and British. The document apparently
represents all that the French and the Portuguese were prepared to accede
to.

The presentation of the American Suggestions under Chapter II of the
Convention caused much controversy, particularly among those nations
which were represented at the First Conference and who insisted that the
questions affecting prepared opium were outside the scope of the present

[Document 63]
The Consul at Geneva (Tuck) to the Secretary of State
From Porter. I do not consider that the conference can reach an agreement
satisfactory to us or which will be an improvement over the Hague
Convention.

1. A vital part of our program—the limitation of production to medicinal
and scientific needs—seems unlikely to be embodied in the convention.
However, if inserted in convention little if any useful purpose would be
served, as producing countries which are disinclined to assume any further
obligations to restrict production have indicated they will record nullifying
reservations. Persia has at every opportunity made it clear that production
cannot for economic reasons be limited except upon the unique conditions:
years, thereafter at 5 percent. (b) Moratorium to be granted by foreign
countries having claims against Persia during period of transition—that is
until substitution of other crops for opium had proven feasible, (c) Removal
of restrictions on Persia’s liberty of action in tariff questions—that is
revision of tariff treaties so as to provide increased [revenue?].
Representatives of Servia and Turkey state that they have received definite
instructions not to agree to limit productions but when pressed add that they
will ask for further instructions. No change in their instructions has as yet
been reported. China, the largest producer, which is admittedly powerless
owing to internal chaotic condition to fulfill obligation, has had for some
time laws against the cultivation of poppy but they are not nor are they
likely soon to be enforced. India refuses to accept the principle and asks
that the words “for export” be added. This would not affect the situation so
far as other producers are concerned and India now avows strict supervision

over exports is maintained. The result of any effort under present conditions
to strike at the source of the evil—production of raw material—I regard as
negligible.
2. It is proposed that a central board shall be established consisting of seven
members to be appointed by representatives of the United States, Germany,
France, Great Britain, Italy, Japan and those nations having nonpermanent
seats on the Council of the League of Nations from a list upon which each
of the signatory parties to the convention may place one name. While not in
final form the following provision seems not unlikely to be adopted.
“The Council shall in consultation with the board make the
necessary arrangements for the organization and working of the
board with the object of assuring the full technical independence
of the board in carrying out their duties under the present
convention while providing for the control of the staff in
administrative matters by the Secretary General.

The Council shall also in consultation with the governments of
any contracting parties who are not members of the League take
the necessary measures to allocate the expenses of the board
among the contracting parties.

The board shall, subject to the approval of the Council, appoint
their secretary and staff”.

The British delegation is urging the acceptance of the following amendment
against which no objections have been raised except our own.
“The Secretary General shall appoint the secretary and staff of the
board on the nomination of the board and subject to the approval
of the Council”.

To the board are to be sent statistics of production, manufacture,
consumption, import and export of substances covered by convention. The
board shall have the right in case the information at its disposal leads it to

conclude that excessive quantities are accumulating in any country to ask
for explanations and in the case of no explanations or an unsatisfactory
explanation to call the attention of the governments and the Council of the
League to the matter and to recommend that no further exports be made to
the country in question until the board reports that it is satisfied with the
situation [in?] the country concerned and any exporting country has the
right to appeal to the Council of the League against any decision of the
board. A government not prepared to act on the recommendation shall
notify the board; the board may publish a report on the matter and
communicate it to the Council which shall forward it to the governments.
Any decision by the board with respect to complaints shall be by an
absolute majority.

The right of making representations to the board is to be given to any
signatory power. The board has been granted certain limited powers to
make regulations principally regarding the furnishing of information but it
has been impossible to obtain consent that the board be granted power” to
make sufficient regulations to carry out its duties, it being generally
believed that such authority should be exercised jointly by board and
Council of the League. The board is so closely connected with the
organization of the League of Nations as to make it practically subservient
to the Council of the League, as [a?] result which if it will not defeat
ratification certainly will provoke a bitter fight in the Senate. In striving to
preserve the full independence of the board I have been repeatedly advised
that unless the board tied up with the League the object for which the board
was created could not be accomplished. Any further attempt to preserve the
independence of the board seems futile.
3. There is no prospect of obtaining a control [of] opium and cocaleaf
derivatives extensive as that provided by our own legislation. No agreement
can be obtained which would immediately include as dangerous drugs any
derivative of opium other than those specified in the Hague Conference
although coca leaves and ecgonine and possibly Indian hemp may be added.
Some additional restrictions are to be placed upon the sale of heroin but no
agreement to prevent manufacture is possible. Machinery for the
determination of dangerous drugs under article 14 is proposed.

4. After repeated conferences with the representatives of the interested
governments I do not believe that there is any prospect of obtaining more
definite assurances regarding the suppression of prepared opium than are
contained in the Hague Convention. The British, French and Dutch
proposals are in substance that 15 years after the producing countries limit
production and prevent smuggling they will abolish the traffic. The time
when period shall begin to run is to be determined by Council whose
decision shall be final.

While acknowledging their obligations under the Hague Convention they
insist that owing to increased production and smuggling they are powerless
to take any further measures than those contemplated by agreement
concluded by first conference. The well known disinclination of producing
countries to limit production [and?] their seeming inability to stop
smuggling do not strengthen the belief that the governments interested in
prepared opium are seriously considering suppressing the traffic. On the
contrary the acceptance of the proposals offered would in my judgment
weaken chapter 2 of the Hague Convention, a result which must be avoided,
as the main protection we have against leakage from the ordinary traffic in
hundreds of tons of raw and prepared opium is the right to demand
suppression of traffic in prepared opium under article 6 of this chapter. It
should be mentioned that the central board while entitled to receive
statistics regarding prepared opium would be expressly [denied?] the right
to question them in any way or to file or receive any complaint against
countries engaged in the traffic until the board has found that illicit
international transactions are taking place on an appreciable scale. I fear
that it would be extremely unwise for any action to be taken which would
postpone the date for the suppression of this traffic and which could be
regarded as placing it upon a more secure foundation.
5. While statistical information to be given the board represents decided
improvement over present situation, this information and the import [and?]
export certificate which it is proposed to make of general application can be
obtained otherwise than by treaty.

Under all circumstances I am reluctantly forced to the conclusion that it
would be inadvisable for the delegation to continue to participate in the

[Document 64]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Geneva (Tuck)
For Porter. If as appears from your telegram of February 1, 4 P.M., you are
convinced that there is no possibility the Conference can agree upon a
convention satisfactorily carrying out the purposes of the Hague Opium
Convention of 1912 and of the Joint Resolution of Congress of May 15 last,
the American Delegation is authorized in your discretion to withdraw from
the Conference.

Upon receiving word of your withdrawal, the Department will, in pursuance
of your suggestion, give out a brief explanatory statement to the following
effect:
“This Government has received from the American Delegation to
the Opium Conference now in session at Geneva a report to the
effect that that Conference cannot be expected to reach an
agreement which would be satisfactory to this Government as
carrying out the purposes of the Hague Opium Convention of
1912, or acceptable to it as according with the purposes set forth
in the Joint Resolution of Congress of May 15 last, which
authorized the participation of this Government in the present
Conference.

The President has therefore, to his regret, found it necessary to
authorize the American Delegation to withdraw from further
participation in the Conference at the discretion of its chairman,
the Honorable Stephen G. Porter.”
It is assumed that in announcing the withdrawal of our Delegation you will
make a statement of the reasons for that action substantially as set forth in
your telegram though of course with the modifications appropriate to a

public statement likely to have reactions upon our relations with other
governments and therefore requiring to be drawn up in a way to avoid all
unnecessary occasion for irritation. You will please telegraph to the
Department as soon as possible the text of your statement.
HUGHES

[Document 65]
The Chairman of the American Delegation (Porter) to the
Secretary of State
GENEVA [undated].

I propose to enclose following in letter to president of conference tomorrow
morning. Do not release pending my telegram announcing withdrawal.
“On October 18, 1923, the League of Nations extended an
invitation to the powers signatory to the Hague Convention
including the United States to participate in an international
conference which was called for the purpose of giving effect to
the following principles subject to reservations made by certain
nations regarding smoking opium.
1. If the purpose of the Hague Opium Convention is to
be achieved according to its spirit and true intent it must
be recognized that the use of opium products for other
than medical and scientific purpose is an abuse and not
legitimate.
2. In order to prevent the abuse of these products it is
necessary to exercise the control of the production of
raw opium in such a manner that there will be no
surplus available for nonmedical and nonscientific
purpose. The joint resolution adopted by the Congress
of the United States May 15, 1924, authorizing our
participation in the present conference, quoted the
principles referred to in the preamble and expressly
stipulated that the representatives of the United States
shall sign no agreement which does not fulfill the
conditions necessary for the suppression of the narcotic

drug traffic as set forth in the preamble. Despite more
than 2 months of discussion and repeated adjournments
it now clearly appears that the purpose for which the
conference was called cannot be accomplished. The
reports of the various committees of the conference
plainly indicate that there is no likelihood under present
conditions that the production of raw opium and coca
leaves will be restricted to the medicinal and scientific
needs of the world. In fact the nature of the reservations
made show[s] that no appreciable reduction in raw
opium may be expected. It was hoped that if the nations
in whose territories the use of smoking opium is
temporarily permitted would, in pursuance of the
obligation undertaken under chapter 2 of the Hague
Convention, adopt measures restricting the importation
of raw opium for the manufacture of smoking opium or
would agree to suppress the traffic within a definite
period, such action would materially reduce the market
for raw opium and an extensive limitation of production
would inevitably follow. Unfortunately however these
nations with the exception of Japan are not prepared to
reduce the consumption of smoking opium. Unless the
producing nations agree to reduce production and
prevent smuggling from their territories, and then only
in the event of an adequate guarantee being given that
the obligations undertaken by the producing nations
would be effectively and promptly fulfilled, no
restriction of the production of raw opium under such
conditions can be expected. In the matter of
manufactured drugs and the control of transportation an
improvement over the Hague Convention is noticeable.
There is however no likelihood of obtaining a complete
control of all opium and coca-leaf derivatives
irrespective of the measure of control provided. For
manufactured drugs it is believed that by reason of the
very small bulk, the ease of transportation with
minimum risk of detection, and the large financial gains

to be obtained from their illicit handling such drugs and
their derivatives can only be effectively controlled if the
production of the raw opium and coca leaves from
which they are obtained is strictly limited to medical
and scientific purposes. This the conference is unable to
accomplish. In the circumstances the delegation of the
United States in pursuance of instructions received from
its Government has no alternative under terms of the
joint resolution authorizing participation in the
conference other than to withdraw, as it could not sign
the agreement which it is proposed to conclude. We
desire to make it clear that withdrawal from the present
conference does not mean that the United States will
cease its efforts through international cooperation for
the suppression of the illicit traffic in opium and other
dangerous drugs. The United States recognizes that the
world-wide traffic in habit-forming drugs can be
suppressed only by international cooperation but
believes that for the present at least greater strides in the
control of the traffic may be hoped for if it should
continue to work towards this end upon the basis of the
Hague Convention of 1912”.

PORTER
that the letter of withdrawal had been presented at 10: Geneva time (file

[Document 66]
The French Chargé (Laboulaye) to the Secretary of State
[Translation ]
WASHINGTON, September 26, 1923.

[Received September 28.]

MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: As Your Excellency knows, an international committee
was appointed in Paris in 1920 to settle the question of the credits needed
by certain countries such as Austria, Hungary, Poland, Rumania,
Czechoslovakia, the Baltic and the Caucasian states, to insure their
economic recuperation. The United States of America, England, Denmark,
Norway, the Netherlands, Sweden, and Switzerland gave their assistance to
this undertaking in various forms.

In October 1921, on the eve of adjourning, the International Commission on
“Relief Credits” had offered the advice that a coordinating agency should
be maintained between the lending and borrowing countries. The French
Government, for its part, thought that in accordance with the suggestions of
several members of the Commission, Mr. de Haller, former president of the
Swiss National Bank and a delegate to the conference, was particularly well
qualified to take that part of intermediary or “trustee”, but it does not seem
that any action was ever taken on the suggestion. The fact that there is no
special appropriation to compensate even in a meager way the person who
would take charge of those duties, obviously adds to the difficulties that the
question carries.

However, considering the propositions that have been received separately
by a number of the lending states from certain borrowing states in the last
few months, with a view either to determining how the payment of their
debts should be made or to obtaining postponements, and owing, on the
other hand, to the difficulties and delays which unavoidably spring from the
exchange of correspondence between the several governments concerned,

[Document 67]
The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand)
WASHINGTON, December 14, 1923.

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to refer to the note addressed to me on September
26, 1923, by M. de Labouiaye and to inform Your Excellency that careful
consideration has been given to the request contained therein for an
expression of the views of the Government of the United States respecting
the desirability of establishing a coordinating agency, to deal with questions
arising out of the relief credits advanced by the United States and other
governments to certain European countries. I desire also to acknowledge the
receipt of your communication of November 30, 1923, bearing on the same
subject.

While this Government was happy to cooperate with the other interested
governments with a view to providing the necessary credits for the purchase
of the relief supplies which were so urgently needed in order to facilitate the
prompt and practical solution of the pressing relief problems arising in
Europe after the conclusion of the war, it has never been the opinion of the
Government of the United States that it would be necessary to establish any
international agency for the settlement of questions arising out of its
advances to foreign governments for the purpose of relief or for other
purposes, as this Government has believed and still believes that any
questions that may arise in this regard are susceptible of adjustment through
existing channels. As the French Government has already been informed,
the World War Foreign Debt Commission was created by act of the
Congress to negotiate with respect to the debts owed to the United States
Government by foreign Governments, 99 and under existing legislation that
Commission could not undertake to execute its authority through any
international agency.

I regret, therefore, to have to inform Your Excellency that the Government
of the United States finds itself unable to acquiesce in the suggestion that an

[Document 68]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, February 9, 1924.

No. 129
SIR: I have the honour to inform you that His Majesty’s Government, in
conjunction with the French Government, have lately had under
consideration the advisability of setting up some centralizing organ to deal
with questions arising out of the liquidation of the Relief Credits granted in
1920 and 1921 by certain Allied and Neutral Governments to other
Governments in Central and Eastern Europe, and to transmit to you
herewith, for facility of reference, a memorandum explaining the steps
taken to furnish these credits to the countries concerned. The French
Government, while favouring the utilisation of the Financial Committee of
the League of Nations for the purpose of dealing with the questions referred
to above, has declared that it would have no difficulty in agreeing to any
other suggestion embodying the same principle.

His Majesty’s Government entirely share the view of the French
Government that the interests of the creditor states will best be served,
when the date for repayment of the advances approaches, by acting in
unison and dealing with individual debtor states according to the
circumstances of each. At the same time, they doubt whether the Financial
Committee of the League of Nations would be a suitable body to deal with
these credits, even if it were willing to undertake the work. The Committee
is a purely advisory body, with no administrative functions; and it is neither
intended nor suited for carrying out routine administration demanding
constant attention.

A further disadvantage is that its members do not correspond in nationality
with all the creditor countries concerned and include at least one member of
a debtor nationality. Moreover, the members, do not represent the

governments of their countries, and have always regarded themselves as
entirely independent experts. It appears essential that where decisions with
regard to government advances have to be taken, the deciding body must be
strictly representative of the governments concerned.

His Majesty’s Government have therefore suggested that the best course
would be for a Relief Credits Committee to be formed, which might meet in
London, to whom all applications by debtor governments with regard to
their liabilities under the Relief Credits should be referred. The committee
would consist of the representatives of the credit-giving governments and
would be furnished by those governments with full particulars of the
present position of such credits. It would probably be sufficient for the
committee to meet occasionally, and it might possibly be formed in the
main from representatives already in London.

The Committee (after settling its procedure) would naturally be chiefly
concerned with the arrangements to be made with the debtor countries in
view of the maturity of a considerable portion of the original bonds on the
1st of January, 1925.

All proposals received by any creditor Government as regards the relief
credits would, of course, be referred to the committee, who would be in a
position to undertake oral discussions with representatives of each debtor
country.

The Committee could also consider whether there would be any advantage
in appointing a Trustee as suggested in 1921, though there would seem to
be little need for this proposal at this stage.

While His Majesty’s Government suggest that the Committee should
consist primarily of the European credit-giving countries, they would
naturally welcome the presence of an American representative and,
inasmuch as they are aware that, under the United States laws, only the
Debt Funding Commission can deal with American Credits, I am instructed
to express the hope that, in the event of the United States Government being
willing to share in the work of the Committee, a representative of the Debt
Funding Commission might be delegated to attend the meetings of the
Committee in London. I should be glad to receive in due course an

expression of the views of the United States Government in regard to this
matter for communication to my Government.

I have the honour to add that His Majesty’s representatives at Christiania
and the Hague have been instructed to bring these proposals to the notice of
the Norwegian and Netherlands Governments.

I have [etc.]

H. G. CHILTON
[Enclosure]
Memorandum on Relief Credits
The Relief Credits grew out of the Relief Missions organised in 1919 under
the Supreme Economic Council, the successor to the short-lived Supreme
Council of Supply and Relief. These two bodies had been the result of
negotiations for the formation of some allied organization for the prevention
of starvation and disorder in Central, Eastern and Southern Europe. The
principal contributors to the Relief thus administered were the United
States, Great Britain, (with Canada and Newfoundland) France and Italy.
By the end of 1919 it had become evident that in order to cope with the
economic needs of Eastern and Southern Europe it was urgently necessary
to substitute for “Relief” some comprehensive form of credits in order to
remedy the situation in those regions. “To continue to provide food without
at the same time providing raw materials on which to re-establish industry
would merely be to aggravate the problem of Europe”. It seemed
improbable that any group of American, French, Italian or British bankers,
would make a long-term contract with governments whose political
existence and whose assets and liabilities were from day to day of doubtful
duration. There was therefore little likelihood of credits being provided on a
scale and on terms likely to be effective unless the allied and associated
governments and also the neutral governments intervened with some
scheme to minimise the political risk preventing the introduction of private
foreign capital into such countries.

Negotiations with this in view accordingly took place with the result that
the International Committee for Relief Credits was set up in Paris in April
1920. It consisted of representatives of Argentine, Belgium, Canada,
(unofficial), Denmark, France, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden,
Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States, (unofficial). The object of
the committee was to administer, in consultation with the representatives of
the debtor countries, the relief and reconstruction credits which had been
granted by the governments of some of the above-mentioned creditor
countries and to arrange for new credits.

Each lending country reserved complete liberty as to the country to which
its credits should be extended but agreed to accept a common form of bond
as security. In the case of Austria-Hungary these bonds were accorded
priority over reparation payments, this having been a condition as to
participation made by several neutral governments.

This committee sat until the winter of 1921, when it was dissolved. It had
during that time arranged for credits for Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary,
Servia, Roumania, Baltic States, Armenia and Austria. The United States of
America advanced the largest sum—approximately £63,000,000, the United
Kingdom coming next with £17,000,000, followed by Italy and France with
£4¾ millions and £3½ millions respectively. After them the two most
substantial creditors are Holland and Norway. These sums do not include
the relief advances made prior to the beginning of 1920.

[Document 69]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, March 13, 1924.

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Mr. Chilton’s note
of February 9, 1924, stating that His Majesty’s Government, in conjunction
with the French Government, have lately had under consideration the
advisability of setting up some centralizing organ to deal with questions
arising out of the liquidation of the relief credits granted in 1920 and 1921,
by certain allied and neutral Governments to other Governments in central
and eastern Europe.

While the Government of the United States was happy to cooperate with the
other interested Governments with a view to providing the necessary credits
for the purchase of the relief supplies which were so urgently needed in
order to facilitate the prompt and practical solution of the pressing relief
problems arising in Europe after the conclusion of the war, it has never been
the opinion of this Government that it would be necessary to establish any
international agency for the settlement of questions arising out of its
advances to foreign Governments for the purposes of relief as this
Government has believed and still believes that any questions that may arise
in this regard are susceptible of adjustment through existing channels.
Furthermore, as pointed out in your note under acknowledgment, under
existing legislation the World War Foreign Debt Commission alone is
competent to deal with the question of refunding the indebtedness of other
Governments to the Government of the United States, and that Commission
has no authority to execute its powers through any international agency.
It is the understanding of the Government of the United States, however,
that your Government is suggesting not that an international agency with
plenary powers be established for the purpose of settling questions arising
out of the liquidation of the above mentioned relief credits, but that a
committee be appointed for ancillary purposes only.

I have noted the suggestion of your Government that the committee should
consist primarily of the European credit-giving countries, but that they
would welcome the presence of an American representative, and that in the
event that the Government of the United States were willing to share in the
work of the committee, a representative of the World War Foreign Debt
Commission might be delegated to attend the meetings of the committee.
This suggestion has been transmitted to the Chairman of the World War
Foreign Debt Commission and upon the receipt of a reply from him, I shall
take pleasure in communicating with you further on this subject.
Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 70]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
No. 396
His Britannic Majesty’s Ambassador presents his compliments to the
Secretary of State, and with reference to Mr. Hughes’ note of March 13th
last, regarding the proposal to set up a centralizing organ to deal with
questions arising out of the liquidation of relief credits granted by certain
allied and neutral Governments to other Governments in Central and
Eastern Europe, has the honour to request that he may be informed whether
it is yet possible to furnish an expression of the views of the United States
Government on the question of delegating a representative of the Debt
Funding Commission to attend the meetings of the Relief Credits
Committee to be formed in this connection.

WASHINGTON , May 3, 1924.

[Document 71]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, June 3, 1924.

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of May 3,
Mr. Chilton’s note of February 9, 1924, regarding the establishment of a
centralizing organ to deal with questions arising out of the liquidation of
relief credits granted by certain Allied and Neutral Governments to other
Governments in central and eastern Europe and possible participation
therein by a representative of the World War Foreign Debt Commission.
Appropriate inquiries have been made in connection with the proposal of
His Majesty’s Government and it has been found that it would be
impracticable to have a representative of the World War Foreign Debt
Commission attend the meetings of the proposed committee. I take pleasure
in advising you, however, that if the committee in question should be
constituted, the American Ambassador at London will be instructed to keep
in close touch with its work. I should be pleased, therefore, to be informed
as to the decision that may be finally taken regarding the creation of such a
committee and the time and place of its meetings.

Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 72]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Kellogg)
WASHINGTON, June 17, 1924.

No. 236
SIR: The Department transmits herewith for your information a copy of each
of the following documents regarding a proposal that an Interallied Agency
be constituted to deal with questions arising out of the relief credits
extended to certain European governments:1
Chargé at Washington.

Ambassador at Washington.

Ambassador at Washington.

Washington, and the memorandum transmitted therewith.
Ambassador at Washington.

Ambassador at Washington.

As you will observe, the Department’s note of June 3, 1924, to the British
Ambassador states that “if the committee in question should be constituted,
the American Ambassador at London will be instructed to keep in close

touch with its work.” The Department feels that it is highly important that
this Government be kept closely and fully informed of the proceedings of
the proposed committee. The United States is a large creditor on account of
the relief loans in question and is entitled to as favorable treatment, both as
to payment of interest and of principal, as any other creditor government. In
several instances, however, debtor governments have made payments to
other creditor governments on account of these relief loans without making
corresponding payments to the United States. When attention has been
called to this discrimination the reply has been made that the omission was
an oversight, or that the amounts due to the United States were so much
greater than those due to other governments that it was impossible for the
debtor governments to pay them under existing conditions.

The Department does not desire that the activities of the proposed
committee should in any way result in prejudicing the position of the
United States. The Department will advise you promptly of any further
information received on this subject from the British Government, and in
the meantime you are requested to telegraph any significant developments
in connection with the proposed committee which may come to your notice
in London.

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 73]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Kellogg)
Meeting of Committee postponed to July 29. Please have representative
attend at that time.

GREW

[Document 74]
The Lithuanian Chargé (Bizauskas) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, May 1, 1924.

SIR: I have the honor to inform you that I have been telegraphically
instructed by my Government to communicate to you that I am authorized
by my Government to enter into negotiations with the Government of the
United States with regard to the settlement of the indebtedness of Lithuania
to the United States.

I should be very grateful if you will cause this to be communicated to the
World War Foreign Debt Commission.

Please accept [etc.]

K. BIZAUSKAS

[Document 75]
The Secretary of State to the Lithuanian Chargé (Bizauskas)
WASHINGTON, May 12, 1924.

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of May 1,
1924, stating that you have been authorized by your Government to enter
into negotiations with the Government of the United States with regard to
the settlement of the indebtedness of Lithuania to the United States and
requesting that this information be communicated to the World War Foreign
Debt Commission.

I take pleasure in informing you that the substance of your note under
acknowledgment has been communicated to the Honorable A. W. Mellon,
Secretary of the Treasury and Chairman of the World War Foreign Debt
Commission, with whom it will be proper for you to enter into direct
negotiations.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
LELAND HARRISON

[Document 76]
The Minister in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania (Coleman) to the
Secretary of State
[Received 3: p.m.]
118. In re Lithuanian debt to the United States, Lithuanian Government
inquires whether the United States Government would protest the
ratification by the Lithuanian Assembly of the trade agreement with
Germany which provides for the mutual cancelation of all claims arising out
of the war, the German occupation, reparations and post-bellum supplies,
etc. Agreement now before the Assembly. Prompt reply desired.
COLEMAN

[Document 77]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Estonia, Latvia,
and Lithuania (Coleman)
official the following memorandum:
“The American Minister to Lithuania did not fail promptly to
communicate to the Government of the United States the inquiry
of the Lithuanian Government whether the Government of the
United States would protest the ratification by the Lithuanian
Assembly of the trade agreement with Germany now before the
Assembly which provides for the mutual cancellation of all
claims arising out of the war, the German occupation, reparations,
and post-bellum supplies etc. The Minister has now been advised
that neither the Treasury nor the World War Foreign Debt
Commission has authority to consent to a release of the securities
provided for in Lithuania’s obligations held by the Government of
the United States except in connection with a refunding of the
indebtedness of the Lithuanian Government under existing
American legislation. The Government of the United States is
gratified that the Lithuanian Minister at Washington has been
instructed by his Government to inform the World War Foreign
Debt Commission that it is ready and willing, subject to
ratification by the Assembly of Lithuania, to enter into an
agreement providing for the refunding of its indebtedness to the
United States upon terms similar to those set forth in the
agreement previously concluded by the Government of the United
States with the Government of Finland, and the Minister of the
United States is authorized to state that, if assurance be given that
such an agreement will in fact be concluded, the Government of

the United States would not be disposed to raise any objection to
the ratification of the proposed agreement with Germany.”
[Paraphrase.] The following is for your information: In view of the
provision that Lithuania’s obligations shall be entitled to security of and
shall be charge upon any payments or property received from Germany or
from its allies by way of reparation or cession equally with all other notes
which represent similar advances to Lithuania since the Armistice by other
Allied and Associated Powers, the Treasury thinks that the suggested
ratification of the trade agreement with Germany seems to release the
security definitely provided for these obligations. In view, moreover, of the
theory advanced informally by Mr. Narushkevich that payments were to be
made the United States only from reparations received by Lithuania, a
theory which has not, as far as the Department is aware, been discarded by
Lithuania, although it is wholly inacceptable to the Government of the
United States, it is obvious that should the Lithuanian Government adopt
this view as its position the ratification of the proposed agreement with
Germany would preclude the possibility of recovery by the United States
upon obligation in question. The release of this security, furthermore, by the
United States seems all the more inappropriate if any payments have been
made to the British Government on obligations similar to those held by this
Government unless it is understood definitely that Lithuania’s indebtedness
to the United States be refunded at once.
you expected to inform Mr. Narushkevich of the views of this Government
in the matter but the Department does not have a record that you have yet
done so. The Department presumes, however, that you did, and that the
Lithuanian Government is fully aware of the views of this Government in
the matter as stated in the Department’s instruction no. 78, November 7,
1923, and concurs in them. If you have not taken up this matter, consult
Department before taking action in regard to it. [End paraphrase.]
GREW

[Document 78]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Estonia, Latvia, and
Lithuania (Coleman)
[Paraphrase]
43. The Debt Commission has informed Department that several of the
Governments indebted to the United States have, in the course of
negotiations for refunding, requested inclusion of a most-favored-nation
clause in one form or another, but that to date the Commission has denied
all requests of this sort. This statement is for your confidential guidance in
any conversations you may have with Latvian officials on Latvia’s
indebtedness to the United States.

Please advise Department promptly of any developments in regard to
designation of representative by Latvia to negotiate with Debt Commission.
HUGHES

[Document 79]
The Chargé in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania (White) to the
Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
RIGA, November 20, 1924—noon.

[Received 1: p.m.]
183. Minister of Finance has informed me that the Cabinet of Ministers has
decided to inaugurate funding negotiations through the Latvian consul at
New York.

WHITE
that Mr. Ringold Kalning, formerly Latvian Minister of Finance, would
proceed to the United States as Commissioner to assist the consul in the

[Document 80]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Greece (Laughlin)
[Paraphrase]
88. Department informed by Guaranty Trust Company of New York that it
has been approached by certain London banks on matter of participating to
of which is projected for the Refugee Settlement Commission. Banker’s
inquiry as to Department’s attitude was pursuant to course usually followed
replied that in light of information before it no objection was offered to the
flotation of this amount of Greek refugee loan in the American market.
Department has not been informed whether Guaranty Trust Company has
decided to proceed with the matter and has requested that for time being its
possible participation be not divulged.

In view of humanitarian interests involved, Department did not condition its
prompt and favorable reply to the company’s inquiry upon action to be
taken by Greece to regulate any of the outstanding questions between
Greece and the United States, including question of Greek financial
obligations to this Government. Nor did this Government make its consent
to the pledging by Greece of fresh security for an external loan contingent
to the performance of any act by Greece herself. Not only in dealing with
these questions but in regard to all matters which have in any way been
related to the amelioration of the refugee problem, the Government of the
United States has acted with marked consideration towards Greece.
Department thinks it would be only proper and right, therefore, that Greece
on her part show a spirit of willingness to settte the few questions of
importance between the two countries, especially at the present time when

it is planned that a Greek loan be floated in the American market. The
outstanding questions are:
(1) The exchange of notes in regard to most-favored-nation
treatment.

(3) Funding of the Greek indebtedness to the United States.

The Government of the United States does not think that it is under any
further obligation to make advances to the Hellenic Government under the
agreement of 1918, and feels that in candor and fairness to that Government
it should be informed of this view. If Greece will make satisfactory
arrangements for the funding of the Greek debt to this country, the Treasury
will be willing to recommend that Greece be relieved of the obligation to
obtain consent of the United States to the pledging of any new security for
external loans. A helpful effect upon the position of Greek securities in the
American market would undoubtedly follow the prompt announcement of
Greece’s intention to initiate the negotiations referred to. In view,
furthermore, of the Greek–Canadian Agreement13 and the interest which
Greece is paying to Canada, it seems only just and proper that action should
be taken at an early date to regulate Greek indebtedness to this Government.
In the Department’s opinion any attempt by the Hellenic Government to
insist upon further advances under the agreement of 1918, in the light of the
agreement made with Canada in 1923 as well as for other reasons, would be
unjustified, and, in the light of present circumstances, would necessarily be
met by the statement that in the agreement between Greece and Canada the
former Government appears to have violated the agreement of 1918 and
that the Government of the United States is under no obligation to make
further advances.

[Document 81]
The Minister in Greece (Laughlin) to the Secretary of State
confidential. As I was already engaged upon the most pressing item of the
former instruction before it reached me I thought it wise to exercise the
discretion allowed me and delayed further conversations until today when I
communicated to Roussos orally the substance of the whole instruction.
He replied that his Government felt the deepest gratitude for the
humanitarian disposition you had shown toward Greece but that he was
unable to renounce Greek claims to the remainder of the 1918 credits. He
did not consider that the Canadian agreement affected these claims as it
covered materials purchased in Canada.

He said that he wished to go to Washington to discuss the question of the
credits and that he would start early in January; meanwhile, he has
authorized me to announce to you for publication Greece’s intention to take
up the regulation of the funding of Greek debts to the United States which
he would discuss with you at the same time.

[Paraphrase.] He told me that in urging the reopening of the credits he
would propose that no money be turned over to Greece, but that entire
balance be used to pay for public works that would be executed by
American firms; these works would include the reclamation of large areas
of land near Saloniki, which must be drained in order to protect refugee
colonies and population there from malaria. [End paraphrase.]
LAUGHLIN

[Document 82]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Greece (Laughlin)
that the fact that Greece expended in Canada the proceeds of the loan
refunded by the Greek-Canadian Agreement of December, 1923, in any way
affects the situation. Under the refunding agreement Greece pledged
additional revenues for the service of an external loan without obtaining the
consent of the United States, as required by the 1918 agreement. This
appears to be a substantial breach of the latter’s agreement and even in the
absence of other considerations it would seem to follow that the United
States is relieved from further obligation in the matter.

While this Government would be glad to receive Mr. Roussos or any other
representative of the Greek Government duly authorized to negotiate with
the World War Foreign Debt Commission for the funding or other
settlement of the debt of Greece to the United States, the Department feels
that the Greek Government should be aware of the fact that, in the light of
this Government’s view that the 1918 Loan Agreement has been violated,
this Government considers that discussion in Washington with a
representative of the Greek Government with respect to the making of
further advances under this Agreement would serve no useful purpose.
The use of the proceeds of further advances for the purposes indicated by
Mr. Roussos instead of those contemplated under the original agreement
would not change the position of this Government in the matter.
You may convey the foregoing informally and orally to Mr. Roussos so that
in connection with his contemplated visit he may be under no
misapprehension as to the views of this Government.

HUGHES

[Document 83]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
WASHINGTON, February 1, 1924.

No. 610
SIR: As you are aware, the treaty to establish friendly relations between the
United States and Austria, signed at Vienna, August 24, 1921, and the
treaty between the United States and Hungary, signed at Budapest on
August 29, 1921, contemplate the concluding of agreements for the
satisfaction of claims of the United States and its nationals against the
Austro-Hungarian Government or its successors. You reported in your
for Foreign Affairs had no objection to the early conclusion of an agreement
providing for the settlement of claims. The Hungarian Government has
indicated its willingness to negotiate such an agreement.

There is enclosed herewith draft of a proposed tripartite agreement17 in
which it is proposed to make what the Government of the United States
regards as suitable provisions for the determination of the amounts to be
paid by Austria and Hungary in satisfaction of their obligations under the
treaties concluded by the United States with Austria on August 24, 1921,
and with Hungary on August 29, 1921. The draft agreement, as you will
observe, is similar in purport to the agreement concluded August 10, 1922,
between the United States and Germany. It differs from the agreement
with Germany mainly in that it is to be signed by representatives of three
governments instead of two, and that it provides that the obligations of
Austria and Hungary shall be determined by one commissioner instead of
two commissioners and an umpire, as provided by the agreement between
the United States and Germany.

It is deemed desirable to have any agreement which provides means for
determining the obligations of Austria and Hungary under the treaties
establishing friendly relations between the United States and those
countries, signed by representatives of both Austria and Hungary as well as
the United States, for the reason that many claims of American citizens
which have been filed and which are in prospect arose out of acts of the
former Austro-Hungarian Government for which, as successors to the
Austro-Hungarian Government and by applicable treaty provisions, Austria
and Hungary assumed responsibility. Both Austria and Hungary are,
therefore, interested in any agreement which provides means of determining
their respective obligations under the treaties to the United States and its
nationals.

The Government of the United States considers that the purposes of the
agreement could be accomplished with greater expedition and with less
expense if provision were made for a single commissioner instead of two
commissioners and an umpire for which provision was made in the
agreement with Germany. Such a commissioner would perform the judicial
functions of an arbitrator in behalf of the several litigants.

At the time the agreement between the United States and Germany was
signed, the German Chancellor addressed to the American Ambassador at
Berlin, a note requesting that the President of the United States designate a
suitable American to act as umpire. The two governments selected the
Honorable William E. Day, formerly an Associate Justice of the United
States, as umpire and upon his retirement, the Honorable Edwin B. Parker
was selected in the same manner to serve as umpire. The Government of the
United States understands that the manner in which Judge Parker has
performed the duties of umpire is a source of satisfaction to the
Government of Germany no less than to the Government of the United
States. It has occurred to me, therefore, that possibly the Government of
Austria and the Government of Hungary might agree to the selection of
Judge Parker as sole commissioner or arbitrator to determine the obligations
of Austria and of Hungary to the United States and its nationals under the
treaties establishing friendly relations and under the proposed agreement.

[Document 84]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
conference during the day with Dr. Schüller who is charged with
negotiations. As a matter of first impressions, I think there will be no
objection to tripartite agreement to be signed at Washington and I believe
that Judge Parker will be acceptable. Schüller is, however, somewhat
concerned over the proposal to make the Austrian Government liable for
debts due American citizens by Austrian nationals. He apparently fears that
this proposal may bridge over some connection with property of Austrian
nationals in the hands of alien property custodian and that foundation is
possibly being laid to satisfy judgments out of the proceeds of such
property. Since, however, our treaty with Germany contains similar clause,
he presumes that provision is working satisfactorily in practice and if Berlin
should confirm this, he would personally withdraw all objection to draft as
it now stands. I am supplying him with a copy of the draft today and he
promises prompt consideration.

WASHBURN

[Document 85]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
extended Foreign Office conferences during the last fortnight and note
received today, I can definitely state that Austrian Government accepts
submitted draft of the proposed claims convention in principle and agrees to
request the President of the United States to select a single commissioner.
Austrian Government makes the following suggestions:
1. The question against which party or nationals a special claim
should be properly made is in each instance a legal question
which the agreement to a tripartite convention should not be
construed as prejudicing. A future official communication will be
made to me upon this point.
2. Proposed claims convention modified the question for mixed
arbitral tribunal provided for in the treaty between the United
St. Germain, which treaties have force of law here. Austrian
Government is without sufficient power to make new convention
operative by simple decree but must secure ratification by
Parliament and Federal President. German Constitution gives
more latitude in this respect. Suggestion is therefore made that
article 6 of proposed draft should be amended to read as follows:
“The present convention shall be ratified in accordance with the
constitutional forms of the high contracting parties and shall take
effect immediately on the exchange of ratifications which shall
take place as soon as possible at (blank).”

[Document 86]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
Government is not clear to Department. It will probably be necessary to
await receipt of official communication promised before definitely
answering this suggestion. It may be said, however, that purpose of
tripartite agreement is to confer on arbitrator authority to determine party
which is obligated on any claim presented for adjudication.
Department has no objection to adopting second suggestion of Austrian
Government to include provision regarding ratification.

As to third suggestion terms of proposed tripartite agreement clearly
indicate that purpose of agreement is to provide means of determining
amounts to be paid by Austria and Hungary in satisfaction of their
obligations under our treaties of August 24, 1921 with Hungary [Austria]
and of August 29, 1921 with Austria [Hungary]. Department considers
jurisdiction of arbitrator as defined in proposed agreement to be sufficiently
comprehensive to determine amounts due by Austria and Hungary under
treaties mentioned. In making suggestion for tripartite agreement United
States Government did not contemplate establishment of two tribunals.
While Department does not perceive purpose or necessity of enlarging
jurisdiction of arbitrator it will be glad to receive and consider concrete
suggestion as to language which Austrian Government considers should be
employed in amending draft to enlarge jurisdiction.

In order that appropriation for purposes of convention may be obtained
before adjournment of Congress it is necessary that convention be signed as
soon as possible. Endeavor expedite action and telegraph developments and
substance any communication received from Austrian Government.

Hucues

[Document 87]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
suggestion, if public claim be decided adversely to old dual monarchy
Austrian Government does not believe Commissioner can decide in what
respective proportion judgment shall be satisfied by Austria and Hungary
but thinks that this is a question of interior relations to be settled by these
two powers. Basis of settlement hitherto two-thirds Austria and one-third
Hungary but negotiations in progress to readjust ratio. America holds excess
of security and it is pointed out that Austria and Hungary would have every
inducement to effect speedy amicable arrangement in this respect. Foreign
Office states that anyway this first suggestion is only a reservation and need
not call for change of phraseology in submitted draft.

[Document 88]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
of communication mentioned under the first suggestion my telegram no. 16
May 2nd. Said draft too intricate for detailed synopsis, but the substance
of argument is that dual citizenship under the old monarchy did not exist.
One was either Austrian subject or Hungarian subject. Excepting limited
classes of public property enumerated in the draft, all other property,
whether public or private, must be solely Austrian or Hungarian. Main point
made is that Austrian property cannot be held as security for or used to
satisfy a Hungarian claim. The above may conveniently be termed a
reservation regarding nationality.

Am advised that instructions are being forwarded by mail early this week to
Prochnik, Austrian Chargé d’Affaires, authorizing him to sign original draft
of tripartite agreement as submitted by the Department, amended articles
only to be article 6 by ratification language contained in second suggestion
of my aforesaid telegram 16 [17]. Simultaneously with signing, Prochnik is
instructed to address letter to the American Government formulating above-
mentioned reserve regarding nationality and also making concrete
suggestions for enlarging jurisdiction, should the necessity later arise, along
WASHBURN

[Document 89]
The Minister in Hungary (Brentano) to the Secretary of State
Minister of Foreign Affairs on behalf of the Government makes the
following comments regarding the draft of proposed agreement:
1. Proposes that since the purpose is identical the text of the
introductory paragraph of article 1 be verbally identical with that
of corresponding paragraph of the German-American agreement.
2. Since the provisions of the Treaty of Trianon included in the
treaty of peace permit legal claims between nationals of the two
countries to be submitted to a tribunal even by a Hungarian, it is
suggested but not insisted that a clause be inserted in article 1
conferring exclusive jurisdiction upon the Commissioner so that
he alone shall have authority to pass upon claims submitted even
by nationals of Hungary and/or Austria against citizens of the
[United States?] arising from the peace treaties.
3. Proposes the inclusion of a clause providing a 6 month’s limit
for filing claims.
4. Considering the depressed economic conditions here the
Hungarian Government would consider it only fair that article 5
provide that the expenses be borne one-half by the United States
and one-quarter by each of the other countries instead of one-third
by each of the three.
5. As Hungarian laws provide that important international
agreements shall be effective only after ratification or after

exchange of ratifications the Hungarian Government proposes
that article 6 be changed to provide for ratification and exchange
of ratifications and that the agreement be effective from say 15
days after or, at the earliest, from the date of exchange of
ratifications. Copy to European Information Center.
BRENTANO

[Document 90]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
Government is disposed to sign tripartite agreement in form submitted by
Department with amendment to Article VI as already agreed upon. With
respect to reservation of question of liability and of the division of
responsibility between Austria and Hungary, which Austrian Government
apparently intends to make in note to be delivered when agreement is
signed, it may be stated that the Hungarian Government as well as the
Austrian Government is concerned in the question of liability and the
division of responsibility, and that the Commissioner would be competent
under the terms of the proposed agreement to determine whether there was
liability to indemnify in any given case and how the burden of
indemnifying should be divided between Austria and Hungary. The United
States would prefer that this question be not raised by the Austrian
Government, and if it is raised in the note as proposed, the United States
would be obliged to answer as indicated.

The Austrian Government apparently intends to make in its note a further
reservation regarding the enlargement of the jurisdiction of the
Commissioner. The purpose of the tripartite agreement is, as indicated in
the terms of the draft submitted by the Department, to provide means for
determining the amounts to be paid by Austria and by Hungary to the
United States or to its nationals. Austria and Hungary are committed in the
treaties establishing friendly relations to make suitable provision for
satisfaction of claims of American nationals and the American Government.
The agreement with Germany made no provision for the adjudication of any
claims against the United States and its nationals, and the discussions with
Austria and Hungary have proceeded on the understanding that the
agreement was to be along the lines of agreement between United States
and Germany. The Department considers it preferable that there be no

reservations made in the note to be delivered by Austrian Government when
agreement is signed.

HUGHES

[Document 91]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Hungary (Brentano)
Foreign Affairs is believed to be impracticable. Tripartite character of
proposed agreement, different plan for adjudication and fact that different
treaties are involved render it necessary to employ different language in the
first paragraph of Article I than was employed in the corresponding
paragraph of agreement with Germany. Except as to parenthetical
expression in first paragraph of Article I, it is considered that the language
of that paragraph is adequate and necessary to accomplish desired purposes.
Department willing to omit parenthetical expression if desired.
Second suggestion. Purpose of proposed tripartite agreement is to provide
means for determining amounts due by Austria and Hungary to United
States or its nationals. Austria and Hungary are committed in treaties
establishing friendly relations to make suitable provision for satisfaction of
claims of United States and its nationals. Agreement with Germany made
no provision for adjudication of any claims against United States or its
nationals and discussions with Austria and Hungary regarding proposed
agreement have proceeded on understanding that agreement was to be along
lines of agreement with Germany. Department gratified Hungary will not
insist on this suggestion.

Third suggestion. Department regards 6 months’ period for filing claims
inadequate. Would agree to provision that claims must be filed within 1 year
from date of exchange of ratifications.

Fourth suggestion. Department agrees.

Fifth suggestion. Similar suggestion made by Austrian Government and
agreed to by Department.

Legation Vienna reports Austrian Government is instructing Austrian
Chargé d’Affaires at Washington to sign agreement as submitted by
Department, but to make reservations in note delivered on signing
agreement. Department replied stating it was deemed undesirable to have
reservations made. Inasmuch as Austrian Government has instructed Chargé
dAffaires here to take matter up with Department, and since views of
Austrian and Hungarian Governments have now been ascertained,
Department believes conclusion of agreement satisfactory to all parties
would be expedited if Hungarian Government would instruct its Minister
here to discuss matter with Department.

You may answer Minister for Foreign Affairs as above.

HUGHES

[Document 92]
The Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs,
Department of State (Castle) to the Acting Secretary of State
[Extract]
[WASHINGTON,] August 11, 1924.

MR. GREW: Mr. Pelenyi, Hungarian Chargé, came to see me this morning to
say that he had received authorization from his Government for the signing
of the agreement for a mixed claims commission. He said, however, that
this authorization to sign was made out in the name of the Minister and
Count Szechenyi will not be back in this country before the end of October.
He said, therefore, that instead of sending the papers to us he was at the
moment merely informing us that the authorization had arrived so that, if
the Department so desired, the papers could be ready when the Minister
reaches Washington.

W. E. C[ASTLE]

[Document 93]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[Received 4: p.m.]

Office about this matter on Monday last and received satisfactory
assurances. Prochnik has now been authorized by cable to sign tripartite
agreement in form already agreed upon without any reservations whatever.
His instructions dated 3d instant should now be in Washington.
WASHBURN

[Document 94]
Agreement between the United States of America and Austria and
Hungary, Signed at Washington, November 26, 192426
The United States of America and the Republic of Austria, hereafter
described as Austria, and the Kingdom of Hungary, hereafter described as
Hungary, being desirous of determining the amounts to be paid by Austria
and by Hungary in satisfaction of their obligations under the treaties
concluded by the United States with Austria on August 24, 1921, and with
Hungary on August 29, 1921, which secure to the United States and its
nationals rights specified under a Joint Resolution of the Congress of the
United States of July 2, 1921, including rights under the Treaties of St.
Germain-en-Laye and Trianon, respectively, have resolved to submit the
questions for decision to a commissioner and have appointed as their
plenipotentiaries to sign an agreement for that purpose:
The President of the United States of America, Charles Evans
Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States of America,
The President of the Federal Republic of Austria, Mr. Edgar L. G.
Prochnik, Chargé d’Affaires of Austria in Washington, and
The Governor of Hungary, Count László Széchényi, Envoy
Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Hungary to the
United States,
Who, having communicated their full powers, found to be in good and due
form, have agreed as follows: ARTICLE I
The three governments shall agree upon the selection of a Commissioner
who shall pass upon all claims for losses, damages or injuries suffered by
the United States or its nationals embraced within the terms of the Treaty of
August 24, 1921, between the United States and Austria and/or the Treaty
of August 29, 1921, between the United States and Hungary, and/or the

Treaties of St. Germain-en-Laye and/or Trianon, and shall determine the
amounts to be paid to the United States by Austria and by Hungary in
satisfaction of all such claims (excluding those falling within paragraphs 5,
6 and 7 of Annex I to Section I of Part VIII of both the Treaty of St.
Germain-en-Laye and the Treaty of Trianon) and including the following
categories:
respect of damage to or seizure of their property, rights and
interests, including any company or association in which they are
interested, within the territories of either the former Austrian
Empire or the former Kingdom of Hungary as they respectively
existed on August 1, 1914;
(2) Other claims for loss or damage to which the United States or
its nationals have been subjected with respect to injuries to or
death of persons, or with respect to property, rights and interests,
including any company or association in which American
nationals are interested, since July 31, 1914, as a consequence of
the war;
(3) Debts owing to American citizens by the Austrian and/or the
Hungarian Governments or by their nationals.

ARTICLE II
Should the Commissioner for any cause be unable to discharge his
functions, a successor shall be chosen in the same manner that he was
selected. The Commissioner shall hold a session at Washington within two
months after the coming into force of the present agreement. He may fix the
time and the place of subsequent sessions according to convenience. All
claims shall be presented to the Commissioner within one year from the
date on which he holds the first session required by the foregoing provision.
ARTICLE III
The Commissioner shall cause to be kept an accurate record of the
questions and cases submitted and correct minutes of proceedings. To this

end each of the Governments may appoint a secretary, and these secretaries
shall act together as joint secretaries and shall be subject to the direction of
the Commissioner.

ARTICLE IV
The three Governments may designate agents and counsel who may present
oral or written arguments to the Commissioner under such conditions as he
may prescribe.

The Commissioner shall receive and consider all written statements or
documents which may be presented to him, in accordance with rules which
he may prescribe, by or on behalf of the respective Governments in support
of or in answer to any claim.

The Governments of Austria and Hungary shall be notified of all claims
filed with the Commissioner and shall be given such period of time as the
Commissioner shall by rule determine in which to answer any claim filed.
The decisions of the Commissioner shall be accepted as final and binding
upon the three Governments.

ARTICLE V
Each Government shall pay its own expenses, including the compensation
of the secretary appointed by it and that of its agent and counsel. All other
expenses which by their nature are a charge on the three Governments,
including the compensation of the Commissioner and such employees as he
may appoint to assist him in the performance of his duties, shall be borne
one-half by the Government of the United States and one-half by the
Governments of Austria and Hungary in equal moieties.

ARTICLE VI
This agreement shall be ratified in accordance with the constitutional forms
of the contracting parties and shall come into force on the date of the

exchange of ratifications.

IN FAITH WHEREOF, the above named plenipotentiaries have signed the present
agreement and have hereunto affixed their seals.
Done in triplicate at the City of Washington this twenty-sixth day of
November, one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four.
CHARLES EVANS HUGHES [SEAL]
EDGAR PROCHNIK [SEAL]
LÁSZLÓ SZÉCHÉNYI [SEAL]
Washington, Dec. 12, 1925.

[Document 95]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Received 5 p.m.]
liberation debt of the Austrian states of Austro-Hungarian Monarchy,
Finance Service recommends following repartition to Commission all gold
Czechoslovakia 750,000,000, Italy 59,000,000; and also recommends
notification of repartition to Great Britain, France and Italy with a request
for their views as to whether the issue of the liberation bonds should be
called for and if so “whether the United States of America should be
consulted.”
2d. Last suggested question arises from the fact that by article 4 of
liberation debt agreement of September 10, 1919 signed by the powers and
by United States delegates to Peace Conference27 it was provided that the
bonds should be delivered “to such person or body as the Governments of
the United States of America, the British Empire, France and Italy may
designate.” A similar provision in article 4 of amendatory agreement of
3d. In practice understand that only Poland and Czechoslovakia may be
called upon to issue bonds, because reparation claims of other states
involved more than offset the liberation bond indebtedness. However this
point is not quite clear.

Ministers’ Agreement of March 192230 provided that the issue of liberation
bonds is to be divided among the powers in the ratio of their participation in

[Document 96]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
up in the Reparation Commission in regard to the person or body to whom
delivery of bonds shall be made under the provisions of article 4, Liberation
may state that this Government would not object to the delivery of these
bonds to the Reparation Commission.

The Department does not perceive that the Government of the United States
has an interest in the disposition of the liberation bonds such as to preclude
the above expression of its attitude, although as long as our Army cost
claim remains unsatisfied31 and no procedure is decided upon for payment
of American claims adjudicated by the Mixed Claims Commission, this
Government has an interest in reparation credits.

You will advise the Department of your opinion whether a claim could
properly be made under the Army Costs Agreement33 for share in cash
realized from the liberation bonds.

HUGHES

[Document 97]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
1. I have noted instructions about liberation bonds and when question
comes up before Commission shall take position directed.
2. In answer to question last paragraph your telegram regarding
applicability of ultimate cash payments on bonds to Army Costs Agreement,
the date of maturity is not yet clearly fixed, but it is possible that this will be
so remote as to fall beyond period of operation of Army Costs Agreement.
Amortization beginning in 1931 and running to 1956 is now being
considered.
3. I am inclined to the view that proceeds of liberation bonds may not on a
proper construction of the Army Costs Agreement be claimed as subject to
it. Our proper charges are: (1) against all payments made by German
Government or for Germany’s account where they are deliveries or
transfers made by her except for items excluded in section 4 of article 2;
and (2) for payments credited to reparation account of Germany which are
made as or for accounts of another country from which a similar payment
may be exacted. It is my opinion that true intent of that proviso was to
cover payments made by former enemy countries like Austria-Hungary and
Bulgaria.

This construction is in words “similar” and “exacted”. The liberation bonds
are not cash payments and are made by Allied countries instead of former
enemy powers; and they are made as part of cost of liberation of certain
territory to them. It is true that there is canceled on the reparation claim
against Austria and on the German C bonds an amount equivalent to the
bonds, but I do not think that this cancelation constitutes a payment of
reparations by a country from whom a reparation payment may be exacted
as required by Army Costs Agreement.
4. If we have any claim to cash which may flow ultimately from these
bonds, there would be probability that we may have claim against the bonds
by and by, for they are a mode of payment which does not fall within the
excluded classes; i. e., deliveries in kind, British Recovery Act, etc.,
which are not applicable to the Army Costs Agreement. Claim could only
be based on cancelation of C bonds provided for in annex to Finance
Ministers’ Agreement of March 11, 1922. I shall not put forward any such
claim, however, for reasons above stated, unless I am instructed to contrary.
Logan.

HERRICK
33a Telegram in two sections.

[Document 98]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Kellogg) to the Secretary of
State
[Paraphrase]
77. A note I have just received from the Prime Minister states that to his
regret he had misinformed me yesterday in regard to the status of the liquor
treaty. He now states that definite assurance has been given Canada that
ratification binding on the Dominion will not take place until Canadian
Parliament has had opportunity to discuss the matter. In regard to the other
Dominions, Imperial Conference decided at its last meeting that each
Government will decide whether approval of Parliament or legislation is
required before it indicates concurrence in ratification. Prime Minister adds
that he has telegraphed Dominion Governments urging as prompt action as
possible, and he hopes to have replies immediately.

KELLOGG

[Document 99]
Convention between the United States of America and Great
Britain, Signed at Washington, January 23, 192437
The President of the United States of America;
And His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India;
Being desirous of avoiding any difficulties which might arise between them
in connection with the laws in force in the United States on the subject of
alcoholic beverages; Have decided to conclude a Convention for that
purpose;
And have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries:
The President of the United States of America:
Charles Evans Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States;
His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor
of India:
The Right Honorable Sir Auckland Campbell Geddes, G. C. M.
G., K. C. B., His Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary
to the United States of America;
Who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form,
have agreed as follows: ARTICLE I
The High Contracting Parties declare that it is their firm intention to uphold
the principle that 3 marine miles extending from the coastline outwards and
measured from low-water mark constitute the proper limits of territorial
waters.

ARTICLE II
(1) His Britannic Majesty agrees that he will raise no objection to
the boarding of private vessels under the British flag outside the
limits of territorial waters by the authorities of the United States,
its territories or possessions in order that enquiries may be
addressed to those on board and an examination be made of the
ship’s papers for the purpose of ascertaining whether the vessel or
those on board are endeavoring to import or have imported
alcoholic beverages into the United States, its territories or
possessions in violation of the laws there in force. When such
enquiries and examination show a reasonable ground for
suspicion, a search of the vessel may be instituted.
(2) If there is reasonable cause for belief that the vessel has
committed or is committing or attempting to commit an offense
against the laws of the United States, its territories or possessions
prohibiting the importation of alcoholic beverages, the vessel may
be seized and taken into a port of the United States, its territories
or possessions for adjudication in accordance with such laws.
(3) The rights conferred by this article shall not be exercised at a
greater distance from the coast of the United States its territories
or possessions than can be traversed in one hour by the vessel
suspected of endeavoring to commit the offense. In cases,
however, in which the liquor is intended to be conveyed to the
United States its territories or possessions by a vessel other than
the one boarded and searched, it shall be the speed of such other
vessel and not the speed of the vessel boarded, which shall
determine the distance from the coast at which the right under this
article can be exercised.

ARTICLE III
No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be
applicable or attach to alcoholic liquors or to vessels or persons by reason
of the carriage of such liquors, when such liquors are listed as sea stores or
cargo destined for a port foreign to the United States, its territories or

possessions on board British vessels voyaging to or from ports of the
United States, or its territories or possessions or passing through the
territorial waters thereof, and such carriage shall be as now provided by law
with respect to the transit of such liquors through the Panama Canal,
provided that such liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the
vessel on which they are carried remains within said territorial waters and
that no part of such liquors shall at any time or place be unladen within the
United States, its territories or possessions.

ARTICLE IV
Any claim by a British vessel for compensation on the grounds that it has
suffered loss or injury through the improper or unreasonable exercise of the
rights conferred by Article II of this Treaty or on the ground that it has not
been given the benefit of Article III shall be referred for the joint
consideration of two persons, one of whom shall be nominated by each of
the High Contracting Parties.

Effect shall be given to the recommendations contained in any such joint
report. If no joint report can be agreed upon, the claim shall be referred to
the Claims Commission established under the provisions of the Agreement
for the Settlement of Outstanding Pecuniary Claims signed at Washington
the 18th August, 1910, but the claim shall not, before submission to the
tribunal, require to be included in a schedule of claims confirmed in the
manner therein provided.

ARTICLE V
This Treaty shall be subject to ratification and shall remain in force for a
period of one year from the date of the exchange of ratifications.
Three months before the expiration of the said period of one year, either of
the High Contracting Parties may give notice, of its desire to propose
modifications in the terms of the Treaty.

If such modifications have not been agreed upon before the expiration of
the term of one year mentioned above, the Treaty shall lapse.

If no notice is given on either side of the desire to propose modifications,
the Treaty shall remain in force for another year, and so on automatically,
but subject always in respect of each such period of a year to the right on
either side to propose as provided above three months before its expiration
modifications in the Treaty, and to the provision that if such modifications
are not agreed upon before the close of the period of one year, the Treaty
shall lapse.

ARTICLE VI
In the event that either of the High Contracting Parties shall be prevented
either by judicial decision or legislative action from giving full effect to the
provisions of the present Treaty the said Treaty shall automatically lapse,
and, on such lapse or whenever this Treaty shall cease to be in force, each
High Contracting Party shall enjoy all the rights which it would have
possessed had this Treaty not been concluded.

The present Convention shall be duly ratified by the President of the United
States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof,
and by His Britannic Majesty; and the ratifications shall be exchanged at
Washington as soon as possible.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present
Convention in duplicate and have thereunto affixed their seals.
DONE at the city of Washington this twenty-third day of January, in the year
of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four.
[SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES
[SEAL] A. C. GEDDES

ratifications exchanged at Washington, May 22, 1924; proclaimed by the
President, May 22, 1924.

[Document 100]
The German Ambassador (Wiedfeldt) to the Secretary of State
[Translation ]
WASHINGTON, April 28, 1924.

MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: I have the honor most respectfully to return herewith to
Your Excellency the draft for a convention between the United States and

[Document 101]
The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Wiedfeldt)
WASHINGTON, May 1, 1924.

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to refer to suggested changes in the draft of the
proposed convention to prevent the smuggling of intoxicating liquors into
the United States as set forth in a communication from Doctor von
Lewinski40 to the Solicitor for this Department under date of April 26,
1924. In accordance with your suggestions, the following changes in the
draft are acceptable to this Government:
PREAMBLE.

“… have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries:
The President of the United States of America, Mr.
Charles Evans Hughes, Secretary of State of the United
States of America,
The President of the German Empire, Dr. Otto
Wiedfeldt, German Ambassador to the United States of
America.”
ARTICLE II. (1)
“The President of the German Empire agrees that Germany will
raise no objection”.

ARTICLE VI, PARAGRAPH 2:
“The present Convention shall be duly ratified by the President of
the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent

[Document 102]
Convention between the United States of America and Germany,
Signed at Washington, May 19, 192443
The President of the United States of America and the President of the
German Empire being desirous of avoiding any difficulties which might
arise between them in connection with the laws in force in the United States
on the subject of alcoholic beverages have decided to conclude a
Convention for that purpose, and have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries:
The President of the United States of America, Mr. Charles Evans
Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States of America; and
The President of the German Empire, Dr. Otto Wiedfeldt, German
Ambassador to the United States of America;
Who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form,
have agreed as follows:
ARTICLE I
The High Contracting Parties declare that it is their firm intention to uphold
the principle that 3 marine miles extending from the coastline outwards and
measured from low-water mark constitute the proper limits of territorial
waters.

ARTICLE II
(1) The President of the German Empire agrees that Germany will
raise no objection to the boarding of private vessels under the
German flag outside the limits of territorial waters by the
authorities of the United States, its territories or possessions, in
order that enquiries may be addressed to those on board and an
examination be made of the ship’s papers for the purpose of

ascertaining whether the vessel or those on board are endeavoring
to import or have imported alcoholic beverages into the United
States, its territories or possessions in violation of the laws there
in force. When such enquiries and examination show a reasonable
ground for suspicion, a search of the vessel may be initiated.
(2) If there is reasonable cause for belief that the vessel has
committed or is committing or attempting to commit an offense
against the laws of the United States, its territories or possessions
prohibiting the importation of alcoholic beverages, the vessel may
be seized and taken into a port of the United States, its territories
or possessions for adjudication in accordance with such laws.
(3) The rights conferred by this article shall not be exercised at a
greater distance from the coast of the United States its territories
or possessions than can be traversed in one hour by the vessel
suspected of endeavoring to commit the offense. In cases,
however, in which the liquor is intended to be conveyed to the
United States its territories or possessions by a vessel other than
the one boarded and searched, it shall be the speed of such other
vessel and not the speed of the vessel boarded, which shall
determine the distance from the coast at which the right under this
article can be exercised.

ARTICLE III
No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be
applicable or attach to alcoholic liquors or to vessels or persons by reason
of the carriage of such liquors, when such liquors are listed as sea stores or
cargo destined for a port foreign to the United States, its territories or
possessions on board German vessels voyaging to or from ports of the
United States, or its territories or possessions or passing through the
territorial waters thereof, and such carriage shall be as now provided by law
with respect to the transit of such liquors through the Panama Canal,
provided that such liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the
vessel on which they are carried remains within said territorial waters and
that no part of such liquors shall at any time or place be unladen within the
United States, its territories or possessions.

ARTICLE IV
Any claim by a German vessel for compensation on the grounds that it has
suffered loss or injury through the improper or unreasonable exercise of the
rights conferred by Article II of this Treaty or on the ground that it has not
been given the benefit of Article III shall be referred for the joint
consideration of two persons, one of whom shall be nominated by each of
the High Contracting Parties.

Effect shall be given to the recommendations contained in any such joint
report. If no joint report can be agreed upon, the claim shall be referred to
the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague described in the
Convention for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes, concluded
at The Hague, October 18, 1907. The Arbitral Tribunal shall be constituted
in accordance with Article 87 (Chapter IV) and with Article 59 (Chapter III)
of the said Convention. The proceedings shall be regulated by so much of
Chapter IV of the said Convention and of Chapter III thereof (special regard
Tribunal may consider to be applicable and to be consistent with the
provisions of this agreement. All sums of money which may be awarded by
the Tribunal on account of any claim shall be paid within eighteen months
after the date of the final award without interest and without deduction, save
as hereafter specified. Each Government shall bear its own expenses. The
expenses of the Tribunal shall be defrayed by a ratable deduction of the
amount of the sums awarded by it, at a rate of five per cent, on such sums,
or at such lower rate as may be agreed upon between the two Governments;
the deficiency, if any, shall be defrayed in equal moieties by the two
Governments.

ARTICLE V
This Treaty shall be subject to ratification and shall remain in force for a
period of one year from the date of the exchange of ratifications.

Three months before the expiration of the said period of one year, either of
the High Contracting Parties may give notice of its desireto propose

modifications in the terms of the Treaty.

If such modifications have not been agreed upon before the expiration of
the term of one year mentioned above, the Treaty shall lapse.
If no notice is given on either side of the desire to propose modifications,
the Treaty shall remain in force for another year, and so on, automatically,
but subject always in respect of each such period of a year to the right on
either side to propose as provided above three months before its expiration
modifications in the Treaty, and to the provision that if such modifications
are not agreed upon before the close of the period of one year, the Treaty
shall lapse.

ARTICLE VI
In the event that either of the High Contracting Parties shall be prevented
either by judicial decision or legislative action from giving full effect to the
provisions of the present Treaty the said Treaty shall automatically lapse,
and, on such lapse or whenever this Treaty shall cease to be in force, each
High Contracting Party shall enjoy all the rights which it would have
possessed had this Treaty not been concluded.

The present Convention shall be duly ratified by the President of the United
States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof,
and by the President of the German Empire in accordance with the
requirements of the German Constitution; and the ratifications shall be
exchanged at Washington as soon as possible.

In witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present
Convention in duplicate and have thereunto affixed their seals.
Done at the city of Washington, this nineteenth day of May in the year of
our Lord one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four.

[SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES
[SEAL] DR. OTTO WIEDFELDT

[Document 103]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Bliss)
WASHINGTON, January 3, 1924.

No. 17
SIR: The Department has received your despatch No. 72 dated November 21,
1923, enclosing a memorandum dealing with the extent of territorial
jurisdiction claimed by Sweden. You refer to Article 7 of the Treaty of
Friendship, Commerce and Navigation between Sweden and Mexico,
ratified on the 28th day of May, 1886, at Stockholm, and on the first of July,
1886, at Mexico, which contains the following provision:
“Both parties agree to consider as limit of territorial waters on
their respective coast for everything pertaining to the application
of customs regulations and to measures taken to prevent
smuggling, a distance of three sea leagues from the line of the low
water.”
You state that three sea leagues is approximately ten miles from shore.
The information you have furnished is considered important. Reference is
made to the request contained in the Department’s instruction of September
10, 1923, for a report setting forth information concerning the views held
by Swedish officials with respect to the proposal for a treaty dealing with
the enforcement of prohibition on Swedish vessels within American
territorial waters and measures for stopping liquor smuggling operations
outside the three-mile limit. The Department will be glad to receive a report
dealing with this matter at your early convenience.

You are informed that the British Government has submitted a counter-draft
for the proposed treaty dealing with the subject referred to in the

[Document 104]
The Minister in Sweden (Bliss) to the Secretary of State
STOCKHOLM, February 20, 1924.

[Received March 8.]

No. 135
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s
the jurisdiction claimed by Sweden over territorial waters. In that
instruction I am directed to report “the views held by Swedish officials with
respect to the proposal for a treaty dealing with the enforcement of
prohibition on Swedish vessels within American territorial waters and
measures for stopping liquor smuggling operations outside of the three mile
limit.”
On receipt of this instruction, I took the first opportunity which was
presented to speak informally with Baron Marks von Würtemberg, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, on the matter. I told him that I was desirous of
learning the views of the Swedish Government officials on this subject, but
explained that my inquiry was made informally and should not be
considered as a proposal to negotiate a treaty. The Minister stated that he
could not reply immediately, as the matter was a subject which required
consideration and the necessity of talking with his colleagues, but that he
would give me an answer as soon as possible.

Not having the text of the treaty then being negotiated between our
Government and that of Great Britain on this same subject, I was unable to
accede to the Minister’s request to supply him with a copy thereof.
He asked several questions, especially wishing to know what advantage it
would be to Swedish vessels and Swedish commerce if his Government
were to recognize the jurisdiction of the United States beyond the three mile

limit for the purpose of suppressing liquor smuggling operations. I replied
that according to the treaty we were then discussing with England, Swedish
vessels would obtain the privilege of carrying liquor as sealed stores within
the territorial waters of the United States and cargoes of liquors, not
destined for disembarkation within the confines of the United States. I also
pointed out that a somewhat similar provision for extending the limits of
jurisdiction over territorial waters was contained in the treaty between
Sweden and Mexico, whereby it was provided, for the purpose of
enforcement of customs regulations, that the territorial waters of the two
contracting parties would be extended to a distance of about ten miles.
A fortnight ago Baron von Würtemberg told me that he had received a copy
of the American-English treaty, which was being examined by his
colleagues, and that he hoped to have something to say to me shortly.
Yesterday, at the weekly diplomatic reception, he said that he had examined
that treaty with much interest and that Sweden would be quite disposed to
enter into negotiations with the United States looking to the conclusion of a
treaty of that nature.

He expressed the desire that whatever agreement might be reached for
extending the territorial waters beyond the three mile limit would be a
reciprocal arrangement. I told the Minister that I could make no rejoinder to
that request other than to say that I would acquaint my Government with the
desire that he expressed, for my inquiry to him having been of an informal
nature, I could not enter into a discussion of the subject with him.
I have [etc.]

ROBERT WOODS BLISS

[Document 105]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Bliss)
11. Treaty with Great Britain to aid in the prevention of the smuggling of
intoxicating liquors into the United States was approved by the Senate
March 13. A similar text has been submitted to Swedish Minister at this
capital, as likewise to diplomatic representatives here of Netherlands,
Japan, Denmark, Germany, Italy and Norway. Expect copy by pouch.
Take no action without further instructions.

There is a substitute Article 1 in Treaty given to Italian Ambassador as
follows:
“The High Contracting Parties respectively retain their rights and
claims, without prejudice by reason of this agreement, with
respect to the extent of their territorial jurisdiction.”
Department prefers Article 1 as contained in Treaty with Great Britain and
that no question be raised as to any change in text. Department is willing,
however, if insisted upon, to give same Article as that proposed to the
Italian Government which was unwilling to assent to three-mile limit.
HUGHES

[Document 106]
The Swedish Legation to the Department of State
MEMORANDUM
Before signing the proposed so-called liquor treaty with the United States
the Swedish Government desires to know if the American Government
would be willing to have article 1 omitted or, if not that, to have inserted in
this article or in the introduction to the treaty provisions to the effect that
the treaty shall not be considered establishing a precedent with regard to the
territorial limits hitherto upheld by the contracting parties.
Further, the Swedish Government desires to know if the American
Government would-be willing to agree to reciprocal rights of boarding
smuggling vessels outside the limits of the territorial waters. It is thought
that such reciprocal rights might be of importance in the event Sweden
should wish to make similar treaties with other powers.

In passing the Swedish Government should like to know if there may be a
possibility of having the treaty ratified by the Senate during the present
session of Congress, if the treaty were to be signed in the middle of this
month.

[ WASHINGTON ,] May 3, 1924.

[Document 107]
The Department of State to the Swedish Legation
MEMORANDUM
Referring to the memorandum handed by the Counselor of the Swedish
Legation to the Solicitor of the Department of State on May 3 last, in
relation to the proposed treaty to aid in the prevention of the smuggling of
intoxicating liquors into the United States, the Secretary of State begs to
say:
First. The Government of the United States is not disposed to
omit Article I but will be willing to accept as a substitute therefor
the following:
“The High Contracting Parties respectively retain their
rights and claims, without prejudice by reason of this
agreement, with respect to the extent of their territorial
jurisdiction.”
Second. With respect to the other provisions of the proposed
treaty, the Government of the United States desires to have the
treaty conform to the draft handed to the Swedish Minister on
March 20, 1924, for the reason that the provisions of the draft are
those of the treaty already concluded with Great Britain.
Third. The treaty if concluded with the Swedish Government
would be at once submitted to the Senate of the United States and,
as the Senate has already approved the treaty with Great Britain,
it is not expected that there would be any great delay in its action
upon the treaty in question.

[ WASHINGTON ,] May 5, 1924.

[Document 108]
Convention between the United States of America and Sweden,
Signed at Washington, May 22, 192450
The President of the United States of America and His Majesty the King of
Sweden being desirous of avoiding any difficulties which might arise
between them in connection with the laws in force in the United States on
the subject of alcoholic beverages have decided to conclude a Convention
for that purpose, and have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries:
The President of the United States of America, Mr. Charles Evans
Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States;
His Majesty the King of Sweden, Mr. V. Assarsson, Counselor of
His Legation at Washington;
Who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form,
have agreed as follows: ARTICLE I
The High Contracting Parties respectively retain their rights and claims,
without prejudice by reason of this agreement, with respect to the extent of
their territorial jurisdiction.

ARTICLE II
(1) His Majesty agrees that he will raise no objection to the
boarding of private vessels under the Swedish flag outside the
limits of territorial waters by the authorities of the United States,
its territories or possessions in order that enquiries may be
addressed to those on board and an examination be made of the
ship’s papers for the purpose of ascertaining whether the vessel or
those on board are endeavoring to import or have imported
alcoholic beverages into the United States, its territories or
possessions in violation of the laws there in force. When such

enquiries and examination show a reasonable ground for
suspicion, a search of the vessel may be initiated.

(2) If there is reasonable cause for belief that the vessel has
committed or is committing or attempting to commit an offense
against the laws of the United States, its territories or possessions
prohibiting the importation of alcoholic beverages, the vessel may
be seized and taken into a port of the United States, its territories
or possessions for adjudication in accordance with such laws.
(3) The rights conferred by this article shall not be exercised at a
greater distance from the coast of the United States its territories
or possessions than can be traversed in one hour by the vessel
suspected of endeavoring to commit the offense. In cases,
however, in which the liquor is intended to be conveyed to the
United States its territories or possessions by a vessel other than
the one boarded and searched, it shall be the speed of such other
vessel and not the speed of the vessel boarded, which shall
determine the distance from the coast at which the right under this
article can be exercised.

ARTICLE III
No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be
applicable or attach to alcoholic liquors or to vessels or persons by reason
of the carriage of such liquors, when such liquors are listed as sea stores or
cargo destined for a port foreign to the United States, its territories or
possessions on board Swedish vessels voyaging to or from ports of the
United States, or its territories or possessions or passing through the
territorial waters thereof, and such carriage shall be as now provided by law
with respect to the transit of such liquors through the Panama Canal,
provided that such liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the
vessel on which they are carried remains within said territorial waters and
that no part of such liquors shall at any time or place be unladen within the
United States, its territories or possessions.

ARTICLE IV

Any claim by a Swedish vessel for compensation on the grounds that it has
suffered loss or injury through the improper or unreasonable exercise of the
rights conferred by Article II of this Treaty or on the ground that it has not
been given the benefit of Article III shall be referred for the joint
consideration of two persons, one of whom shall be nominated by each of
the High Contracting Parties.

Effect shall be given to the recommendations contained in any such joint
report. If no joint report can be agreed upon, the claim shall be referred to
the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague described in the
Convention for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes, concluded
at The Hague, October 18, 1907. The Arbitral Tribunal shall be constituted
in accordance with Article 87 (Chapter IV) and with Article 59 (Chapter III)
of the said Convention. The proceedings shall be regulated by so much of
Chapter IV of the said Convention and of Chapter III thereof (special regard
Tribunal may consider to be applicable and to be consistent with the
provisions of this agreement. All sums of money which may be awarded by
the Tribunal on account of any claim shall be paid within eighteen months
after the date of the final award without interest and without deduction, save
as hereafter specified. Each Government shall bear its own expenses. The
expenses of the Tribunal shall be defrayed by a ratable deduction of the
amount of the sums awarded by it, at a rate of five per cent, on such sums,
or at such lower rate as may be agreed upon between the two Governments;
the deficiency, if any, shall be defrayed in equal moieties by the two
Governments.

ARTICLE V
This Treaty shall be subject to ratification and shall remain in force for a
period of one year from the date of the exchange of ratifications.
Three months before the expiration of the said period of one year, either of
the High Contracting Parties may give notice of its desire to propose
modifications in the terms of the Treaty.

If such modifications have not been agreed upon before the expiration of
the term of one year mentioned above, the Treaty shall lapse.

If no notice is given on either side of the desire to propose modifications,
the Treaty shall remain in force for another year, and so on automatically,
but subject always in respect of each such period of a year to the right on
either side to propose as provided above three months before its expiration
modifications in the Treaty, and to the provision that if such modifications
are not agreed upon before the close of the period of one year, the Treaty
shall lapse.

ARTICLE VI
In the event that either of the High Contracting Parties shall be prevented
either by judicial decision or legislative action from giving full effect to the
provisions of the present Treaty the said Treaty shall automatically lapse,
and, on such lapse or whenever this Treaty shall cease to be in force, each
High Contracting Party shall enjoy all the rights which it would have
possessed had this Treaty not been concluded.

The present Convention shall be duly ratified by the President of the United
States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof,
and by His Majesty the King of Sweden; and the ratifications shall be
exchanged at Washington as soon as possible.

In Witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present
Convention in duplicate in the English and Swedish languages and have
thereunto affixed their seals.

Done at the city of Washington this twenty-second day of May, in the year
of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four.
[SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES
[SEAL] V ASSARSSON

[Document 109]
Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with
the Norwegian Minister (Bryn), March 20, 1924
March 20, 1924
[Extract]
Liquor Treaty.—The Secretary referred to the request of the Minister to be
informed in case a liquor treaty were concluded with Great Britain and
stated that such a treaty had been concluded and as it had been approved by
the Senate he was at liberty to hand the Minister a copy. The Secretary said
he was ready to conclude a similar treaty with Norway and handed to the
Minister a draft of a treaty which was identical with the treaty with Great
Britain (with the change of name) except in the second paragraph of Article
4 where he had incorporated in the draft provisions substantially as those
contained in the Convention of 1910 with Great Britain. The Minister said
that his Government might not be willing to sign a provision upholding the
three-mile limit and hence might object to Article 1. The Secretary said he
would be glad to substitute for Article 1 the following:
“The High Contracting Parties respectively retain their rights and
claims, without prejudice by reason of this agreement with
respect to the extent of their territorial jurisdiction.”

[Document 110]
The Norwegian Legation to the Department of State
AIDE-MÉMOIRE
The Norwegian Government is willing to negotiate a Liquor Treaty on the
basis of the draft submitted by the Government of the United States, Article
I being substituted by the alternative text delivered by the Secretary of
State, and providing that the provisions of the Treaty be made reciprocal.
The Norwegian Government prefers that instead of the rules for
computation of the distance contained in Article II, Paragraph 3, there be
agreed upon a fixed distance from the coast within which boarding of
vessels etc. can take place, preferably 10 nautical miles, which is the
distance established by Norwegian Law for the police activities of the
customs authorities. With regard to the expenses of the Tribunal mentioned
in Article IV the Norwegian Government should prefer, instead of the
provisions of the draft, that the provision of Article 85 of The Hague
Convention, according to which each Government shall bear an equal
share of the expenses of the Tribunal, be adopted.

In the last paragraph of the last Article the words “in English and
Norwegian language” should be inserted.

WASHINGTON , May 8, 1924.

[Document 111]
The Department of State to the Norwegian Legation
MEMORANDUM
Referring to the aide-mémoire handed by the Norwegian Minister to the
Secretary of State on May 8, 1924, in relation to the proposed treaty to aid
in the prevention of the smuggling of intoxicating liquors into the United
States, the Secretary of State begs to say:
First. It is noted that the Norwegian Government accepts the
alternative text for Article I submitted by the Secretary of State.
Second. The Government of the United States finds it impossible
to agree to the proposals of the Norwegian Government
amendatory of paragraph (3), Article II respecting the distance
from the coast within which the boarding of vessels, etc., can take
place. The Government of the United States desires to have the
treaty conform in this regard to the draft submitted to the
Norwegian Minister for the reason that the provisions of the
Article are those of the treaty recently concluded between the
United States and Great Britain.

Third. After consideration of the Norwegian proposal for the
substitution of Article 85 of The Hague Convention of 1907 for
the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes respecting the
payment of the expenses of the Tribunal mentioned in Article IV
of the treaty, the Government of the United States prefers to retain
the provisions which it has submitted to the Norwegian
Government.

Fourth. The Government of the United States accepting the
proposal of the Norwegian Government that the final Article
should refer to the two languages in which the treaty is expressed,

suggests that after the words “in duplicate” in Article VI there be
incorporated the words “in the English and Norwegian
languages”.

[ WASHINGTON ,] May 14, 1924.

[Document 112]
The Secretary of State to the Norwegian Minister (Bryn)
WASHINGTON, May 21, 1924.

SIR: With further reference to your aide-mémoire of May 8th last, in regard
to the proposed treaty to aid in the prevention of the smuggling of
intoxicating liquor into the United States, I have to confirm my verbal
statement to you of May 8th that this Government would be unwilling to
agree to the proposal of your Government that the provisions of the treaty
be made reciprocal and so differ from those of the treaty recently concluded
between the United States and Great Britain. It is desired that the treaties on
this subject should be of the same tenor.

Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 113]
The Norwegian Minister (Bryn) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, May 22, 1924.

MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: Referring to your notes of the 14th and 21st instant
I have the pleasure to state that I have been authorized to sign with you a
liquor treaty as the one recently concluded between the United States and
Great Britain with the alternative text for Article I submitted by you and
with the words “in the English and Norwegian languages” to be
incorporated in Article VI after the words “in duplicate.”
I enclose the text in Norwegian language.

[Document 114]
The Secretary of State to the Norwegian Minister (Bryn)
WASHINGTON, May 23, 1924.

MY DEAR MR. MINISTER: Permit me to acknowledge the receipt of your
communication of May 22nd, in which you inform me that you have been
authorized by your Government to sign a liquor treaty such as that recently
concluded between the United States and Great Britain, with the alternative
text for Article I which I submitted to you and also with the words “in the
English and Norwegian languages” to be incorporated in Article VI after the
words “in duplicate”.

With your note you were good enough to enclose a text in the Norwegian
language.

I take note of your further statement that your Government maintains its
desire with regard to reciprocity and to ten miles from the shore as the limit
within which the boarding of vessels, etc. can take place and that it ventures
to hope that in a possible revision of the treaty in accordance with Article V,
the Government of the United States will meet the desires of the Norwegian
Government in those respects.

By way of response to this suggestion, permit me to renew the expression
of my opinion that the treaties of the United States to aid in the prevention
of the smuggling of intoxicating liquors into the United States should, so far
as possible, be of the same tenor and that, therefore, this Government might
find difficulty in accepting provisions differing with respect to what you
refer from those in the treaty recently concluded between the United States
and Great Britain.

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 115]
Convention between the United States of America and Norway,
Signed at Washington, May 24, 192454
The President of the United States of America and His Majesty the King of
Norway being desirous of avoiding any difficulties which might arise
between them in connection with the laws in force in the United States on
the subject of alcoholic beverages have decided to conclude a Convention
for that purpose, and have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries:
The President of the United States of America, Charles Evans
Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States;
His Majesty the King of Norway, Helmer H. Bryn, His Envoy
Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to the United States of
America;
Who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form,
have agreed as follows: ARTICLE I
The High Contracting Parties respectively retain their rights and claims,
without prejudice by reason of this agreement with respect to the extent of
their territorial jurisdiction.

ARTICLE II
(1) His Majesty agrees that he will raise no objection to the
boarding of private vessels under the Norwegian flag outside the
limits of territorial waters by the authorities of the United States,
its territories or possessions in order that enquiries may be
addressed to those on board and an examination be made of the
ship’s papers for the purpose of ascertaining whether the vessel or
those on board are endeavoring to import or have imported
alcoholic beverages into the United States, its territories or

possessions in violation of the laws there in force. When such
enquiries and examination show a reasonable ground for
suspicion, a search of the vessel may be initiated.
(2) If there is reasonable cause for belief that the vessel has
committed or is committing or attempting to commit an offense
against the laws of the United States, its territories or possessions
prohibiting the importation of alcoholic beverages, the vessel may
be seized and taken into a port of the United States, its territories
or possessions for adjudication in accordance with such laws.
(3) The rights conferred by this article shall not be exercised at a
greater distance from the coast of the United States its territories
or possessions than can be traversed in one hour by the vessel
suspected of endeavoring to commit the offense. In cases,
however, in which the liquor is intended to be conveyed to the
United States its territories or possessions by a vessel other than
the one boarded and searched, it shall be the speed of such other
vessel and not the speed of the vessel boarded, which shall
determine the distance from the coast at which the right under this
article can be exercised.

ARTICLE III
No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be
applicable or attach to alcoholic liquors or to vessels or persons by reason
of the carriage of such liquors, when such liquors are listed as sea stores or
cargo destined for a port foreign to the United States, its territories or
possessions on board Norwegian vessels voyaging to or from ports of the
United States, or its territories or possessions or passing through the
territorial waters thereof, and such carriage shall be as now provided by law
with respect to the transit of such liquors through the Panama Canal,
provided that such liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the
vessel on which they are carried remains within said territorial waters and
that no part of such liquors shall at any time or place be unladen within the
United States, its territories or possessions.

ARTICLE IV
Any claim by a Norwegian vessel for compensation on the grounds that it
has suffered loss or injury through the improper or unreasonable exercise of
the rights conferred by Article II of this Treaty or on the ground that it has
been given the benefit of Article III shall be referred for the joint
consideration of two persons, one of whom shall be nominated by each of
the High Contracting Parties.

Effect shall be given to the recommendations contained in any such joint
report. If no joint report can be agreed upon, the claim shall be referred to
the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague described in the
Convention for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes, concluded
at The Hague, October 18, 1907. The Arbitral Tribunal shall be constituted
in accordance with Article 87 (Chapter IV) and with Article 59 (Chapter III)
of the said Convention. The proceedings shall be regulated by so much of
Chapter IV of the said Convention and of Chapter III thereof (special regard
Tribunal may consider to be applicable and to be consistent with the
provisions of this agreement. All sums of money which may be awarded by
the Tribunal on account of any claim shall be paid within eighteen months
after the date of the final award without interest and without deduction, save
as hereafter specified. Each Government shall bear its own expenses. The
expenses of the Tribunal shall be defrayed by a ratable deduction of the
amount of the sums awarded by it, at a rate of five per cent, on such sums,
or at such lower rate as may be agreed upon between the two Governments;
the deficiency, if any, shall be defrayed in equal moieties by the two
Governments.

ARTICLE V
This Treaty shall be subject to ratification and shall remain in force for a
period of one year from the date of the exchange of ratifications.
Three months before the expiration of the said period of one year, either of
the High Contracting Parties may give notice of its desire to propose
modifications in the terms of the Treaty.

If such, modifications have not been agreed upon before the expiration of
the term of one year mentioned above, the Treaty shall lapse.

If no notice is given on either side of the desire to propose modifications,
the Treaty shall remain in force for another year, and so on automatically,
but subject always in respect of each such period of a year to the right on
either side to propose as provided above three months before its expiration
modifications in the Treaty, and to the provision that if such modifications
are not agreed upon before the close of the period of one year, the Treaty
shall lapse.

ARTICLE VI
In the event that either of the High Contracting Parties shall be prevented
either by judicial decision or legislative action from giving full effect to the
provisions of the present Treaty the said Treaty shall automatically lapse,
and, on such lapse or whenever this Treaty shall cease to be in force, each
High Contracting Party shall enjoy all the rights which it would have
possessed had this Treaty not been concluded.

The present Convention shall be duly ratified by the President of the United
States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof,
and by His Majesty the King of Norway; and the ratifications shall be
exchanged at Washington as soon as possible.

In witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present
Convention in duplicate in the English and Norwegian languages and have
thereunto affixed their seals.

Done at the city of Washington this twenty-fourth day of May, in the year of
our Lord one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four.

[SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES
[SEAL] HELMER H. BRYN

[Document 116]
The Danish Chargé (Helmer-Petersen) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, May 26, 1924.

No. 99
SIR: I have the honor to inform you that the Danish Government is prepared
to sign a Treaty with the United States Government concerning the
Regulations of the Liquor Traffic similar to that signed between the United
As I have already had the honor to communicate verbally to the Honorable
the Undersecretary of State, the Danish Government proposes that in the
English text of the Treaty, after the word “between” in alinea three of the
preamble, instead of the word “them” the words “the United States of
America and Denmark” should be inserted.

Furthermore the Danish Government proposes the following text of Article
I of the Treaty: The high contracting Parties respectively retain their rights
and claims without prejudice by reason of this agreement with respect to the
extent of their territorial jurisdiction.

It is also desired that the full title of His Majesty the King, to wit: His
Majesty the King of Denmark and Iceland, be inserted in the text, wherever
the King is mentioned.

As I have understood that the United States Government will have no
objections to these modifications, I beg to enclose a draft of the Danish text
of the proposed treaty.

I beg to add that, according to a cablegram received today from the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, it is expected that the full power for me can be

[Document 117]
The Secretary of State to the Danish Chargé (Helmer-Petersen)
WASHINGTON, May 28, 1924.

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your communication No.
99 of May 26, in which you inform me of the readiness of your Government
to conclude a treaty with the United States to aid in the prevention of the
smuggling of intoxicating liquors into the United States similar to that
concluded between the United States and Great Britain on January 23,
1924, subject, however, to certain modifications which you specify and
which are acceptable to this Government.

You have been good enough to enclose a draft of the Danish text of the
proposed treaty.

With reference to your full powers to sign the treaty, I have to inform you
that the American Minister at Copenhagen has telegraphed the Department
that he has inspected the same.

Permit me to suggest the hour of ten forty-five A.M. on Thursday, May
29th, as an appropriate one for the signature of the treaty, if agreeable to
yourself.

Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 118]
Convention between the United States of America and Denmark,
Signed at Washington, May 29, 192456
The President of the United States of America and His Majesty the King of
Denmark and Iceland being desirous of avoiding any difficulties which
might arise between the United States and Denmark in connection with the
laws in force in the United States on the subject of alcoholic beverages have
decided to conclude a Convention for that purpose, and have appointed as
their Plenipotentiaries:
The President of the United States of America, Mr. Charles Evans
Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States; and
His Majesty the King of Denmark and Iceland, Mr. Kai Helmer-
Petersen, His Majesty’s Chargé d’Affaires at Washington,
Who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form,
have agreed as follows: ARTICLE I
The High Contracting Parties respectively retain their rights and claims,
without prejudice by reason of this agreement, with respect to the extent of
their territorial jurisdiction.

ARTICLE II
(1) His Majesty the King of Denmark and Iceland agrees that he
will raise no objection to the boarding of private vessels under the
Danish flag outside the limits of territorial waters by the
authorities of the United States, its territories or possessions in
order that enquiries may be addressed to those on board and an
examination be made of the ship’s papers for the purpose of
ascertaining whether the vessel or those on board are endeavoring
to import or have imported alcoholic beverages into the United

States, its territories or possessions in violation of the laws there
in force. When such enquiries and examination show a reasonable
ground for suspicion, a search of the vessel may be initiated.
(2) If there is reasonable cause for belief that the vessel has
committed or is committing or attempting to commit an offense
against the laws of the United States, its territories or possessions
prohibiting the importation of alcoholic beverages, the vessel may
be seized and taken into a port of the United States, its territories
or possessions for adjudication in accordance with such laws.
(3) The rights conferred by this article shall not be exercised at a
greater distance from the coast of the United States its territories
or possessions than can be traversed in one hour by the vessel
suspected of endeavoring to commit the offense. In cases,
however, in which the liquor is intended to be conveyed to the
United States its territories or possessions by a vessel other than
the one boarded and searched, it shall be the speed of such other
vessel and not the speed of the vessel boarded, which shall
determine the distance from the coast at which the right under this
article can be exercised.

ARTICLE III
No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be
applicable or attach to alcoholic liquors or to vessels or persons by reason
of the carriage of such liquors, when such liquors are listed as sea stores or
cargo destined for a port foreign to the United States, its territories or
possessions on board Danish vessels voyaging to or from ports of the
United States, or its territories or possessions or passing through the
territorial waters thereof, and such carriage shall be as now provided by law
with respect to the transit of such liquors through the Panama Canal,
provided that such liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the
vessel on which they are carried remains within said territorial waters and
that no part of such liquors shall at any time or place be unladen within the
United States, its territories or possessions.

ARTICLE IV

Any claim by a Danish vessel for compensation on the grounds that it has
suffered loss or injury through the improper or unreasonable exercise of the
rights conferred by Article II of this Treaty or on the ground that it has not
been given the benefit of Article III shall be referred for the joint
consideration of two persons, one of whom shall be nominated by each of
the High Contracting Parties.

Effect shall be given to the recommendations contained in any such joint
report. If no joint report can be agreed upon, the claim shall be referred to
the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague described in the
Convention for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes, concluded
at The Hague, October 18, 1907. The Arbitral Tribunal shall be constituted
in accordance with Article 87 (Chapter IV) and with Article 59 (Chapter III)
of the said Convention. The proceedings shall be regulated by so much of
Chapter IV of the said Convention and of Chapter III thereof (special regard
Tribunal may consider to be applicable and to be consistent with the
provisions of this agreement. All sums of money which may be awarded by
the Tribunal on account of any claim shall be paid within eighteen months
after the date of the final award without interest and without deduction, save
as hereafter specified. Each Government shall bear its own expenses. The
expenses of the Tribunal shall be defrayed by a ratable deduction of the
amount of the sums awarded by it, at a rate of five per cent. on such sums,
or at such lower rate as may be agreed upon between the two Governments;
the deficiency, if any, shall be defrayed in equal moieties by the two
Governments.

ARTICLE V
This Treaty shall be subject to ratification and shall remain in force for a
period of one year from the date of the exchange of ratifications.
Three months before the expiration of the said period of one year, either of
the High Contracting Parties may give notice of its desire to propose
modifications in the terms of the Treaty.

If such modifications have not been agreed upon before the expiration of
the term of one year mentioned above, the Treaty shall lapse.

If no notice is given on either side of the desire to propose modifications,
the Treaty shall remain in force for another year, and so on automatically,
but subject always in respect of each such period of a year to the right on
either side to propose as provided above three months before its expiration
modifications in the Treaty, and to the provision that if such modifications
are not agreed upon before the close of the period of one year, the Treaty
shall lapse.

ARTICLE VI
In the event that either of the High Contracting Parties shall be prevented
either by judicial decision or legislative action from giving full effect to the
provisions of the present Treaty the said Treaty shall automatically lapse,
and, on such lapse or whenever this Treaty shall cease to be in force, each
High Contracting Party shall enjoy all the rights which it would have
possessed had this Treaty not been concluded.

The present Convention shall be duly ratified by the President of the United
States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof,
and by His Majesty the King of Denmark and Iceland; and the ratifications
shall be exchanged at Washington as soon as possible.

In witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present
Convention in duplicate in the English and Danish languages and have
thereunto affixed their seals.

Done at the city of Washington this twenty-ninth day of May one thousand
nine hundred and twenty-four.

[SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES
[SEAL] HELMER-PETERSEN

[Document 119]
Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with
the Italian Ambassador (Caetani), March 20, 1924
March 20, 1924
[Extract]
Liquor Treaty.—The Secretary referred to the request of the Ambassador to
be advised in case a liquor treaty were concluded with Great Britain and
stated that such a treaty had been concluded and had been approved by the
Senate. The Secretary handed a copy to the Ambassador. The Secretary said
that he had prepared the draft of a proposed treaty with Italy to the same
effect. This was the same (with the names changed) with the exception of
substituted in the draft treaty with Italy, in accordance with the
Ambassador’s suggestion at a recent conference, the following:
“The High Contracting Parties respectively retain their rights and
claims, without prejudice by reason of this agreement, with
respect to the extent of their territorial jurisdiction.”
In the second paragraph of Article 4 the Secretary said he had inserted the
substance of the provisions of the Convention of 1910 with Great Britain.

[Document 120]
Convention between the United States of America and Italy,
Signed at Washington, June 3, 192458
The President of the United States of America and His Majesty the King of
Italy being desirous of avoiding any difficulties which might arise between
them in connection with the laws in force in the United States on the subject
of alcoholic beverages have decided to conclude a Convention for that
purpose, and have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries:
The President of the United States of America, Charles Evans
Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States;
His Majesty the King of Italy, Signor Augusto Rosso, Counselor
of His Embassy at Washington;
Who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form,
have agreed as follows: ARTICLE I
The High Contracting Parties respectively retain their rights and claims,
without prejudice by reason of this agreement, with respect to the extent of
their territorial jurisdiction.

ARTICLE II
(1) The Italian Government agrees that it will raise no objection
to the boarding of private vessels under the Italian flag outside the
limits of territorial waters by the authorities of the United States,
its territories or possessions in order that enquiries may be
addressed to those on board and an examination be made of the
ship’s papers for the purpose of ascertaining whether the vessel or
those on board are endeavoring to import or have imported
alcoholic beverages into the United States, its territories or
possessions in violation of the laws there in force. When such

enquiries and examination show a reasonable ground for
suspicion, a search of the vessel may be initiated.

(2) If there is reasonable cause for belief that the vessel has
committed or is committing or attempting to commit an offense
against the laws of the United States, its territories or possessions
prohibiting the importation of alcoholic beverages, the vessel may
be seized and taken into a port of the United States, its territories
or possessions for adjudication in accordance with such laws.
(3) The rights conferred by this article shall not be exercised at a
greater distance from the coast of the United States its territories
or possessions than can be traversed in one hour by the vessel
suspected of endeavoring to commit the offense. In cases,
however, in which the liquor is intended to be conveyed to the
United States its territories or possessions by a vessel other than
the one boarded and searched, it shall be the speed of such other
vessel and not the speed of the vessel boarded, which shall
determine the distance from the coast at which the right under this
article can be exercised.

ARTICLE III
No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be
applicable or attach to alcoholic liquors or to vessels or persons by reason
of the carriage of such liquors, when such liquors are listed as sea stores or
cargo destined for a port foreign to the United States, its territories or
possessions on board Italian vessels voyaging to or from ports of the United
States, or its territories or possessions or passing through the territorial
waters thereof, and such carriage shall be as now provided by law with
respect to the transit of such liquors through the Panama Canal, provided
that such liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the vessel on
which they are carried remains within said territorial waters and that no part
of such liquors shall at any time or place be unladen within the United
States, its territories or possessions.

ARTICLE IV

Any claim by an Italian vessel for compensation on the grounds that it has
suffered loss or injury through the improper or unreasonable exercise of the
rights conferred by Article II of this Treaty or on the ground that it has not
been given the benefit of Article III shall be referred for the joint
consideration of two persons, one of whom shall be nominated by each of
the High Contracting Parties.

Effect shall be given to the recommendations contained in any such joint
report. If no joint report can be agreed upon, the claim shall be referred to
the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague described in the
Convention for the pacific Settlement of International Disputes, concluded
at The Hague, October 18, 1907. The Arbitral Tribunal shall be constituted
in accordance with Article 87 (Chapter IV) and with Article 59 (Chapter III)
of the said Convention. The proceedings shall be regulated by so much of
Chapter IV of the said Convention and of Chapter III thereof (special regard
Tribunal may consider to be applicable and to be consistent with the
provisions of this agreement. All sums of money which may be awarded by
the Tribunal on account of any claim shall be paid within eighteen months
after the date of the final award without interest and without deduction, save
as hereafter specified. Each Government shall bear its own expenses. The
expenses of the Tribunal shall be defrayed by a ratable deduction of the
amount of the sums awarded by it, at a rate of five per cent, on such sums,
or at such lower rate as may be agreed upon between the two Governments;
the deficiency, if any, shall be defrayed in equal moieties by the two
Governments.

ARTICLE V
This Treaty shall be subject to ratification and shall remain in force for a
period of one year from the date of the exchange of ratifications.
Three months before the expiration of the said period of one year, either of
the High Contracting Parties may give notice of its desire to propose
modifications in the terms of the Treaty.

If such modifications have not been agreed upon before the expiration of
the term of one year mentioned above, the Treaty shall lapse.

If no notice is given on either side of the desire to propose modifications,
the Treaty shall remain in force for another year, and so on automatically,
but subject always in respect of each such period of a year to the right on
either side to propose as provided above three months before its expiration
modifications in the Treaty, and to the provision that if such modifications
are not agreed upon before the close of the period of one year, the Treaty
shall lapse.

ARTICLE VI
In the event that either of the High Contracting Parties shall be prevented
either by judicial decision or legislative action from giving full effect to the
provisions of the present Treaty the said Treaty shall automatically lapse,
and, on such lapse or whenever this Treaty shall cease to be in force, each
High Contracting Party shall enjoy all the rights which it would have
possessed had this Treaty not been concluded.

The present Convention shall be duly ratified by the President of the United
States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof,
and by His Majesty the King of Italy; and the ratifications shall be
exchanged at Washington as soon as possible.

In witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present
Convention in duplicate, in the English and Italian languages, and have
thereunto affixed their seals.

Done at the city of Washington this third day of June in the year of our Lord
one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four.
[SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES
[SEAL] AUGUSTO ROSSO

proclaimed by the President, Oct. 22, 1924.

[Document 121]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, June 4, 1924.

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your
enough to submit to me a draft of the proposed treaty between the United
States and the Dominion of Canada for the purpose of suppressing the illicit
liquor traffic across the international boundary between the two countries
and for other purposes, and which you inform me was drawn up as a result
of recommendations agreed upon by representatives of the United States
and Canada in the conference held at Ottawa November last.

You add that Lord Byng of Vimy feels confident that the terms of the treaty
will be agreeable to this Government and requests you to emphasize the
mutual advantages which would accrue to both the governments concerned
if the treaty should be signed and ratified during the present session of the
Congress. You request, moreover, to be furnished with an expression of my
views as soon as possible.

The text of the Canadian draft has been examined with care by the
appropriate authorities of this Government. Save with respect to a few
minor details which it is believed might be capable of adjustment in
conference, this Government is prepared to accept the Canadian draft.
Inasmuch as the interval is very brief before the adjournment of Congress, I
am hopeful that the Honorable Ernest Lapointe, K. C. who, I am advised by
your Embassy has been empowered to conclude the treaty proposed with
this Government and to sign the same in behalf of His Majesty the King in
respect to the Dominion of Canada, may be good enough to come to
Washington at the earliest possible moment. Through his presence here the
treaty might be signed and submitted to the Senate before its adjournment.

[Document 122]
Convention between the United States of America and Great
Britain in Respect of Canada, Signed at Washington, June 6,
The United States of America and His Majesty the King of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond
the Seas, Emperor of India, in respect of the Dominion of Canada, being
desirous of suppressing smuggling operations along the boundary between
the United States of America and the Dominion of Canada, and of assisting
in the arrest and prosecution of persons violating the narcotic laws of either
Government, and of providing as to the omission of penalties and
forfeitures in respect to the carriage of alcoholic liquors through Alaska into
the Yukon territory, have agreed to conclude a Convention to give effect to
these purposes and have named as their Plenipotentiaries:
The President of the United States of America: Charles Evans
Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States; and
His Britannic Majesty, in respect of the Dominion of Canada: The
Honorable Ernest Lapointe, K. C, a member of His Majesty’s
Privy Council for Canada and Minister of Justice in the
Government of that Dominion;
Who, having communicated to each other their respective full powers,
which were found to be in due and proper form, have agreed upon the
following articles: ARTICLE I
The High Contracting Parties agree that the appropriate officers of the
Governments of the United States of America and of Canada respectively
shall be required to furnish upon request to duly authorized officers of the
other Government, information concerning clearances of vessels or the
transportation of cargoes, shipments or loads of articles across the

international boundary when the importation of the cargo carried or of
articles transported by land is subject to the payment of duties; also to
furnish information respecting clearances of vessels to any ports when there
is ground to suspect that the owners or persons in possession of the cargo
intend to smuggle it into the territory of the United States or of Canada.

ARTICLE II
The High Contracting Parties agree that clearance from the United States or
from Canada shall be denied to any vessel carrying cargo consisting of
articles the importation of which into the territory of the United States or of
Canada, as the case may be, is prohibited, when it is evident from the
tonnage, size and general character of the vessel, or the length of the voyage
and the perils or conditions of navigation attendant upon it, that the vessel
will be unable to carry its cargo to the destination proposed in the
application for clearance.

ARTICLE III
Each of the High Contracting Parties agrees with the other that property of
all kinds in its possession which, having been stolen and brought into the
territory of the United States or of Canada, is seized by its customs
authorities shall, when the owners are nationals of the other country, be
returned to such owners, subject to satisfactory proof of such ownership and
the absence of any collusion, and subject moreover to payment of the
expenses of the seizure and detention and to the abandonment of any claims
by the owners against the customs, or the customs officers, warehousemen
or agents, for compensation or damages for the seizure, detention,
warehousing or keeping of the property.

ARTICLE IV
The High Contracting Parties reciprocally agree to exchange information
concerning the names and activities of all persons known or suspected to be
engaged in violations of the narcotic laws of the United States or of Canada
respectively.

ARTICLE V
It is agreed that the customs and other administrative officials of the
respective Governments of the United States and of Canada shall upon
request be directed to attend as witnesses and to produce such available
records and files or certified copies thereof as may be considered essential
to the trial of civil or criminal cases, and as may be produced compatibly
with the public interest.

The cost of transcripts of records, depositions, certificates and letters
rogatory in civil or criminal cases, and the cost of first-class transportation
both ways, maintenance and other proper expenses involved in the
attendance of such witnesses shall be paid by the nation requesting their
attendance at the time of their discharge by the court from further
attendance at such trial. Letters rogatory and commissions shall be executed
with all possible despatch and copies of official records or documents shall
be certified promptly by the appropriate officials in accordance with the
provisions of the laws of the respective countries.

ARTICLE VI
The following offenses are added to the list of offenses numbered 1 to 3 in
Article I of the Treaty concluded between the United States and Great
Britain on May 18, 1908, with reference to reciprocal rights for the United
States and Canada in the matters of conveyance of prisoners and wrecking
and salvage, that is to say: 4. Offenses against the narcotic laws of the
respective Governments.

ARTICLE VII
No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be
applicable or attached to alcoholic liquors or to vessels, vehicles or persons
by reason of the carriage of such liquors when they are in transit under
guard by Canadian authorities through the territorial waters of the United
States to Skagway, Alaska, and thence by the shortest route, via the White
Pass and Yukon Railway, upwards of twenty miles to Canadian territory,
and such transit shall be as now provided by law with respect to the transit
of alcoholic liquors through the Panama Canal or on the Panama Railroad,

provided that such liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the
vessel or vehicle on which they are carried remains within the United
States, its territories or possessions, and that no part of such liquors shall at
any time or place be unladen within the United States, its territories or
possessions.

ARTICLE VIII
This Convention shall be ratified, and the ratifications shall be exchanged at
Washington as soon as possible. The Convention shall come into effect at
the expiration of ten days from the date of the exchange of ratifications, and
it shall remain in force for one year. If upon the expiration of one year after
the Convention shall have been in force no notice is given by either party of
a desire to terminate the same, it shall continue in force until thirty days
after either party shall have given notice to the other of a desire to terminate
the Convention.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present
Convention in duplicate and have thereunto affixed their seals.
DONE at the city of Washington this sixth day of June, one thousand nine
hundred and twenty-four.

[SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES
[SEAL] ERNEST LAPOINTE
ratifications exchanged at Washington, July 17, 1925; proclaimed by the
President, July 17, 1925.

Panama, June 6, 1924
[123] The Chief of the Division of Latin American Affairs, Department
of State (White) to the Secretary of State
Washington, May 28, 1924.

[Document 123]
The Chief of the Division of Latin American Affairs, Department
of State (White) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, May 28, 1924.

DEAR MR. SECRETARY: The Panaman Minister has just telephoned to say that he had
received instructions from his Government to sign the liquor treaty as given
to him the other day (I gave him an exact copy of the German treaty,
mutatis mutandis). His Government desired, however, to have reference
made to the special conditions existing between the Canal Zone and
Panama and the question of the three mile limit. Certain waters three miles
from the Canal Zone limits are Panaman territorial waters, and he suggests
an exchange of notes at the time of the signing of the treaty making
reservations on this point. He would also like to have it stated in the
exchange of notes that the article which we have agreed upon on the subject
of the carriage of liquors, under seal and certificate by the Panaman
authorities from the terminal ports of the Canal to the cities of Panama and
Colon and from those cities to other ports in the Republic, for inclusion in
the treaty to take the place of the Taft Agreement63 will in no manner be
prejudiced by the signing of this special liquor treaty. Mr. Baker is drafting
the proposed exchange of notes.

WHITE

[Document 124]
Convention between the United States of America and Panama,
Signed at Washington, June 6, 192464
The President of the United States of America and the President of the
Republic of Panama being desirous of avoiding any difficulties which might
arise between them in connection with the laws in force in the United States
on the subject of alcoholic beverages have decided to conclude a
Convention for that purpose, and have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries:
The President of the United States of America, Charles Evans
Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States of America, and
The President of Panama, Ricardo J. Alfaro, Envoy Extraordinary
and Minister Plenipotentiary of the Republic of Panama in
Washington,
Who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form,
have agreed as follows: ARTICLE I
The High Contracting Parties declare that it is their firm intention to uphold
the principle that three marine miles extending from the coast line outwards
and measured from low-water mark constitute the proper limits of territorial
waters.

ARTICLE II
(1) The President of Panama agrees that Panama will raise no
objection to the boarding of private vessels under the Panaman
flag outside the limits of territorial waters by the authorities of the
United States, its territories or possessions, in order that enquiries
may be addressed to those on board and an examination be made
of the ship’s papers for the purpose of ascertaining whether the
vessel or those on board are endeavoring to import or have

imported alcoholic beverages into the United States, its territories
or possessions in violation of the laws there in force. When such
enquiries and examinations show a reasonable ground for
suspicion, a search of the vessel may be initiated.

(2) If there is reasonable cause for belief that the vessel has
committed or is committing or attempting to commit an offense
against the laws of the United States, its territories or possessions
prohibiting the importation of alcoholic beverages, the vessel may
be seized and taken into a port of the United States, its territories
or possessions for adjudication in accordance with such laws.
(3) The rights conferred by this article shall not be exercised at a
greater distance from the coast of the United States its territories
or possessions than can be traversed in one hour by the vessel
suspected of endeavoring to commit the offense, and shall not be
exercised in waters adjacent to territorial waters of the Canal
Zone. In cases, however, in which the liquor is intended to be
conveyed to the United States its territories or possessions by a
vessel other than the one boarded and searched, it shall be the
speed of such other vessel and not the speed of the vessel
boarded, which shall determine the distance from the coast at
which the right under this article can be exercised.

ARTICLE III
No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be
applicable or attach to alcoholic liquors or to vessels or persons by reason
of the carriage of such liquors, when such liquors are listed as sea stores or
cargo destined for a port foreign to the United States, its territories or
possessions on board Panaman vessels voyaging to or from ports of the
United States, or its territories or possessions or passing through the
territorial waters thereof, and such carriage shall be as now provided by law
with respect to the transit of such liquors through the Panama Canal,
provided that such liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the
vessel on which they are carried remains within said territorial waters and
that no part of such liquors shall at any time or place be unladen within the
United States, its territories or possessions.

ARTICLE IV
Any claim by a Panaman vessel for compensation on the grounds that it has
suffered loss or injury through the improper or unreasonable exercise of the
rights conferred by Article II of this Treaty or on the ground that it has not
been given the benefit of Article III shall be referred for the joint
consideration of two persons, one of whom shall be nominated by each of
the High Contracting Parties.

Effect shall be given to the recommendations contained in any such joint
report. If no joint report can be agreed upon, the claim shall be referred to
the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague described in the
Convention for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes, concluded
at The Hague, October 18, 1907. The Arbitral Tribunal shall be constituted
in accordance with Article 87 (Chapter IV) and with Article 59 (Chapter III)
of the said Convention. The proceedings shall be regulated by so much of
Chapter IV of the said Convention and of Chapter III thereof (special regard
Tribunal may consider to be applicable and to be consistent with the
provisions of this agreement. All sums of money which may be awarded by
the Tribunal on account of any claim shall be paid within eighteen months
after the date of the final award without interest and without deduction, save
as hereafter specified. Each Government shall bear its own expenses. The
expenses of the Tribunal shall be defrayed by a ratable deduction of the
amount of the sums awarded by it, at a rate of five per cent. on such sums,
or at such lower rate as may be agreed upon between the two Governments;
the deficiency, if any, shall be defrayed in equal moieties by the two
Governments.

ARTICLE V
This Treaty shall be subject to ratification and shall remain in force for a
period of one year from the date of the exchange of ratifications.
Three months before the expiration of the said period of one year, either of
the High Contracting Parties may give notice of its desire to propose
modifications in the terms of the Treaty.

If such modifications have not been agreed upon before the expiration of
the term of one year mentioned above, the Treaty shall lapse.

If no notice is given on either side of the desire to propose modifications,
the Treaty shall remain in force for another year, and so on automatically,
but subject always in respect of each such period of a year to the right on
either side to propose as provided above three months before its expiration
modifications in the Treaty, and to the provision that if such modifications
are not agreed upon before the close of the period of one year, the Treaty
shall lapse.

ARTICLE VI
In the event that either of the High Contracting Parties shall be prevented
either by judicial decision or legislative action from giving full effect to the
provisions of the present Treaty the said Treaty shall automatically lapse,
and, on such lapse or whenever this Treaty shall cease to be in force, each
High Contracting Party shall enjoy all the rights which it would have
possessed had this Treaty not been concluded.

The present Convention shall be duly ratified by the President of the United
States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof
and by the President of Panama in accordance with the requirements of the
Panaman Constitution; and the ratifications shall be exchanged at
Washington as soon as possible.

In witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present
Convention in duplicate and have thereunto affixed their seals.
Done at the city of Washington, this sixth day of June in the year of our
Lord one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four.

[SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES
[SEAL] R. J. ALFARO

[Document 125]
The Secretary of State to the Panaman Minister (Alfaro)
WASHINGTON, June 6, 1924.

SIR: I have the honor to confirm to you the understanding developed in the
conversations that took place during the negotiation of the treaty signed by
us today to aid in the prevention of the smuggling of intoxicating liquors
into the United States, that the signing of this treaty will in no wise affect
the inclusion in the treaty now under negotiation to take the place of the
Taft Agreement of an article in the terms of Exhibit 8 of the American
Commissioners reading as follows:
It is agreed that no penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the
United States shall be applicable or attach to alcoholic liquors or
to vehicles or persons by reason of the carriage of such liquors
when they are transported under seal and under certificate by
Panaman authority from the terminal ports of the Canal to the
cities of Panama and Colon and between those cities and any
other point of the Republic and between any two points of the
territory of the Republic when in either case the direct or natural
means of communication is through Canal Zone territory and
provided that such liquors remain under said seal and certificate
while they are passing through Canal Zone territory.
Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 126]
The Panaman Minister (Alfaro) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, July 7, 1924.

No. D. 360
MR. SECRETARY: I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that my Government
informs me that it has received a copy of the treaty signed by Your
Excellency and by me to prevent the smuggling of alcoholic beverages in
the United States of America. I have also received the note sent by Your
Excellency to this Legation about the explanation offered by Your
Excellency that the treaty does not in any way interfere with the insertion of
the clause already agreed on in the new treaty to take the place of the Taft
Agreement concerning the enforcement of the Volstead law in the Canal
Zone. My Government also informs me that as soon as the National
Assembly meets again the treaty will be referred to it for its approval.
I avail myself [etc.]

R. J. ALFARO

[Document 127]
Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with
the French Ambassador (Jusserand), June 21, 1924
June 21, 1924
[Extract]
The Ambassador submitted a draft of a treaty to prevent the smuggling of
intoxicating liquors. He said that the French Government preferred Article I
as it had appeared in the treaties with Norway, Sweden and Italy. The
Secretary said that that was satisfactory. The Ambassador said that his
Government proposed a modification in order to make more efficacious the
provision for an agreement under Article IV, that is, it was proposed to
insert a line to the effect that if the two persons selected to make the inquiry
failed to agree there should be one other step before it went to the
Permanent Court at the Hague, that is, that the two Governments should
choose a third arbitrator and should go to the Hague if they were unable to
agree upon a choice. The Secretary said that he would give the matter
consideration.

[Document 128]
Convention between the United States of America and France,
Signed at Washington, June 30, 192466
The President of the United States of America and the President of the
French Republic being desirous of avoiding any difficulties which might
arise between them in connection with the laws in force in the United States
on the subject of alcoholic beverages have decided to conclude a
Convention for that purpose, and have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries:
The President of the United States of America: Mr. Charles Evans
Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States; and
The President of the French Republic: Mr. J. J. Jusserand,
Ambassador of the French Republic to the United States;
Who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form,
have agreed as follows: ARTICLE I
The High Contracting Parties respectively retain their rights and claims,
without prejudice by reason of this agreement, with respect to the extent of
their territorial jurisdiction.

ARTICLE II
(1) The President of the French Republic agrees that France will
raise no objection to the boarding of private vessels under the
French flag outside the limits of territorial waters by the
authorities of the United States, its territories or possessions in
order that enquiries may be addressed to those on board and an
examination be made of the ship’s papers for the purpose of
ascertaining whether the vessel or those on board are endeavoring

to import or have imported alcoholic beverages into the United
States, its territories or possessions in violation of the laws there
in force. When such enquiries and examination show a reasonable
ground for suspicion, a search of the vessel may be effected.
(2) If there is reasonable cause for belief that the vessel has
committed or is committing or attempting to commit an offense
against the laws of the United States, its territories or possessions
prohibiting the importation of alcoholic beverages, the vessel may
be seized and taken into a port of the United States, its territories
or possessions for adjudication in accordance with such laws.
(3) The rights conferred by this article shall not be exercised at a
greater distance from the coast of the United States its territories
or possessions than can be traversed in one hour by the vessel
suspected of endeavoring to commit the offense. In cases,
however, in which the liquor is intended to be conveyed to the
United States its territories or possessions by a vessel other than
the one boarded and searched, it shall be the speed of such other
vessel and not the speed of the vessel boarded, which shall
determine the distance from the coast at which the right under this
article can be exercised.

ARTICLE III
No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be
applicable or attach to alcoholic liquors or to vessels or persons by reason
of the carriage of such liquors, when such liquors are listed as sea stores or
cargo destined for a port foreign to the United States, its territories or
possessions on board French vessels voyaging to or from ports of the
United States, or its territories or possessions or passing through the
territorial waters thereof, and such carriage shall be as now provided by law
with respect to the transit of such liquors through the Panama Canal,
provided that such liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the
vessel on which they are carried remains within said territorial waters and
that no part of such liquors shall at any time or place be unladen within the
United States, its territories or possessions.

ARTICLE IV
Any claim by a French vessel for compensation on the grounds that it has
suffered loss or injury through the improper or unreasonable exercise of the
rights conferred by Article II of this Treaty or on the ground that it has not
been given the benefit of Article III shall be referred for the joint
consideration of two persons, one of whom shall be nominated by each of
the High Contracting Parties.

Effect shall be given to the recommendations contained in any such joint
report. If no joint report can be agreed upon, the claim shall be referred to
an umpire selected by the two Governments; should they fail to agree on the
choice of that umpire, it shall be referred to the Permanent Court of
Arbitration at The Hague described in the Convention for the Pacific
Settlement of International Disputes, concluded at The Hague, October 18,
1907. The Arbitral Tribunal shall be constituted in accordance with Article
ARTICLE V
This Treaty shall be subject to ratification and shall remain in force for a
period of one year from the date of the exchange of ratifications.

Three months before the expiration of the said period of one year, either of
the High Contracting Parties may give notice of its desire to propose
modifications in the terms of the Treaty.

If such modifications have not been agreed upon before the expiration of
the term of one year mentioned above, the Treaty shall lapse.

If no notice is given on either side of the desire to propose modifications,
the Treaty shall remain in force for another year, and so on automatically,
but subject always in respect of each such period of a year to the right on
either side to propose as provided above three months before its expiration
modifications in the Treaty, and to the provision that if such modifications
are not agreed upon before the close of the period of one year, the Treaty
shall lapse.

ARTICLE VI
In the event that either of the High Contracting Parties shall be prevented
either by judicial decision or legislative action from giving full effect to the
provisions of the present Treaty the said Treaty shall automatically lapse,
and, on such lapse or whenever this Treaty shall cease to be in force, each
High Contracting Party shall enjoy all the rights which it would have
possessed had this Treaty not been concluded.

The present Convention shall be duly ratified by the President of the United
States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof,
and by the President of the French Republic in accordance with the
constitutional laws of France; and the ratifications shall be exchanged at
Washington as soon as possible.

In witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present
Convention in duplicate in the English and French languages and have
thereunto affixed their seals.

Done at the city of Washington this thirtieth day of June, one thousand nine
hundred and twenty-four.

[SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES
[SEAL] JUSSERAND

[Document 129]
The Netherlands Minister (De Graeff) to the Secretary of State
No. 1595
The Minister of The Netherlands presents his compliments to the
Honorable, the Secretary of State and acting upon instructions received
from the Minister for Foreign Affairs in The Hague, has the honor to inform
him, that the Royal Government having taken cognizance of the draft of a
convention to regulate the traffic of alcoholic beverages, proposed to Her by
the United States Government, suggests the following modifications in the
text of that document.
1. The Royal Government proposes to insert in the first paragraph of the
Article 2 the words: “hovering off the coasts of the United States” after the
word: “flag”, so as to read this paragraph as it was originally drawn up in
the draft treaty submitted to the Royal Government by the American
Minister at The Hague in November 1923. By the insertion of these words
the right of boarding, etc. will be limited to those cases whereto the treaty in
fact pertains and will not be extended to regular mail steamers in normal
course, which if necessary can be examined after their arrival within
American territorial waters.
2. The wording of the third paragraph of the Article 2 seeming complicated
and apt to give rise to controversies the Royal Government recommends the
substitution in the paragraph’s first sentence of the words: “at a distance
coast of the United States, its territories or possessions” for the words: “at a
greater distance from the coast of the United States, its territories or
possessions than can be traversed in an hour by the vessel suspected of
endeavoring to commit the offense”, and the striking out of the paragraph’s
second sentence.

In case the United States Government should not be able to agree with this
modification, it seems at any rate desirable to add a clause to this article,
stipulating that the rights conferred by it can never he exercised at a
distance greater than 12 geographical miles from the coast of the United
States, its territories or possessions.
3. It seems further desirable to make an exception on the stipulation in
Article 3 prohibiting the unloading of liquor within the United States, in so
far that unloading for transhipment in another Netherland vessel may be
possible. The addition to the end of the article 3 of the words: “unloading
for transhipment in another Netherland vessel is allowed” is therefore
proposed.

It be moreover well understood that by “seastores” not only the liquor
destined for the use of the crew and the passengers is meant but also the
provisions for medical purposes.
4. The Royal Government agrees with the provisions of the first part of the
Article 4, ruling that claims for compensation will be referred to the joint
consideration of two persons nominated for the purpose and that in case no
joint report can be agreed upon, these claims shall be submitted to the
Permanent Court of Arbitration. The arrangement however prescribed in the
second part of this article seems hardly to be acceptable. The latter part of
this article is evidently taken from the “special agreement for the submitting
to arbitration of pecuniary claims outstanding between Great Britain and the
Union and the United Kingdom, it is a matter of course that the claims
arising eventually from any new agreement concluded between these two
Powers be submitted to the same special procedure. As, however, no such a
special agreement exists between the United States and The Netherlands it
will be difficult to the Royal Government to accept the special arrangement,
mentioned in the second part of the Article 4, the more so as this
arrangement greatly differs from the way generally adopted for settling
claims by arbitration and as it does not harmonize with the system adopted
in other treaties concluded by the Netherlands. The Royal Government
suggests therefore to replace the last part of this article beginning with the
words: “All sums of money etc. … [”] by the sentence: “Each Government

shall bear its own expenses and half of the expenses of the tribunal”. So the
stipulation shall be in harmony with the tenor of the article 57 of the
declared applicable by the Arbitration Convention, concluded between the
United States and The Netherlands. It does further seem unnecessary to
exclude the applicability of the articles 53 and 54 of the Convention of
1907. In case the High Contracting Parties might not succeed in agreeing
upon a compromise, it is not clear why a solution should not be found in the
way prescribed by the aforesaid articles.
5. To the opinion of the Royal Government the meaning of the second and
subsequent paragraphs of the Article 5 does not seem very clear. According
to the letter of these paragraphs a simple denunciation of the convention by
one party is not allowed; in case such party wishes to terminate the
convention the only way for her is to propose a modification unacceptable
for the other party. On the other side each proposed but not accepted
modification automatically does terminate the whole convention even in
case such modification may not be of such a nature that the party which
made the proposal wishes such consequence. It being obvious that this
would not be in accordance with the intentions of the United States
Government the Royal Government proposes to read these paragraphs as
follows: “If neither of the High Contracting Parties has given notice three
months before the expiration of the said period of its intention to terminate
the treaty, it shall be deemed to be renewed for a further period of a year
and so on automatically, each party being free to terminate it by giving
notice at least three months before the expiration of each period. If either of
the High Contracting Parties has given notice of its desire to terminate the
treaty it shall lapse at the end of that period”.
6. The Royal Government recommends an exchange of notes at the time of
the conclusion of this convention regarding the substitution of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration by the Permanent Court of International
Justice, in case the United States adhere to the Protocol of the latter Court.
7. The Royal Government wishes the convention to be concluded in the
English and Dutch languages.

Wasuincron , June 12, 1924,

67 . °
~~ foreign Relations 1911, p. 266.

[Document 130]
The Secretary of State to the Netherland Minister (De Graeff)
The Secretary of State presents his compliments to the Netherlands Minister
and acknowledges the receipt of his communication of June 12, 1924, in
which there are set forth certain modifications proposed by the Netherlands
Government of the draft of the convention submitted by the Government of
the United States with respect to the prevention of smuggling of
intoxicating liquors into the United States.

The Government of the United States deems it of great importance that the
treaties of the United States on this subject should not substantially differ.
Uniformity is regarded as desirable as a means of establishing one set of
regulations for the guidance of the appropriate authorities charged with the
duty of enforcement of prohibitions against smuggling, and who could not
without great confusion consider differences with respect to vessels of
different flags. Uniformity of tenor is deemed important also with respect to
other matters, such as privileges of foreign vessels in American waters, the
adjustment of differences by arbitration, and the mode of amendment or
termination of the treaty. Treaties similar to that submitted to the
Netherlands Government have been concluded with certain other
Governments; and one with Great Britain is now in force. It is, therefore,
the hope of the Secretary of State that the Netherlands Government may
understand that, while the Government of the United States has every
disposition to conclude a treaty with the Netherlands Government similar to
the British treaty and the conventions recently signed in behalf of Germany,
Sweden, Norway, Denmark, and Italy, it finds obstacles in the way of the
acceptance of a convention embracing the modifications proposed by the
Netherlands Government in its recent communication, save with respect to
the matter of languages. The Government of the United States is, of course,
happy to accede to the wish of the Netherlands Government that the treaty
be concluded in the Dutch and English languages.

WASHINGTON , June 20, 1924.

[Document 131]
The Netherland Minister (De Graeff) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, July 10, 1924.

No. 1939
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your note dated June 20,
1924 in which you state that the United States Government cannot agree
with the modifications which the Royal Government has proposed with
regard to the draft of the convention submitted by your Government with
respect to the preventing of smuggling of intoxicating liquors into the
United States.

After having taken cognizance of the contents of your note the Foreign
Minister at The Hague feels somewhat disappointed by this decision of your
Government. Jonkheer van Karnebeek is inclined to concede that for
practical reasons it is desirable to establish one set of regulations for the
guidance of the authorities charged with the duty of enforcement of
prohibitions against smuggling. He understands that for that reason
substantial differences between the treaties of the United States on this
subject with one Government and with another Government are not
acceptable to the United States Government as far as such differences
should occur in stipulations wherewith the said authorities are concerned.
The Minister, however, regrets that in your note no further explanation has
been given why also with respect to other stipulations as f. i. the adjustment
of differences by arbitration and the mode of amendment or termination of
the treaty, uniformity of tenor of the different treaties is deemed of so great
importance that the United States Government had to object also against the
1924. It seems to my Government, also after further consideration, that
strong arguments have been brought forward to support these proposals,
and that there is no sufficient reason to fear confusion if matters of this kind

are arranged between the United States and our country in a different way
as between the United States and other countries.

Furthermore, in sub 6° of the said note I suggested an exchange of notes
regarding the substitution of the Permanent Court of Arbitration by the
Permanent Court of International Justice in case the United States should
adhere to the Protocol of the latter Court. In your note no special mention
has been made of this suggestion, which seems to my Government a logical
consequence of the notes I had the pleasure to exchange with you on the
occasion of the renewal of the Arbitration treaty between the United States
and The Netherlands.

Being desirous to bring the negotiations about the treaty in question to a
conclusion, the Royal Government, although reluctantly, has decided to
abandon further discussion on the modifications proposed sub 4° and 5° of
my note of June 12, 1924, but feels obliged to emphasize once more the
great importances She attaches to the suggested exchange of notes and to
express the hope that the United States Government as yet could be found
willing to accede to this proposal. In order to make clear the intentions of
the Royal Government I take the liberty to enclose herewith a draft of the
note that eventually I could sign simultaneously with the signature of the
Convention.

In expectation of your answer, I beg to inform you that I am in possession
of a formal authorization to sign on behalf of the Royal Government a
treaty in conformity with the draft which you handed to me on March 22,
1924, provided that in the penultimate paragraph the words “in the English
and Dutch languages” are inserted between the words “in duplicate” and
“and”.

The Dutch text of the drafted convention has been mailed to me but has not
yet reached me.

Accept [etc.]

DE GRAEFF

[Document 132]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Netherland Minister (De
Graeff)
WASHINGTON, July 29, 1924.

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note dated July 10,
1924 and to express gratification that you have been authorized to sign a
convention relating to the prevention of the smuggling of intoxicating
liquors into the United States in the form of a draft submitted to your
Government, provided that it is executed in the Dutch and English
languages.

The Government of the United States will be glad to accede to your request
that notes be exchanged expressing the understanding that if the United
States adheres to the protocol establishing the Permanent Court of
International Justice, the Government of the United States will not be
averse to considering a modification of the convention to provide that
claims arising under the convention shall be referred to the Permanent
Court of International Justice instead of to the Permanent Court of
Arbitration.

Upon the receipt of the Dutch text, which you state has been mailed to you,
the Department will be prepared to proceed to the signature of the treaty.
Accept [etc.]

JOSEPH C. GREW

[Document 133]
The Netherland Minister (De Graeff) to the Acting Secretary of
State
WASHINGTON, August 6, 1924.

MY DEAR MR. GREW: In connection with the so called liquor treaty that soon will
be concluded between the United States and the Royal Government I take
liberty to ask you whether it would be possible that the provisions of that
treaty practically are put in force already from the date of signature of the
treaty. My Government is quite willing to accept the consequences of that
treaty pending the exchange of ratifications and we hope sincerely that the
American Government could do the same, so that the American authorities
from the date of signature are entitled to board and to search our ships
outside the 3-mile limit and on the other side our ships may carry alcoholic
beverages under seal within that limit.

As on account of the recess of the Senate ratification of the treaty cannot be
expected before the beginning of next year both parties for purely formal
reasons still for several months would be deprived of the benefits of the
treaty and in the opinion of my Government this would be regrettable and
useless as there is no reasonable doubt whether the treaty will have the
approval of the Senate and of our Parliament.

The question is for us of special importance as after the decision of the
Supreme Court72 our steamship companies had to abandon the carrying of
alcoholic beverages in transit to our West Indian colonies and they are
anxious to resume this profitable business as soon as possible.
I would highly appreciate if you could let me know at your earliest
convenience if the American Government could agree with this proposal
and eventually would be willing to issue instructions to the authorities
concerned so that the carrying of alcoholic beverages under seal will be
allowed to our ships from the date of signature of the treaty.

[Document 134]
The Secretary of State to the Netherland Minister (De Graeff)
WASHINGTON, August 21, 1924.

MY DEAR MR. MINISTER: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your note dated
August 6, 1924, in which you inquire whether it will be possible that the so-
called liquor treaty between the United States and the Netherlands be put in
force from the date of the signature of the treaty without awaiting its
ratification, so that the American authorities would be entitled from the date
of signature to board and search Netherlands ships outside of the three mile
limit and Netherlands ships would be entitled to carry alcoholic beverages
under seal within that limit from the same date.

By way of response I am obliged to inform you that this Government finds
itself unable to give application to the treaty prior to the exchange of
ratifications and proclamation thereof.

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 135]
Convention between the United States of America and the
Netherlands, Signed at Washington, August 21, 192473
The President of the United States of America and Her Majesty the Queen
of the Netherlands being desirous of avoiding any difficulties which might
arise between them in connection with the laws in force in the United States
on the subject of alcoholic beverages have decided to conclude a
Convention for that purpose, and have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries:
The President of the United States of America: Charles Evans
Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States; and
Her Majesty the Queen of the Netherlands: Jonkheer Dr. A. C. D.
de Graeff, Her Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary
to the United States of America;
Who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form,
have agreed as follows: ARTICLE I
The High Contracting Parties declare that it is their firm intention to uphold
the principle that 3 marine miles extending from the coastline outwards and
measured from low-water mark constitute the proper limits of territorial
waters.

ARTICLE II
(1) Her Majesty agrees that she will raise no objection to the
boarding of private vessels under the Netherlands flag outside the
limits of territorial waters by the authorities of the United States,
its territories or possessions in order that enquiries may be
addressed to those on board and an examination be made of the
ship’s papers for the purpose of ascertaining whether the vessel or
those on board are endeavoring to import or have imported

alcoholic beverages into the United States, its territories or
possessions in violation of the laws there in force. When such
enquiries and examination show a reasonable ground for
suspicion, a search of the vessel may be initiated.

(2) If there is reasonable cause for belief that the vessel has
committed or is committing or attempting to commit an offense
against the laws of the United States, its territories or possessions
prohibiting the importation of alcoholic beverages, the vessel may
be seized and taken into a port of the United States, its territories
or possessions for adjudication in accordance with such laws.
(3) The rights conferred by this article shall not be exercised at a
greater distance from the coast of the United States its territories
or possessions than can be traversed in one hour by the vessel
suspected of endeavoring to commit the offense. In cases,
however, in which the liquor is intended to be conveyed to the
United States its territories or possessions by a vessel other than
the one boarded and searched, it shall be the speed of such other
vessel and not the speed of the vessel boarded, which shall
determine the distance from the coast at which the right under this
article can be exercised.

ARTICLE III
No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be
applicable or attach to alcoholic liquors or to vessels or persons by reason
of the carriage of such liquors, when such liquors are listed as sea stores or
cargo destined for a port foreign to the United States, its territories or
possessions on board Netherlands vessels voyaging to or from ports of the
United States, or its territories or possessions or passing through the
territorial waters thereof, and such carriage shall be as now provided by law
with respect to the transit of such liquors through the Panama Canal,
provided that such liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the
vessel on which they are carried remains within said territorial waters and
that no part of such liquors shall at any time or place be unladen within the
United States, its territories or possessions.

ARTICLE IV
Any claim by a Netherlands vessel for compensation on the grounds that it
has suffered loss or injury through the improper or unreasonable exercise of
the rights conferred by Article II of this Treaty or on the ground that it has
not been given the benefit of Article III shall be referred for the joint
consideration of two persons, one of whom shall be nominated by each of
the High Contracting Parties.

Effect shall be given to the recommendations contained in any such joint
report. If no joint report can be agreed upon, the claim shall be referred to
the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague described in the
Convention for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes, concluded
at The Hague, October 18, 1907. The arbitral tribunal shall be constituted in
accordance with Article 87 (Chapter IV) and with Article 59 (Chapter III) of
the said Convention. The proceedings shall be regulated by so much of
Chapter IV of the said Convention and of Chapter III thereof (special regard
tribunal may consider to be applicable and to be consistent with the
provisions of this agreement. All sums of money which may be awarded by
the Tribunal on account of any claim shall be paid within eighteen months
after the date of the final award without interest and without deduction, save
as hereafter specified. Each Government shall bear its own expenses. The
expenses of the Tribunal shall be defrayed by a ratable deduction of the
amount of the sums awarded by it, at a rate of five per cent on such sums, or
at such lower rate as may be agreed upon between the two Governments;
the deficiency, if any, shall be defrayed in equal moieties by the two
Governments.

ARTICLE V
This Treaty shall be subject to ratification and shall remain in force for a
period of one year from the date of the exchange of ratifications.
Three months before the expiration of the said period of one year, either of
the High Contracting Parties may give notice of its desire to propose
modifications in the terms of the Treaty.

If such modifications have not been agreed upon before the expiration of
the term of one year mentioned above, the Treaty shall lapse.

If no notice is given on either side of the desire to propose modifications,
the Treaty shall remain in force for another year, and so on automatically,
but subject always in respect of each such period of a year to the right on
either side to propose as provided above, three months before its expiration,
modifications in the Treaty, and to the provision that if such modifications
are not agreed upon before the close of the period of one year, the Treaty
shall lapse.

ARTICLE VI
In the event that either of the High Contracting Parties shall be prevented
either by judicial decision or legislative action from giving full effect to the
provisions of the present Treaty the said Treaty shall automatically lapse,
and, on such lapse or whenever this Treaty shall cease to be in force, each
High Contracting Party shall enjoy all the rights which it would have
possessed had this Treaty not been concluded.

The present Convention shall be duly ratified by the President of the United
States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof,
and by Her Majesty the Queen of the Netherlands; and the ratifications shall
be exchanged at Washington as soon as possible.

In witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present
Convention in duplicate in the English and Dutch languages and have
thereunto affixed their seals.

Done at the city of Washington this twenty-first day of August, in the year
of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four.

CHARLES EVANS HUGHES [SEAL]
DE GRAEFF [SEAL]

[Document 136]
The Netherland Minister (De Graeff) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, August 21, 1924.

No. 2330
SIR: In connection with the signing today of a convention pertaining to avoid
difficulties which might arise between our two Governments in connection
with the laws in force in the United States on the subject of alcoholic
beverages and in pursuance of our previous correspondence on the subject,
I have the honor to inform you that the Royal Government understands that
in the event of the adhesion by the United States to the Protocol of
December 16, 1920 under which the Permanent Court of International
Justice has been created at The Hague, the Government of the United
States will not be averse to considering a modification of the said
Convention, or the making of a separate agreement, providing that claims as
mentioned in Article IV of that Convention, which cannot be settled in the
way as indicated in the first paragraph of that article, shall be referred to the
Permanent Court of International Justice instead of the Permanent Court of
Arbitration.

I shall be glad to have you confirm this understanding on behalf of your
Government.

Accept [etc.]

DE GRAEFF

[Document 137]
The Secretary of State to the Netherlands Minister (De Graeff)
WASHINGTON, August 21, 1924.

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of today’s
date, in which you were so good as to inform me, in connection with the
signing this day of the Convention between the United States and the
Netherlands to aid in the prevention of the smuggling of intoxicating liquors
into the United States, that the Government of the Netherlands understands
that in the event of the adhesion by the Government of the United States to
the Protocol of December 16, 1920, under which the Permanent Court of
International Justice has been created at The Hague, the Government of the
United States will not be averse to considering a modification of the said
Convention, or the making of a separate Agreement, providing that claims
mentioned in Article IV of that Convention which can not be settled in the
way indicated in the first paragraph of that Article, shall be referred to the
Permanent Court of International Justice instead of to the Permanent Court
of Arbitration.

Complying with your request for confirmation of this understanding, I have
the honor to state that the Netherlands Government’s understanding of the
attitude of the Government of the United States in this respect is correct,
and that in the event that the Senate gives its assent to the proposal made by
the President on February 24, 1923, that it consent under certain stated
conditions to the adhesion by the United States to the Protocol of December
16, 1920, under which the Permanent Court of International Justice has
been created at The Hague, the Government of the United States will not be
averse to considering a modification of the Convention this day signed, or
the making of a separate Agreement, providing for the reference of claims
mentioned in Article IV of the Convention which can not be settled in the
way indicated in the first paragraph of that Article, to the Permanent Court
of International Justice instead of to the Permanent Court of Arbitration.

Accept [etc. ]

Cartes E. Hucues

[Document 138]
The Salvadoran Chargé (Castro) to the Secretary of State
[Translation ]
WASHINGTON, January 4, 1924.

DE–2
MR. SECRETARY: I learn through the press that the Department of Labor has sent
to the Committees on Immigration of the Senate and House of
Representatives a bill relative to immigration which provides for the
extension of the provisions concerning the quota of immigration to the
American countries.

I regret that it becomes my duty to say to Your Excellency that if a measure
like that contemplated were adopted, it would greatly concern my
Government as it appears to be inconsistent with the special policy followed
by the Government of the United States towards the other republics of

[Document 139]
The Cuban Ambassador (Torriente) to the Secretary of State
[Translation ]
WASHINGTON, January 14, 1924.

MOST EXCELLENT SIR: My Government having heard of the amendment which the
Honorable the Secretary of Labor, Mr. Davis, has proposed to make in the
immigration law to the effect of setting a quota of admission into this
country for Cuban immigrants, I have the honor, in compliance with
instructions received, to apply to Your Excellency and represent that the
institution of such restrictions with regard to Cuba might affect the
commercial relations of the two countries and would greatly hamper the
coming to the United States of thousands of Cuban citizens who are not
immigrants, without any advantage at all in the way proposed by the
Department of Labor inasmuch as very few Cubans do emigrate to this
country.

In support of this statement I beg leave to call the attention of Your
Excellency’s Government to the fact that in Cuba letters of citizenship are
not issued to any but the foreigners who become naturalized in accordance
with the laws and must add that the cases of fraud that have been brought
before the courts have given rise to sentences in some cases and will surely
lead to the same result in others.

I avail myself [etc.]

COSME DE LA TORRIENTE
press, Jan. 2, 1924; it advocated application of the quota arrangement to
Canada, Mexico, and South and Central America.

[Document 140]
The Rumanian Chargé (Nano) to the Secretary of State
The Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of Roumania presents his compliments to
the Secretary of State and, acting under instructions from his Government,
has the honour to inform him that the bill known as the “Johnson Bill”, now
pending in Congress, is viewed with much concern by the Government of
Roumania. While conceding absolutely the undoubted right of the United
States of America to limit or even to entirely suppress immigration, the
Roumanian Government cannot but be painfully surprised when it
contemplates the possibility of a bill becoming law, the undisguised purpose
of which is not only the reduction in the total number of admissible
immigrants, but more particularly the practical elimination of immigration
from southern and southeastern Europe, including Roumania. Under the
terms of the bill now before Congress, which adopts as a basis for the quota
the census of 1890, the quota of certain countries of northern and
northeastern Europe would be but slightly modified, whereas the
Roumanian quota would be reduced to a wholly negligible figure, probably
around 10 to 15 percent of the present one. No attempt is even made to
justify the selection of the census of 1890 as a basis for the immigration
quota.

The Roumanian Government feels compelled to draw the attention of the
Secretary of State to the painful impression and the disappointment which
would be caused in Roumania should the bill above referred to become law
in its present form, the more so as the United States of America have always
expressed their determined opposition and aversion to discriminatory
policies. Further, it should be considered that the adoption of the census of
1890 would not only deeply wound the pride of the Roumanian people but
also strongly affect their material interests, inasmuch as Roumanian
immigrants by their savings increase the amount of stable currencies
available for commercial and financial purposes in Roumania. This, in turn,
would not fail to have a detrimental effect on the chances of Roumania to
speedily attain its goal, economic recuperation, an aim which cannot be

indifferent to any Government interested in assisting the world to recover
from the consequences of the world war.

[ WASHINGTON ,] February 2, 1924.

[Document 141]
The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the Committee on
Immigration and Naturalization of the House of Representatives
(Johnson)
WASHINGTON, February 8, 1924.

MY DEAR MR. JOHNSON: I have received your letter of January 2879 enclosing
copies of “Committee Print No. 1, Selective Immigration Act,” requesting
any recommendations the Department of State may desire to submit with
respect to this measure. I have also received a copy of H. R. 6540
introduced by you on February 1, 1924 and my comments will be made
with respect to it.

I fully appreciate the importance of removing present hardships by the issue
of immigration certificates to those who would normally come under
immigration laws. I endorse this policy. Assuming that treaties were not
violated and immigration certificates were demanded of those who
normally would be classed as immigrants, I should not object to the giving
of authority to Consular Officers to issue immigration certificates, provided,
of course, that Consular Offices were properly equipped with the requisite
staff to carry out the provisions of the law. It seems to me that the granting
of such immigration certificates might be treated as so analogous to the
granting of visas as properly to come within a broad description of consular
functions. In the absence of the violation of any treaty, I assume that the
admission of immigrants to this country could be conditioned upon their
receiving an immigration certificate in the manner required by our laws;
although, of course, if independent machinery through special immigration
officials were sought to be set up in foreign countries such officials would
have to be properly accredited to the foreign governments and could not
function with out the consent of the foreign State in whose territory they
would act.

It is hardly necessary for me to say that I am in favor of suitable restrictions
upon immigration. The questions which especially concern the Department
of State in relation to the international effects of the proposed measure are
these: (1) the question of treaty obligations; (2) the provision excluding
Japanese; (3) the establishment of the quotas upon the basis of the Census
of 1890.

First. Treaties.—According to the terms of the proposed measure
“immigrant” is defined (Sec. 3) as “any alien departing from any place
outside the United States destined for the United States, except (1) a
government official, his family, attendants, servants, and employees, (2) an
alien visiting the United States as a tourist or temporarily for business or
pleasure, (3) an alien in continuous transit through the United States, (4) an
alien lawfully admitted to the United States who later goes in transit from
one part of the United States to another through foreign contiguous
territory, and (5) a bona fide alien seaman serving as such on a vessel
arriving at a port of the United States and seeking to enter temporarily the
United States solely in the pursuit of his calling as a seaman.”
The result is that under this definition of “immigrant” all aliens are subject
to the restrictions of the proposed measure unless they fall within the stated
exceptions. The question at once arises whether there would be aliens, not
falling within these exceptions who would be entitled to be admitted under
our treaties.

Article I of the Treaty between the United States and Japan, concluded in
1911, provides:
“The citizens or subjects of each of the High Contracting Parties
shall have liberty to enter, travel and reside in the territories of the
other to carry on trade, wholesale and retail, to own or lease and
occupy houses, manufactories, warehouses and shops, to employ
agents of their choice, to lease land for residential and
commercial purposes, and generally to do anything incident to or
necessary for trade upon the same terms as native citizens or
subjects, submitting themselves to the laws and regulations there
established.”

There appears to be no such exception in the proposed measure as that
contained in subdivision (5) of paragraph (a) of Section 2 of the quota act
of 1921, and hence the proposed restrictions would apply to Japan not
simply in relation to laborers or other classes falling outside of our treaty
but with respect to those who come directly within the provisions of our
treaty as above set forth.

Reference may also be made to our treaties with Great Britain of 1815, with
of 1902. (See Malloy’s Treaties, Conventions, etc.) In view of the
provisions of Section 4 (c) I have omitted reference to clauses, similar to
that above quoted, in our treaties with Latin American countries.
In my opinion the restrictions of the proposed measure, in view of their
application under the definition of “immigrant”, are in conflict with treaty
provisions. The exception in subdivision (2) of Section 3 with respect to
aliens visiting the United States “temporarily for business or pleasure”
would not meet the treaty requirements to which I have referred, for this
phrase would seem to indicate a stay more temporary than that permitted by
these provisions and the right established by a treaty can not be cut down
without a violation of the treaty so long as it is maintained in force.
Accordingly, I take the liberty of suggesting that there be included in
Section 3 of the proposed measure an additional exception to read as
follows:
“an alien entitled to enter the United States under the provisions
of a treaty.”
I should add that the persons entitled to enter and reside here under the
terms of our treaties for the purposes of trade and commerce are not those
against whom immigration restrictions are deemed to be necessary.
Second.—Section 12 (b) provides as follows:
“No alien ineligible to citizenship shall be admitted to the United
States unless such alien (1) is admissible as a non-quota

immigrant under the provisions of sub-divisions (b), (d) or (g) of
age of an immigrant admissible under such sub-division (d), and
is accompanying or following to join him, or (3) is not an
immigrant as defined in section 3.”
In determining the effect of this provision it should be noted that sub-
division (b) of Section 4 relates to “an immigrant previously lawfully
admitted to the United States, who is returning from a temporary visit
abroad.” Sub-division (d) of the same section relates to immigrants who
seek to enter the United States solely to carry on “the vocation of minister
of any religious denomination, or professor of a college, academy,
seminary, or university.” And sub-division (g) of the same section relates to
immigrants who are bona fide students seeking to enter the United States
for the purpose of study at an accredited college, academy, seminary, or
university approved by the Secretary of Labor.

It is apparent that Section 12, sub-division (b) taken in connection with
Sections 3 and 4 of the proposed measure, operates to exclude Japanese.
This is inconsistent with the provision of the Treaty of 1911 above-
mentioned, and, with respect to those denned as immigrants who do not
come within the treaty, it establishes a statutory exclusion.
So far as the latter class is concerned, the question presented is one of
policy. There can be no question that such a statutory exclusion will be
deeply resented by the Japanese people. It would be idle to insist that the
provision is not aimed at the Japanese, for the proposed measure (Sec. 25)
continues in force the existing legislation regulating Chinese immigration
and the Barred Zone provisions of our immigration laws which prohibit
immigration from certain other portions of Asia. The practical effect of
Section 12 (b) is to single out Japanese immigrants for exclusion. The
Japanese are a sensitive people and unquestionably would regard such a
legislative enactment as fixing a stigma upon them. I regret to be compelled
to say that I believe such legislative action would largely undo the work of
the Washington Conference on Limitation of Armament, which so greatly
improved our relations with Japan. The manifestation of American interest

and generosity in providing relief to the sufferers from the recent
earthquake disaster in Japan would not avail to diminish the resentment
which would follow the enactment of such a measure, as this enactment
would be regarded as an insult not to be palliated by any act of charity. It is
useless to argue whether or not such a feeling would be justified; it is quite
sufficient to say that it would exist. It has already been manifested in the
discussions in Japan with respect to the pendency of this measure and no
amount of argument can avail to remove it.

The question is thus presented whether it is worth while thus to affront a
friendly nation with whom we have established most cordial relations and
what gain there would be from such action. Permit me to suggest that the
legislation would seem to be quite unnecessary even for the purpose for
which it is devised. It is to be noted that if the provision of subdivision (b)
of Section 12 were eliminated, and the quota provided in Section 10 of the
proposed measure were to be applied to Japan, there would be a total of
only 246 Japanese immigrants entitled to enter under the quota as thus
determined. That is to say, this would be the number equal to two per cent,
of the number of residents in the United States as determined by the Census
of 1890 plus 200. There would remain, of course, the non-quota
immigrants, but if it could possibly be regarded that the provisions of
Section 4 would unduly enlarge the number admitted, these provisions
could be modified without involving a statutory discrimination aimed at the
Japanese. We now have an understanding with the Japanese Government
whereby Japan undertakes to prevent the immigration of laborers from
Japan to the United States except the parents, wives and children of those
already resident here. Furthermore, the Japanese Government, incidentally
to this undertaking, now regulates immigration to territory contiguous to the
United States with the object of preventing the departure from Japan of
persons who are likely to obtain surreptitious entry into this country. If the
provision of Section 12 (b) were to be deleted and the provision in regard to
certificates for immigrants to this country were to become applicable to
Japan, we should with the present understanding with the Japanese
Government be in a position to obtain active cooperation by the Japanese
authorities in the granting of passport and immigration certificates. We
could in addition be assured that the Japanese Government would give its
assistance in scrutinizing and regulating immigration from Japan to

American territory contiguous to the United States. It is believed that such
an arrangement involving a double control over the Japanese quota of less
than 250 a year would accomplish a much more effective regulation of
unassimilable and undesirable classes of Japanese immigrants than it would
be practicable for us, with our long land frontier lines on both North and
South to accomplish by attempting to establish a general bar against
Japanese subjects to the loss of cooperation with the Japanese Government
in controlling the movement of their I people to the United States and
adjacent territories.

I am unable to perceive that the exclusion provision is necessary and I must
strongly urge upon you the advisability, in the interest of our international
relations, of eliminating it. The Japanese Government has already brought
the matter to the attention of the Department of State and there is the
deepest interest in the attitude of Congress with respect to this subject.
Third.—There remains the question of the adoption of the Census of 1890
as the basis of quota restriction. This has evoked representations from
European countries, and especially from Italy, which regards the choice of
such a basis as a discrimination against her. On December 31, 1923 I
communicated to you a memorandum presented to the Department of State
by the Italian Ambassador82 and, as I have no doubt that your committee
will examine these representations attentively, I shall not attempt to add any
further recital of facts. In appropriately providing for a restriction of
immigration, the importance of which I fully recognize, I hope that it will
be possible to find some basis which will be proof against the charge of
discrimination.

In addition to the questions considered above, permit me to direct your
attention to the following: Section 4 (c) of the proposed measure does not
appear to provide for immigrants from British Honduras and British, French
and Dutch Guiana as they would seem not to be “countries of Central or
South America” within the meaning of the bill (See sec. 11 (a)). It is also
not clear from the provisions of Section 4 (c) that it would provide for Haiti,

the Dominican Republic, the British, French and Dutch islands of the West
Indies, St. Pierre and Miquelon, and Greenland.

It is also to be noted that Section 4 (c) applies only to residents of the
countries named and makes no provision for persons born in these
countries, and citizens of them, but residing abroad. In view of the fact that
under Section 11 (a), for the purposes of the Act, nationality is to be
determined by country of birth, it would appear that such persons would
still be referred to the country of birth and yet could not come in as non-
quota immigrants. This would apparently make necessary the establishing
of quotas to cover such classes, but it is not clear that this is the intention of
the measure, or, on the other hand, that there is any reason why such
persons should not be able to come in as “non-quota immigrants” as well as
those who are described in Section 4 (c). I therefore suggest that you
consider amending Section 4 (c) to read as follows:
“(c) An immigrant who was born in or has resided continuously
for at least 10 years immediately preceding the time of his
application for admission to the United States in the Dominion of
Canada, Newfoundland, the Republics of Mexico, Cuba, and
Haiti, the Dominican Republic, countries of Central America and
of South America, colonies and dependencies of European
countries in Central America, South America, the West Indies, or
other islands adjacent to the American continents, and his wife,
and his unmarried children under 18 years of age, if
accompanying or following to join him.”
I desire to invite your attention to the fact that under the provisions of
Section 6 (f) the only copy of the application for an immigration certificate
is attached to the immigration certificate, and would therefore be delivered
to the alien with the immigration certificate and surrendered to the
immigration officer at the port of arrival in the United States. This would
leave the Government without a copy of the application and without any
record of the facts upon which the immigration certificate was issued. It
would seem that difficulties might arise on account of lost certificates or
that copies of the applications might be desired for use in prosecutions
where false statements were made, or where the certificate was altered

while in the immigrant’s possession. I therefore believe that it would be
desirable to provide that a copy of the application for an immigration
certificate should be kept on file in the Consular Office.

Section 8 (e) provides that if the Commissioner General finds the fact stated
in the petition to be true and the immigrant is entitled to admission as a non-
quota immigrant, he shall, through the Secretary of State, authorize the
Consular Officer to issue an immigration certificate. I consider it important
that Consular Officers shall continue to be under the direction and control
of the Department of State and I assume that it is not the intention to divert
this control which is important in order that there may be retained for such
Officers the recognition which they should receive from the foreign
governments concerned. I suggest the advisability, in order to avoid any
possible question, of amending Section 8 (e) by striking out the words “he
shall, through the Secretary of State, authorize the Consular Officer with
whom the application for the immigration certificate has been filed to issue
the immigration certificate” and by inserting in lieu thereof the following:
“he shall inform the Secretary of State of his decision and the
Secretary of State shall then authorize the Consular Officer with
whom the application for the immigration certificate has been
filed to issue the immigration certificate.”
With regard to Section 11 (a), I may state that some question has arisen
under the present Quota Act whether the words “treating as separate
countries the colonies or dependencies for which separate enumeration was
made in the United States census” were sufficient to authorize the granting
of a separate quota to Australia, which is a self-governing dominion under
the British Empire. In order that this doubt may be removed, I suggest that
in line 17, page 14, after the word “countries”, the words “the self-
governing dominions,” be inserted.

With respect to Section 11 (a) (1) which provides that the nationality of a
minor child accompanied by its alien parent not born in the United States
shall be determined by the country of birth of such parent, if such parent is
entitled to an immigration certificate, I may observe that in case the minor
child is accompanied by both parents it is not clear whether the nationality

of the minor child shall be determined by the place of birth of the father or
of the mother. I suggest that the following provision be added:
“If the minor child is accompanied by both parents its nationality
shall be determined by the country of birth of the father.”
With respect to Section 11 (a) (2), I desire to invite attention to the fact that
apparently this Section creates a class of immigration certificates that are
not to be counted as quota certificates and are also not issued as non-quota
certificates. The issuance of such certificates may cause difficulties in the
regulation of the number of immigration certificates to be issued by
Consular Officers. I believe that a more definite provision on this subject
should be included in the Act.

Section 11 (b) incorporates provisions contained in the present Quota Act.
In administering these provisions certain difficulties have arisen which, I
believe, it would be advisable to remedy in the proposed legislation, as
follows: Section 11 (b) (1) refers to changes in political boundaries in
foreign countries occurring subsequent to 1890 and resulting in the creation
of new countries, the governments of which are recognized by the United
States. This provision does not deal with the establishment of a new self-
governing dominion within the British Empire since 1890. Under the
provisions of the present law consideration was given to the matter of
establishing a separate quota for the Irish Free State which is a new self-
governing dominion. It appeared, however, that such a separate quota was
not warranted by the terms of the law. For administrative reasons it would
be helpful if separate quotas could be given the self-governing dominions.
Reference is made in this connection to the fact that the census of 1890
does not contain a separate enumeration for New Zealand or the Union of
South Africa. It is therefore believed that the following amendment should
be added after the word “States” in line 18, page 15, the words “or in the
establishment of self-governing dominions”.

I may also observe that questions have arisen under the provisions of the
present law, which are incorporated in Section 11 (b) (2) concerning the
establishment of quotas covering the territories which had been transferred
by the government exercising sovereignty therein in 1910 but where formal
recognition of a new sovereign had not been extended by the Government

of the United States. Cases of this character have arisen with respect to
Palestine, Syria, Fiume, and other territories involved in settlements arising
out of the World War. I believe that this situation could be dealt with by
follows:
“in the surrender of territory by one country but the transfer of
which to another country has not been recognized by the United
States.”
Your attention is also invited to the fact that several small countries
recognized by the United States in 1890 were not clearly given a separate
enumeration in the census of 1890. A similar situation arose under the
present Act with respect to the granting of a separate quota to San Marino
which had been recognized by the United States prior to 1910. With a view
to making it proper for the United States to provide for a separate quota for
such countries, I suggest that the following sentence be added after the
word “boundary” in line 25, page 15, of the proposed measure:
“Such officials jointly are authorized to prepare a separate
statement for countries recognized by the United States before
1890, but to which a separate enumeration was not given in the
census of 1890.”
With respect to Section 15 (b), it is observed that provision is made for the
clearance of a vessel involved upon the deposit of an amount sufficient to
cover such sums. The present law contains a similar provision, and it was
construed that the foreign ship owner was obliged to deposit money and
that a bond with sufficient surety could not be accepted. Such a provision, it
seems, would work an undue hardship in cases where a serious question of
fact was involved and the sum of money required to be deposited was very
large. I therefore suggest that it would be desirable to provide that the
Secretary of Labor may, in his discretion, accept a bond with sufficient
sureties thereon to guarantee the payment of such sums.

The same observations apply to Section 19 (f).

[Document 142]
The Secretary of State to the Rumanian Chargé (Nano)
The Secretary of State presents his compliments to the Chargé d’Affaires ad
interim of Rumania and has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of his
Government he protests against certain immigration legislation now
pending in the Congress of the United States.

In reply the Secretary of State begs to say that copies of the note of the
Chargé d’Affaires have been referred to the appropriate authorities.
WASHINGTON , February 19, 1924.

[Document 143]
The Secretary of State to the Salvador an Chargé (Castro)
WASHINGTON, February 19, 1924.

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note, dated January
4, 1924, in which you refer to reports in the press respecting proposals to
extend to the American countries the provisions establishing quotas for
immigration. You state that if a measure of this character were adopted, it
would greatly concern your Government and you express the hope that the
proposals will not be adopted insofar as they tend to restrict immigration
from Salvador.

I forwarded copies of your note to the appropriate authorities of this
Government for consideration, and I am pleased to state that I have been
informed that the Immigration Bill reported by the Committee on
Immigration and Naturalization to the House of Representatives does not
contain a provision establishing immigration quotas applicable to Salvador.
Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 144]
The Norwegian Minister (Bryn) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, February 20, 1924.

MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: The new Immigration Bill (H. R. 6540) introduced in the
definition of the term “Immigrant” and provides in Section 10 (a) for
percentage limitations on immigration to the United States.
The Treaty of Commerce and Navigation between Norway and the United
States, concluded on July 4, 1827, contains in its Article I a provision which
in the English translation reads as follows:
“The citizens and subjects of each of the two high contracting
parties may, with all security for their persons, vessels, and
cargoes, freely enter the ports, places, and rivers of the territories
of the other, wherever foreign commerce is permitted. They shall
be at liberty to sojourn and reside in all parts whatsoever of said
territories; to rent and occupy houses and warehouses for their
commerce; and they shall enjoy, generally, the most entire
security and protection in their mercantile transactions, on
condition of their submitting to the laws and ordinances of the
respective countries.”
On this occasion I have the honor, acting under instructions from my
Government, to apply for Your Excellency’s good offices in order that such
steps as Your Excellency deem appropriate, may be taken with a view to
secure that the right which Norwegian subjects and citizens under the terms
of the treaty have to enter, sojourn and reside in the United States, may not
be curtailed or made illusory by the law.

Hoping that Your Excellency will deem it expedient to intervene so that a
possible conflict between the law and the treaty be avoided, I avail myself

[Document 145]
The Secretary of State to the Cuban Ambassador (Torriente)
WASHINGTON, February 21, 1924.

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to refer to your note, dated January 14, 1924,
concerning a proposed amendment to the immigration law by which a quota
for Cuba would be established, and to state that I have received a
communication from the Chairman of the Committee on Immigration and
Naturalization of the House of Representatives, from which it appears that
the Immigration Bill that has been reported to the House of Representatives
by that Committee does not contain such a provision.
Accepted [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 146]
The Secretary of State to the Norwegian Minister (Bryn)
WASHINGTON, March 19, 1924.

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note dated February
20, 1924, with respect to certain provisions of the new immigration bill (H.
You may be assured that all questions relating to the appropriate recognition
of the treaty provisions to which you refer are having proper consideration.
Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 147]
The Italian Embassy to the Department of State
PRO-MEMORIA
Congress is now taking into consideration two important bills on restrictive
and selective immigration, one presented by Senator D. A. Reed and the
other by representative Albert Johnson; more so a number of other bills and
amendments have been presented and there is every indication that
Congress will soon take some final decision with regard to the immigration
policy of the United States.

The Italian Government has always manifested by words and by action, its
sincere desire of cooperating in a friendly way with the Government of the
United States in all matters concerning emigration; in venturing therefore to
express its point of view on some of the contemplated provisions of law, the
Italian Government is animated solely by the desire of avoiding any
possible motives of discussion and any eventual difficulties in the practical
application of the United States Immigration laws.

The principal provisions to be considered are:
expressed to the Secretary of State83 his government’s point of view with
regard to the question of basing the quota law on the 1890 census; there is
no need therefore to go further at present into this matter.
2) Some members of Congress have considered, implicitly or explicitly, the
opportunity of granting immigration certificates independently from the fact
whether passports are obligatory in the country to which the immigrants
owe allegiance.

This would practically invalidate the sovereign right of the Italian
Government to control the emigration of its citizens and interfere with the

necessary national measure to safeguard public order and with the
regulations relating to passports.

If American consular certificates should be issued before the prospective
immigrant has obtained an indispensable Italian passport this would
doubtlessly lead towards encouraging and facilitating the exit of certain
individuals to the departure of whom the Italian authorities may oppose
themselves for reasons of public order or on account of unfulfilled military
service.
3) The issuance of numbered certificates or visa certificates may be an
efficient means for maintaining the number of emigrants within the quota
limits and of reducing the number of rejections of immigrants from the
United States.

In accordance to the sovereign rights of every state to regulate the
admittance of aliens within its territory, the United States government has
doubtlessly the faculty to subordinate the admittance of an immigrant to
certain requisites and formalities. But the exertion of such right must not
come into contrast with the Italian Government’s exclusive right of
jurisdiction over its own subjects in Italy.

Therefore the American consuls in the fulfilment of their customary
functions should not broaden these out with reference to the certificates into
an extraordinary investigation that would become a jurisdictional act
exceeding the recognized consular functions.

The proper selection of immigrants as desired by the United States can only
be efficiently accomplished by a friendly cooperation between the United
States consular officers and the Italian Authorities, due regard being taken
toward the legitimate requirements and the unquestionable prerogative of
one and the other country. The Italian Commissariat of Emigration has
constantly given proof of its willingness in such direction.
4) The Johnson bill contemplates the admittance, extra quota, of children,
wives and parents of American citizens, but the Reed bill only grants them a

preference in obtaining the visa certificates. There seems to be every good
reason to believe that the free admittance into the United States should be a
privilege accruing to the family of every citizen through his constitutional
right to cohabitate with his wife and children and to be unhampered in the
enjoyment of family life.
5) The provision of laying the burden of proof on the alien in case of refusal
of admittance or of deportation from the United States, contained in both
the Reed and the Johnson bills, is in contradiction to the recognized
procedure of law the world over; in the original Reed bill N. 2576 it was
applicable to all individuals but in the amended bill the word “individual”
has been substituted by the word “alien” thereby refusing to aliens an
equitable safeguard granted to any citizen.

It should also be considered that in accordance to Section 2 (e) of the Reed
bill the visa certificate is to be surrendered by the immigrant to the
immigration officer at the port of entry so that he finds himself deprived of
the most important document with which to prove that he has been lawfully
admitted into the United States.

The Italian Government sincerely hopes that the preceding remarks may be
taken into serious consideration by the United States Government with the
aim of suggesting such forms in the drafting of the immigration law and
regulations as will harmonize the rightful interests and the friendly feelings
of their respective countries.

WASHINGTON , April 5, 1924.

[Document 148]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Denmark (Prince)
20. Army Air Service plans around the world flight of several airplanes to
commence early in spring of 1924. Itinerary includes Iceland. War
Department has detailed an officer to investigate conditions there as soon as
possible in order to secure data necessary for plan of flight.
Please inquire whether Danish Government will grant permission for this
investigation. Report by cable.

HUGHES

[Document 149]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Japan (Wilson)
WASHINGTON, July 18, 1923.

SIR: The Department is in receipt of a letter, dated July 5, 1923, from the

[Document 150]
The Minister in Denmark (Prince) to the Secretary of State
informs me that Icelandic Government has granted permission for proposed
investigation by War Department.

PRINCE

[Document 151]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Japan (Caffery)
[Paraphrase]
102. Refer to Department’s mail instruction of July 18 in regard proposed
air flight around the world.

You will advise Department by cable whether proposed flight over Japanese
territory could be arranged for under present law, and whether request
could, in your judgment, be made without antagonizing Japanese opinion,
both official and popular.

PHILLIPS

[Document 152]
The Ambassador in Italy (Child) to the Secretary of State
ROME, September 18, 1923—noon.

[Received 3: p.m.]
advises Italian Government will be glad to furnish American officer with all
information and data he may require for fulfillment of mission in
connection with preparations for round-the-world flight of Army
aeroplanes.

CHILD

[Document 153]
The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State
PARIS, September 19, 1923.

[Received October 2.]

No. 3490
SIR: With reference to the Department’s instruction of July 18, 1923, File
15, 1923, the French Foreign Office informs me that the “Central
Aeronautical Service” of the Ministry of Marine, will give our officers all
possible information and that such of this information as concerns
climatology, meteorology, tides, etc., will be given by Major Lefranc, of the
Hydrographic Service.

I have [etc.]

SHELDON WHITEHOUSE

[Document 154]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Harvey) to the Secretary of
State
Major Davidson, our air attaché here, all information desired. The Air
Ministry is expected to take the same attitude.
Canada will assist the pathfinding officers in every way. There is no
objection to their Canadian itinerary as outlined in the above named
instruction.

HARVEY
includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149].

[Document 155]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Japan (Caffery)
[Paraphrase]
p.m.

[Here follows text of telegram printed on page 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of
The Department wishes you to take the matter up immediately as the War
Department must have a reply by November 30 because of contracts for
construction work in connection with the flight.
For your discreet use you are confidentially informed that of all the
Governments from which permission for flight across territory was
requested, the Japanese Government is the only one which has not yet
replied.

HUGHES

[Document 156]
The Chargé in Japan (Caffery) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
About a week ago, having noted that no reply had ever been made to the
Embassy’s note carrying out Department’s mail instruction of July 18, I
informally requested the Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs to give me his
frank personal opinion on the probable attitude of the Japanese authorities
in connection with the proposed air flight around the world insofar as it
concerned Japan. The Vice Minister told me quite frankly, a few days later,
that the War Department did not look with favor on the particular flights
proposed, but if the American Government would not urge the Government
of Japan to grant permission for American officers to visit Japan on such an
expedition it was his personal belief that the Japanese War Department
would not raise objections to the projected flight across Japanese territory.
He inquired if the American authorities had in mind a route across Japanese
territory. After I had talked with the military attaché of this Embassy I
handed the Vice Minister the information prepared by the War Department
at Washington, showing the tentative route. He promised to expedite the
decision, and I hope that I may receive a definite answer tomorrow.
CAFFERY

[Document 157]
The Chargé in Japan (Caffery) to the Secretary of State
TOKYO, December 14, 1923.

[Received January 7, 1924.]

No. 134–E
reporting that the Japanese authorities stated that they would offer no
objection to American army aircraft flying over or landing in Japanese
territory, but imposing certain conditions; I have the honor to transmit
herewith copies of a memorandum90 on the subject handed to me by the
Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs.

[Document 158]
The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
WASHINGTON, December 19, 1923.

SIR: I beg to inform you that the War Department is contemplating a flight
around the world of five aeroplanes leaving the United States about April 1,
1924 and completing the circuit in the early autumn. It is proposed to divide
the flight into five divisions, assigning one advance officer to each division
of the route and a sixth advance officer to coordinate all the divisions by
travelling over the entire route. The Embassy at London has been instructed
to bring this project to the attention of His Majesty’s Government,90a at the
same time requesting permission for the advance officers to cross British
territory as outlined in the tentative route, requesting permission for the
flight to cross British territory, and to land at such points on British territory
as may be subsequently agreed upon. The Embassy was further directed to
request the waiver of any special restrictions in regard to aerial photography
except insofar as they related to fortifications or such other areas as might
be specified.

The following is the tentative itinerary of the flight:
Washington, D. C.

Aomori (Honshu) Japan 245
miles
Dayton, Ohio
400 miles Tokyo, Japan
miles
St. Joseph, Missouri or Fort
Cook, Nebraska
miles
Nagasaki, Japan
miles
Chemulpo (Jinsen)
miles
Cheyenne, Wyoming
miles
Tsingtau
(Shantung)
China
miles
Salt Lake City, Utah
400 miles Shanghai
(Woosung)
China
miles

Seattle, Washington
770 miles Amoy, China
miles
Prince
Rupert,
British
Columbia
650 miles Hongkong
miles
Haipong, French Indo-
China
miles
Sitka, Alaska
300 miles Tourane, French Indo-
China
miles
Cordova, Alaska
475 miles Saigon, French Indo-
China
miles
Seward, Alaska
135 miles Bangkok, Siam
miles
Chignik, Alaska
450 miles Rangoon, Burma
miles
Akutan or Dutch Harbor,
Unalaska
miles
Akyab, Burma
miles
Calcutta, India
miles
Hazan, Island of Atka
350 miles Allahabad, India
miles
Chicagoff, Island of Attu
530 miles Delhi, India
miles
Paramushiru Island (Kuriles)
878 miles Multan, India
miles
Karachi, India
miles
Bettobu, Yetorofu (Kuriles)
495 miles Charbar, Persia
miles
Akkeshie (Yezo) Japan
250 miles Bandar Abbas, Persia
miles
Bushire, Persia
400 miles Thorshavn,
Faroe
Islands
miles
Bagdad (Mesopotamia)
475 miles Baykjaviki, Iceland
miles

Aleppo, Syria
480 miles Angmagsalik,
Greenland
miles
Konia, Turkey
285 miles Avigtut, Greenland
miles
San Stefano, Turkey
300 miles Rigolet,
Labrador
(Indian Harbor)
miles
Belgrade, Yugoslavia
525 miles
Vienna, Austria
340 miles Mingan, Quebec
miles
Strassbourg, France
400 miles Quebec, Quebec
miles
Paris, France
250 miles Montreal, Quebec
miles
London, England
225 miles Keyport, New Jersey
miles
Hull, England
155 miles Washington, D. C.
miles
Kirkwall, Orkney Islands
370 miles
The Chief of the Air Service is desirous of sending Lieutenant Clayton
Bissell over the proposed route of the projected flight through British
Columbia from Victoria to Prince Rupert as soon after January 1, 1924 as
the weather will permit, the purpose of his trip being to make all necessary
arrangements in connection with the flight relative to supplies,
transportation facilities, et cetera.

I should greatly appreciate it if you would be so good as to inform me
whether or not Lieutenant Bissell’s trip would be agreeable to the Dominion
Authorities.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
WILLIAM PHILLIPS
90a Telegram no. 385, infra.

[Document 159]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Kellogg)
War Department contemplating flight around the world of five aeroplanes
leaving the United States about April 1, 1924 and completing the circuit in
the early autumn. It is proposed to divide the flight into five divisions,
assigning one advance officer to each division of the route and a sixth
advance officer to coordinate all the various divisions by travelling over the
entire route. Address Note immediately to Foreign Office:
1. Requesting permission for advance officers to cross British
territory as outlined in proposed route;
2. Requesting permission for flight to cross territory;
3. Requesting permission for flight to land at points on British
territory to be subsequently agreed upon;
4. Requesting the waiver of any special restrictions in regard to
aerial photography except as to fortifications or such other areas
as may be specified. Personnel will conform strictly to restrictions
imposed;
5. Following are pertinent portions of tentative itinerary which
would be of particular interest to British authorities: Seattle to
Prince Rupert to Sitka (Alaska); Bangkok (Siam) to Rangoon to
Akyab to Calcutta to Allahabad to Delhi to Multan to Karachi to
Charbar (Persia); Bushire (Persia) to Bagdad to Aleppo (Syria);
Paris to London to Hull to Kirkwall (Orkney Islands) to

Thorshavn (Faroe Islands); Greenland to Rigolet to Mingan, to
Quebec, to Montreal, to Keyport, New Jersey.
Tentative itinerary of entire flight is being forwarded to you by mail.
HUGHES

[Document 160]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, January 10, 1924.

No. 34
SIR: With reference to the note which you were so good as to address to me
on the 19th ultimo regarding the contemplated flight around the world of
five American aeroplanes, I have the honour to state that, according to a
communication which I have received from His Excellency the Governor-
General of Canada, the Canadian Government has no objection to the
projected visit of Lieutenant Clayton Bissell over the proposed route of this
flight through British Columbia from Victoria to Prince Rupert.
Lord Byng of Vimy has also requested me to state, for the information of
the appropriate United States authorities, that officers of the Royal
Canadian Air Force who have flown between Victoria and Prince Rupert,
and who may be able to advise and assist Lieutenant Bissell, are stationed at
the Royal Canadian Air Flight Station, Vancouver, British Columbia. Lord
Byng adds that the Officer Commanding that Station has been instructed to
render every possible assistance to Lieutenant Bissell.

I have [etc.]

(For His Majesty’s Chargé d’Affaires)
HERBERT W. BROOKS

[Document 161]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Japan (Caffery)
imposed.

As Japanese Government has of its own accord brought up desirability of
itinerary and other details being settled by Japanese military authorities and
American officer detailed for that purpose, please inform Foreign Office
that visit of advance officer was contemplated in order that details
connected with itinerary and technical requirements of flight might be
adjusted between him and Japanese officials. It would appear therefore that
there has been misapprehension on part of Japanese Government as to
object of officer’s visit.

Reference condition No. 3. In case Japan should make a specific request for
a similar flight over United States territory this Department would be glad
to recommend to the Governors of the States and to the Executive
Departments administering the territories over which the flight was
contemplated that permission to fly over and to land be granted to the
Japanese. Department has no reason to believe that permission would not be
readily accorded and all facilities extended. You will of course appreciate
that because of constitutional requirements reference to appropriate state
authorities is essential.

You may make such use of information contained in preceding paragraph as
you deem advisable.

HUGHES

[Document 162]
The Chargé in Japan (Caffery) to the Secretary of State
have no objection to visit to Tokyo of an officer to discuss details and
technical requirements of flight but as hitherto reported they do object to
pathfinding expedition described in Department’s instruction of July 18,
1923, and enclosure from War Department dated July 5, which had been
communicated to Foreign Office on August 14th.

CAFFERY

[Document 163]
The Chargé in Japan (Caffery) to the Secretary of State
[Received 9: p.m.]
evening that the Japanese authorities consent to landing at Bettobu and will
be prepared to receive advance officer here in Tokyo to discuss details.
Navy Department is disposed to send war vessel to Kurile Islands for
“protection purposes” during flight. Naval hydrographic bureau offers
suggestion that flight should take place between latter part of April and
middle of May on account of floating ice before that period and dense fogs
thereafter.

CAFFERY

[Document 164]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Japan (Caffery)
Express gratification to appropriate authorities for informal consent.
Telegraph promptly as soon as written confirmation is received.
Lieutenant Nutt, Advance Officer, has been instructed to leave Philippines
for Tokyo to arrange details. War Department would be glad if Japanese
Officer would accompany him on pathfinding expedition and believes that
will now be withdrawn.

HUGHES

[Document 165]
The Minister in Persia (Kornfeld) to the Secretary of State
KORNFELD

[Document 166]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
states that requests made by Legation in pursuance of Department’s
to Legation’s note will be forthcoming without delay.
WASHBURN

[Document 167]
The Minister in Siam (Brodie) to the Secretary of State
accordance with Department’s telegram covering all requests. Mail
despatch following.

BRODIE

[Document 168]
The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Groats and Slovenes
(Dodge) to the Secretary of State
[Received 11: p.m.]
send me confirmation in writing.

DODGE

[Document 169]
The Minister in Bulgaria (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
WILSON

[Document 170]
The Minister in Denmark (Prince) to the Secretary of State
COPENHAGEN, January 23, 1924—noon.

General of Foreign Office that permission will be granted for requests as
outlined. Written confirmation to follow.
PRINCE

[Document 171]
The Minister in Hungary (Brentano) to the Secretary of State
writes that the Government authorizes the aviators to fly over and land in
Hungary and that it will inform me later regarding landing points and
restrictions against photography.

BRENTANO

[Document 172]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, January 26, 1924—noon.
permission on the ground that, whereas, when in other instances permission
given for experimental flights across Chinese territory, governments
concerned had stated machines to be of nonmilitary character and flights
made for scientific purposes, in present instance no such information given.
Foreign Office states Chinese regulations prohibit military aeroplanes of
foreign nations flying over Chinese territory. Aviation Department holding
conference with representatives of general staff and Ministry of War on
January 30th to decide question.

I suggest you telegraph that aeroplanes to be used are of nonmilitary
character and flight for scientific purposes if such is the case.
SCHURMAN

[Document 173]
The Ambassador in Germany (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[Received 9: p.m.]
received a note from Foreign Office stating that Government permits the
proposed crossing of German territory and possible landings in Germany
during the flight around the world. German Government likewise permits
carriage and use of photographic apparatus over German territory on
condition (1) course and time of flight be notified in advance to the German
Government, (2) that no photographs be made of fortifications at Ingolstadt
and Ulm, and (3) that a copy of each photograph made during flight over
German territory be supplied to German Government. Government adds
that it will be glad to support and facilitate undertaking in other respects
also.

HOUGHTON

[Document 174]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
Department:
“The purpose of the flight is to demonstrate the feasibility with
which aerial communication may be established between the
various continents and to obtain desired information concerning
the operation of present type aircraft in various climates of the
world. It is hoped also to increase our scientific knowledge of
aeronautics and to advance the art of aviation. Naturally, this
government is also desirous of being the first to circumnavigate
the globe by air.

The type of aircraft to be used is a transcript called the Douglas
Cruiser. This is a modification of a commercial airplane which
has been used for some time as a commercial air transport along
our east coast. The plane is in no way a military type. It was built
only for the purpose of the accomplishment of this flight.”
Bring foregoing to the attention of appropriate authorities and in your
discretion state that replies have been received from majority of
governments to whom requests were addressed for permission to cross
territory and that all replies received have been favorable with the exception
of that from Government at Peking.

HUGHES

[Document 175]
The High Commissioner in Turkey (Bristol) to the Secretary of
State
CONSTANTINOPLE, January 30, 1924—noon.

[Received 1: p.m.]

“January 29, 3 p.m. In a conversation with the Under Secretary
today he states that a reply to your request for permission for
United States aeroplanes to include Turkey in their world flight
itinerary had been given on January 21 to the effect that the
Government is desirous of having Turkey omitted from the
itinerary, giving as reasons that safety to machines and crews
could not be assured, or that the flight over Turkey should be
postponed until appropriate arrangements could be made. The
Under Secretary was informed that the personnel of the
expedition would strictly observe regulations concerning
[omission] et cetera, it was furthermore pointed out that the Turks
would be deriving distinct benefits from such visit. The Under
Secretary conveyed the impression that the question might be
subjected to further examination, but brought to my attention in
the conversation that an identical refusal has been given to a
British request of similar nature.”
The fact that I have not received this message officially from Adnan Bey as
yet gives me hope he is still endeavoring to persuade Angora to meet our
request. I will telegraph further information as soon as possible.
BRISTOL

[Document 176]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Kellogg) to the Secretary of
State
has granted permission for flight over her territory; will give all facilities
asked for.

KELLOGG

[Document 177]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
permission for facilities requested by the Department. I am transmitting
copy of note received from the Foreign Office in pouch tomorrow.
HERRICK
Government had requested the Governor General of Syria to waive

[Document 178]
The Chargé in Rumania (Dennis) to the Secretary of State
[Received 9: p.m.]

Roumanian Government grants all permissions requested but makes no
mention of aerial photography. Foreign Office desires details of the
expedition in due time.

DENNIS

[Document 179]
The Secretary of State to the High Commissioner in Turkey
(Bristol)
extract from letter from War Department: [Here follow the two paragraphs
quoted in the Department’s telegram no. 28, January 28, to the Minister in
[Paraphrase.] You may, if you deem it advisable, bring the paragraphs
quoted from the letter of the War Department to the attention of the
appropriate Turkish authorities and communicate them to Treat for similar
action by him at Angora.

You may, in your discretion, with regard to the statement that an identical
refusal was given to the British request of similar nature, point out that no
state of war has existed between Turkey and the United States of America.
Although the Department still hopes that the Government of Turkey will
grant permission, it is recommending to the War Department that the
advance officer now in Paris be sent immediately to Constantinople to
discuss the situation with you. The itinerary as now proposed includes
passage through Bulgaria, Rumania, Yugoslavia, Hungary, Austria,
Germany, France, Great Britain, Denmark, Canada, Japan, Siam, and
Persia. Favorable replies have been received from all above-mentioned
countries. It would be most difficult and embarrassing if it were now found
necessary, due to the failure of Turkey to grant permission, to change
itinerary as now arranged.

HUGHES

[Document 180]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
received 11th grants permission for night to cross Chinese territory and land
at points therein subject to certain regulations. None of these appear
onerous except provision that no photographic or wireless apparatus may be
carried. I delayed telegraphing Department in order to discuss this matter as
well as the regulations generally with Minister for Foreign Affairs
yesterday. I explained to him that we wanted all the regulations interpreted
in a reasonable way and the specified prohibition of photographic or
wireless apparatus eliminated, since these were necessary for the personal
safety of aviators and the scientific objects of the flight. Koo seemed very
receptive and sympathetic to these arguments and promised he would seek
to have the undesirable regulations modified as the Chinese Government
would not want to do anything prejudicial [to] the object of the flight.
Koo told me that the regulations were “for general application”, and I
believe that they are merely perfunctory in the present instance and that no
serious effort will be made to carry them into effect. Full report by mail in
the pouch giving text of regulations.

SCHURMAN
granted permission to enter Chinese territory.

[Document 181]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Kellogg) to the Secretary of
State
[Received 11: p.m.]
received from the Foreign Office today to the following effect:
1. His Majesty’s Government will be glad to facilitate the flight
and to afford any advice or assistance on land portions of the
route in which establishments of the Royal Air Force exist.
2. Canada will give every assistance. There is nonobjection on the
part of the Iraq Government. The reply of India is still awaited.
3. In view of the amount of work which flight will entail on the
Royal Air Force authorities as regards route between Karachi and
western frontier of Iraq, full and early information should be
supplied to the air officer commanding Iraq concerning proposed
arrangement for flight between these two limits.
4. Question of waiver of photographic restrictions is under
consideration and the decision will be made known at an early
date.

KELLOGG
take photographs while passing over Iraq was telegraphed on May 27 (file

[Document 182]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Japan (Caffery)
33. Reference War Department World Flight. War Department has received
telegram from Nutt stating that Japanese destroyers will transport gasoline
and oil for aeroplanes to Kurile Islands, but will not permit Nutt to go as
passenger. Chartering boat to Kurile Islands requiring 30 days time would
cost $300 gold per day.

War Department states that it is necessary for Nutt to proceed to Kurile
Islands to arrange for details regarding fueling, landings, et cetera, but
expense of chartering vessel prohibitive. It is hoped that arrangements may
be made with Japanese authorities to permit Nutt to proceed on destroyer, in
which case he would comply absolutely with any restrictions. If this not
practicable, would Japanese authorities object to Nutt’s proceeding to
Kurile Islands on United States Navy destroyer? Japanese Naval Attaché
and Assistant Naval Attaché have on several occasions been taken on board
United States Naval vessels to witness bombing tests, et cetera.
HUGHES

[Document 183]
The High Commissioner in Turkey (Bristol) to the Secretary of
State
CONSTANTINOPLE, March 6, 1924—noon.

[Received March 7—11 p.m.]
cross Turkish territory under following conditions:
1. The American aviators should be advised that there do not exist
in Turkey specially prepared landing places.
2. Excepting in case of force majeure aeroplanes shall only land at
the places which the inspectors of the Turkish air service shall
designate.
3. The aeroplanes shall follow after Aleppo the line Adana, Konia,
Afion Karahissar, Ismet, San Stephano.
4. As has been agreed upon officers in the Turkish air service
shall be permitted to make a study of the American machines.
BRISTOL

[Document 184]
The Ambassador in Japan (Woods) to the Secretary of State
have promised to send two destroyers to the Kurile Islands for flight which
will carry 1,000 gallons gasoline which is about half supply required.
Lieutenant Nutt informs me remainder must be carried on a chartered boat.
He adds that, assisted by both Japanese authorities and Standard Oil, he has
made every effort to get bids on transportation of gasoline to Kuriles and
has canvassed thoroughly Japanese shipping firms but on account
hazardous nature of the undertaking due to climates in April, May, it is
almost impossible to find shipping captain willing to undertake trip. Their
attitude is set out in letter from one firm reading: “This journey must be
undertaken by those who are prepared to die.” However, a very few bids
have finally been received ranging from 18 to 20 thousand yen for the trip.

Thus far Japanese military authorities have been unwilling to consent to
Nutt’s proceeding to Kuriles as they say Japanese air service officials will
look after all details regarding fueling, landings, etc., as well as provide
accommodation on destroyers for American flight officers arriving in
aeroplanes.

In view of consistent and insistent reference of Japanese War Office to fact
that there is no open port in Kuriles, it is my opinion that they would regard
suggestion that Nutt proceed there on United States destroyer with
disapproval and suspicion. I understand informal British request for similar
privileges already refused.

WOODS

[Document 185]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Kellogg) to the Secretary of
State
British Government agrees to waive usual restrictions on aerial photography
in the case of the five aeroplanes, provided they do not fly over or
photograph any of prohibited areas named in schedule 7 of Air Navigation
Order 1923, copy of which I am forwarding you, or the areas in which
armament depots are situated at Woolwich, Bedenham, Marchwood,
Bandeath and Wrabness.

KELLOGG

[Document 186]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Woods)
Asiatic Squadron to place destroyer if desired at disposal of Lieutenant Nutt
to transport him to Kurile Islands. Please request Japanese authorities to
grant permission to Nutt to proceed on Japanese destroyer. At the same time
state that if such an alternative course would be more acceptable to the
Japanese Government, arrangements could be made to have him proceed
along route aboard an American naval vessel, with the approval of the
Japanese Government, in order to arrange for details regarding fueling,
landings, et cetera. War Department advises that in order to insure carrying
out of technical arrangements, it is essential that these details be handled by
American officer familiar with flight. In approaching Japanese authorities in
HUGHES

[Document 187]
The Ambassador in Japan (Woods) to the Secretary of State
notified me informally this morning that he had finally succeeded in
securing the consent of the Japanese military and naval authorities to allow
one American destroyer to proceed to Bettobu and another destroyer to
Kashiwabara as desired by our War Department under following conditions:
“1. This expedition to be solely for the purpose of
taking essential supplies.
2. The destroyers are to stop at Yokohama to take on
board one Japanese Army and one Japanese naval
officer who are to remain on board during the trip to the
Kurile Islands.”
I desire to emphasize the fact that this permission has been secured solely
through the personal intervention of the Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs
and that throughout these negotiations the Embassy had had to contend with
the vigorous opposition of the Japanese military and naval authorities who
had been opposed in principle to the flight and categorically opposed to
allowing any foreign warship to enter the ports of the Kurile Islands which
they say have always been regarded as closed territory, as set forth in my
definitely declared to the military attaché at this Embassy that the only
flight the War Office would consent to would be a nonstop flight from the
Aleutian Islands to Aomori. In view of this attitude of the Army and Navy
Departments it was found necessary to appeal to Vice Minister for Foreign
Affairs who through his personal influence has been able finally to have the
wishes of our War Department carried out.

Woons
= Not printed.

[Document 188]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Kellogg)
84. World Flight. Through inadvertence Department did not request
permission from British Government for flight to pass through Hongkong.
Please endeavor to obtain permission immediately and telegraph reply.
HUGHES

[Document 189]
Senator Reed Smoot27 to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, March 24, 1921.

MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: I desire to bring to your attention by letter a question of
very great importance affecting the missionary work of the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints (commonly called the Mormon Church), and
kindly ask you to direct that steps be taken by the State Department to
secure the removal of certain restrictions imposed upon the missionaries of
said Church from entering the following countries to carry on missionary
work, a privilege enjoyed for over fifty years preceding the recent war:
Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Holland, and South Africa.
Shortly after the breaking out of the war most of the European countries
requested that American citizens return to their own country, principally on
account of the shortage of food. The Church immediately complied with the
request as soon as it was suggested to them. The armistice was signed
twenty-eight months ago, and yet these countries named above are refusing
to visa American passports issued to the missionaries of said Church. The
work of the Church requires that missionaries be sent to these countries, not
only to direct the missionary work but to look after the property interests of
the Church.

There can be no possible reason for discriminating against this class of
American citizens. I explained to you yesterday more in detail the situation
as it exists, and I now ask you to direct the proper American representatives
to the above named countries to secure an order from the proper officials of
each country named to their American representatives, authorizing them to
visa the American passports issued to members of said Church when called
to do missionary work therein. The recent and present policy has been very
embarrassing and burdensome to the work of the Church, and I ask you to
endeavor to have it corrected.

Do not hesitate to call upon me at any time for any information touching
this question.

Sincerely yours,
REED SMOOT

[Document 190]
The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State
[Received 3: p.m.]
38. The Swedish Government has recently assumed an unfriendly attitude
toward the missionaries of the Mormon Church in Sweden and has to date
ordered the expulsion of 4 of the 11 American missionaries here as was

[Document 191]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Morris)
17. Department informed Mormon missionaries who are American citizens
being forced out of Sweden by authorities and obliged abandon their
missionary work and valuable property. Department is unaware of reasons
for this action. Ask that nothing drastic be done until matter can be fully
investigated. Reply by telegraph.

HUGHES

[Document 192]
The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State
to Minister for Foreign Affairs as instructed. Count Wrangel informs me
that decision was arrived at by Crown Council and regrets inability to alter
attitude of Government regarding expulsion of Mormons but that Mr.
Soderberg will be allowed to remain 1 month to wind up affairs of church.
Foreigners are not allowed to purchase or sell property in Sweden without
permission of the King which in this case has not been granted. Property
here claimed by the Mormon Church is in the name of Swedish citizens
adhering to Mormon faith.

MORRIS

[Document 193]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Great Britain (Wright)
Department advised that British diplomatic and consular officers here
refuse visas to American Mormon missionaries going to South Africa.
Investigate and report.

Repeat mutatis mutandis to The Hague, Copenhagen, Christiania, and
Berne.

HUGHES

[Document 194]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Morris)
Telegraph Swedish Government’s reasons for expelling Mormons. Request
no drastic action be taken until matter can be fully investigated.
HUGHES

[Document 195]
The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State
[Received 2: p.m.]

Office Count Wrangel informed me that the Crown Council met yesterday
to consider the petition of all the Swedish Mormons in this country and
decided to maintain the decisions already arrived at by the Government. He
also told me that he had again consulted with the Archbishop of Sweden
and the Minister of Public Instructions and that the matter had been
thoroughly investigated and decided upon and it was further pointed out
that they did not consider the action drastic as it was the result of the
decision of the Swedish Government which does not consider the presence
of Mormons desirable because they are proselytizing in favor of church
community which holds public services without having had granted its
application to be recognized by the Swedish State in accordance with the
Royal ordinance of October 31st, 1873, transmitted in our unnumbered
despatch of October 3rd, 1914, and likewise for inducing proselytes to
leave the Swedish State Church without the requisite permission of the
King as provided by section 3 of the same act.

The Swedish law provides (as set forth in the Foreign Office’s note of
10th32 ) that as the right of expulsion is a sovereign prerogative exercised
by the King in council, that is to say in supreme instance [sic”], there can be
no appeal against a such [sic] decree.

The present status of the case is that visas enabling the missionaries to
remain in Sweden have been withdrawn and will not be renewed. However
a formal order of expulsion from the Kingdom will not be made unless they
do not leave the country within a reasonable length of time which in
practice is considered to be about 10 days.

[Document 196]
The Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) to the Secretary of State
states informally that the question of Mormon missionaries has not been
seriously discussed in recent years, that the Department of Justice is firmly
convinced that they are undesirable and the police are satisfied that they
lead young girls astray and that the efforts of conversion are centered upon
them. It was intimated that an official request by the Legation would result
in careful reconsideration of the matter but I did not feel justified in
requesting this without further instructions.

SCHMEDEMAN

[Document 197]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Norway (Schmedeman)
Mormon case.

Request careful reconsideration of matter, and ask no drastic action be taken
until case can be fully investigated.

HUGHES

[Document 198]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Morris)
Mormon Church invites any investigation Swedish Government may desire
to make and will be glad to pay expenses both to and from Utah of any
investigator the Swedish Government may desire to send.
HUGHES

[Document 199]
The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State
missionaries who had received notice of the cancellation of their visas are
still here although the period of their original permission to remain in
Sweden has expired and they have not been asked to leave the country.
Have today received following note from Foreign Office in reply to request
to send investigator to Utah.

“In response to this communication I have the honor to call to
your attention that the Royal Government does not believe that it
should accept this invitation as the conditions to be looked into
are already sufficiently known from reports of persons worthy of
credence who have been sent there by the Government for the
purpose of giving an account of the state of affairs in the Mormon
Church and community.”
MORRIS

[Document 200]
The Minister in the Netherlands (Phillips) to the Secretary of
State
THE HAGUE, April 30, 1921—noon.

[Received 12: p.m.]
discretion of consular officers but Dutch Government has no objection in
principle to the entrance of Mormon missionaries. About 60 and their
families were refused admission last year because of housing shortage. As
this condition is not improved request for admission on a large scale will
not meet with favorable reception.

PHILLIPS

[Document 201]
The Minister in Denmark (Grew) to the Secretary of State
definite policy on question of granting visas to American Mormon
missionaries as such has as yet been formulated. Danish Legation at
Washington generally refused such occasional applications until at the
request of Senator Smoot last summer it was decided to grant visas to a
limited number to proceed to Denmark to look after property interests, et
cetera. There were seven applications during the past year all at Washington
of which four were granted and three refused. I gather that Ministry of
Ecclesiastical Affairs is opposed in principle to their admission. Shall await
further instructions before pressing for a definite ruling.
GREW

[Document 202]
The Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) to the Secretary of State
CHRISTIANS, May 28, 1921.

[Received June 22.]

No. 1845
p.m., relative to permission for Mormon missionaries to enter Norway, and
instructing me to request of the Norwegian Government that no drastic
action be taken in this matter, I have the honor to report that immediately
upon receipt of the instruction I called on the Minister for Foreign Affairs in
order to obtain an expression from him regarding permission for Mormon
missionaries to enter the country.

I told His Excellency that I believed that certain reports circulated regarding
the missionaries were untrue and that, as far as I knew, the Mormon
missionaries in this country had always conducted themselves in a proper
manner; that I had been informed by the Presiding Elder of that
denomination in this country that no efforts on their part had been made to
have the converts emigrate to the United States and that, as Norway
permitted missionaries of other faiths to freely enter the country and carry
on religious propaganda, I believed it was unfair for the Norwegian
Government to discriminate against the Mormons. The Minister for Foreign
Affairs informed me that complaints had reached him from the Police and
the Department of Justice that the efforts of the missionaries were
especially directed towards influencing young women to join the churchy
but added that he knew comparatively little about the matter and suggested
that I address a Note to him on the subject and he would then refer the
matter to the Department of Justice.

I accordingly addressed such a Note to His Excellency on April 12th last (a
copy of which is enclosed herewith), and under date of May 24th I

received a reply (a copy and translation of which is also enclosed
herewith) in which it is stated that the Norwegian Government has issued
no general instructions to its diplomatic and consular officers to refuse visas
to Mormon missionaries, but that the Department of Justice maintains that
questions of this character must be submitted to the Central Passport Bureau
for its decision and that that Bureau will very likely refuse all or the
majority of such requests.

I have [etc.]

A. G. SCHMEDEMAN

[Document 203]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Harvey) to the Secretary of
State
Government do not desire to encourage the entry of Mormon missionaries
into that country.

HARVEY

[Document 204]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Lane)
WASHINGTON, December 26, 1922.

No. 162
SIR: The receipt is acknowledged of your despatches, number 680 of
difficulties experienced by Mr. and Mrs. Ripplinger and Mr. Hugh J. Ford,
American Mormon missionaries, in their attempts to secure permission to
reside in certain of the Swiss Cantons.

You suggest, as a result of conversations with an official of the Political
Department, concerning the matter, that you be instructed to inform the
Swiss Government that, so far as is known, the countenance of polygamy is
no longer tolerated by the Church of the Latter Day Saints. You further
suggest that the Swiss authorities might be willing to interpret Article I of
the Convention of Friendship, Commerce and Extradition, concluded
between the United States and Switzerland on November 25, 1850,41
pertaining to the rights of citizens of the United States in the matter of
residence in Switzerland, and to the rights of Swiss citizens in the matter of
residence in the United States, in favor of the missionaries, who are
requesting the assistance of the Legation.

The Department does not consider it advisable that representations be made
to the Swiss Government in favor of the missionaries on the ground that
Article I of the Convention of Friendship, Commerce, and Extradition
entitles them to the privilege of residence in Switzerland.

You may, however, inform the Political Department, unofficially, that
polygamy is forbidden not only by the laws of the United States but as well

by the Mormon Church, and that this Government hopes that the Swiss
authorities will accord to Mormon missionaries the same privileges that are
granted to missionaries of other faiths.

For the Secretary of State:
WILLIAM PHILLIPS

[Document 205]
The Secretary of State to Senator Reed Smoot
WASHINGTON, January 22, 1923.

MY DEAR SENATOR SMOOT: I wish to refer to my letter of August 10, 1922, relating
to the refusal of the South African railway authorities to allow reduced rates
to elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints.
I have now received a despatch from the American Consulate General at
Cape Town43 stating that as a result of the Consulate General’s
representations the South African Railway Administration has now
recognized the elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints as
entitled to the usual travel concessions granted to Ministers of the Gospel
and Missionaries under the new regulations which were effective January 1,
1923.

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 206]
The Minister in Norway (Swenson) to the Secretary of State
CHRISTIANIA, October 19, 1923.

[Received November 6.]

No. 286
SIR: I have the honor to enclose herewith copies of correspondence
exchanged with the Foreign Office, relative to the refusal of Norwegian
visaes to Mormon missionaries holding passports issued to them as citizens
of the United States.

Senator Reed Smoot, who visited Norway last summer, called my attention
to this discrimination against members of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-Day Saints and asked that I take the matter up with the Norwegian
Government. I did so, requesting that the present practice be changed and
that hereafter visaes be granted to Mormons desiring to enter Norway.

[Document 207]
The Minister in Sweden (Bliss) to the Secretary of State
STOCKHOLM, January 3, 1924.

[Received January 22.]

No. 101
SIR: I have the honor to enclose herewith copies of correspondence
exchanged between this Legation and the Minister for Foreign Affairs
regarding the refusal by the Swedish consuls at Chicago and Copenhagen to
visa the American passport of Darcey U. Wright to enter Sweden, on the
ground that he was a missionary of the Mormon Church.

This question of Mormon missionaries in Sweden was the subject of
telegraphic correspondence between the Department and this Legation in
April, 1921, since which time I find no record in the files that the matter has
been taken up by this Legation. In April of 1921, the expulsion from
Sweden of missionaries of the Mormon church was ordered, but through the
intervention of Mr. Morris it was apparently never fully carried out, as it
would seem that some missionaries were permitted to remain in Sweden.
There is a record in the Legation files that one of the missionaries was
permitted to continue for a limited period his sojourn in Sweden on his
engaging to “abstain from all preaching and propaganda on behalf of the
Mormon Church during his stay in Sweden” (Foreign Office third person
note, May 28, 1921).

Last July, two or three days after my arrival in Stockholm, Senator Reed
Smoot of Utah came to Stockholm and at that time I presented him to the
Prime Minister, Mr. Trygger. During the interview which followed, Senator
Smoot referred to the difficulties of entering Sweden that were placed in the
way of Mormon missionaries by the Swedish authorities and expressed the
hope that the Government might be disposed to examine the matter further
with a view to satisfying itself that there were grounds to warrant a change

in its attitude towards the representatives of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter Day Saints.

Since my arrival here, however, no concrete case has arisen to give an
opportunity for me to make representations to the Foreign Office in this
matter until the one which is the subject of this report to the Department.
In handing to Baron Marcks von Wurtemberg my note of December 17th,
1923, regarding the case of Mr. Wright, I went into the subject as fully as
the information on file at the Legation would permit. I mentioned, in the
course of our conversation, that the restrictions in Norway, somewhat
similar to those in Sweden, had recently been removed.

Last evening I dined with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, and after dinner
he referred to this matter of the Mormon missionaries. He said that it
presented considerable difficulty to his Government, as the information
which it has regarding the Mormon Church was not favorable. He spoke of
a report to the Swedish Government which had been made some years ago,
promising to send me a copy, which I shall forward to the Department as
soon as possible.

I learned that the Minister has instructed the Swedish Legation at
Washington and the Swedish Consulate at San Francisco to make new
investigation of the activities and standing of the Mormon Church. In view
of this instruction, the Minister said it would be some time before he could
make an answer to the note which I sent to him on December 17th last.
Should the Department see no objection, I beg that the information
contained in this despatch be brought to the attention of Senator Smoot, in
order that he may be acquainted with the present situation regarding the
entrance of Mormon missionaries into Sweden and, also, that he may
inform the competent authorities of the Mormon Church of the
investigation which is to be made by the Swedish diplomatic and consular
officers in order that they may facilitate such investigation if the proper
opportunity presents itself.

In this respect, it is my opinion that it would not be advisable for the
Mormon Church to repeat the invitation that an investigation be made nor

to offer to pay the expenses of an investigator of the Swedish Government,
as its previous offer of this nature was rejected in terms which do not
obliged if the Department would indicate what further action it desires
taken in this case, should the Minister’s answer to my note refuse the
request that a visa be given to Mr. Wright.

I have [etc.]

ROBERT WOODS BLISS

[Document 208]
The Minister in Denmark (Prince) to the Secretary of State
COPENHAGEN, February 6, 1924.

[Received February 20.]

No. 666
honor to report that Count Reventlow, Director General of the Danish

[Document 209]
The Minister in Sweden (Bliss) to the Secretary of State
Office informs me that hereafter visas for Mormons will be subject to the
same regulations as applied to all foreigners.
BLISS

[Document 210]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Zurich (Wilkinson)
WASHINGTON, October 7, 1924.

SIR: The Department has received your confidential despatch No. 1911 of
August 16, 1924, concerning the opposition of the Swiss authorities to the
continued presence of Mormon missionaries in Switzerland.

There would appear to be no action which you could take in this matter
other than to render to Mormon missionaries who may be American
citizens, such assistance as may be warranted with a view to seeing that
they are accorded the protection to which they may be entitled under the
laws of Switzerland.

With reference to your statement that the police at Zurich appear to be
under the impression that your office has been over-zealous in the action
which it has taken in behalf of Mormon missionaries, it is suggested that
should you have reason to believe that the local authorities share this view
you may be able to convince them that you have merely rendered to
Mormon missionaries the assistance to which as American citizens they are
entitled. With reference to the extent to which you should intervene in
behalf of Mormon missionaries who are American citizens, it may be
observed that this is a matter depending largely upon the facts and
circumstances of the individual case. You should, however, be convinced
that the facts are such as to warrant you in taking up a particular case with
the local authorities. In general, it may be stated that you should render to
Mormon missionaries who are American citizens the same degree of
assistance that should properly be rendered to any other class of American
citizens.

You may upon an appropriate occasion informally express to the local
authorities the hope that so long as American citizens professing the
Mormon faith do not violate the Swiss laws or preach any doctrine that is

[Document 211]
The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, October 7, 1924.

[Received October 18.]

No. 166
SIR: During the past few years this Legation has frequently been called upon
to deal with the cases of American Mormon missionaries resident in
Switzerland, who are refused renewals of residence permits by the cantonal
authorities.

These cases are usually referred to rather loosely as “deportations” or
“expulsions” and I venture to point out at once the inaccuracy of this
description. The residence of foreigners in Switzerland is a matter regulated
by the cantons and is subject to residence permits granted for short periods.
The cantonal authorities have complete power to grant or withhold renewals
of these residence permits and while the Federal Government is usually
prepared to use its good offices in seeing that justice is done to foreigners, it
cannot, constitutionally, enforce its views upon the cantonal authorities.
The customary procedure is for the cantonal authorities to send a notice to
the individual concerned informing him that his residence permit will
expire at some future date, usually some weeks or months in advance and
that the canton does not see its way to granting an extension. The foreigner
is informed that he will be expected to leave the canton or the
Confederation on or before the date of the expiration of his existing permit.
The procedure in this matter is entirely different from that of deportations
which are effected by the police and with much less consideration of the
individual’s convenience and with less warning. I have entered into this
rather detailed explanation of the question in the belief that it has a
considerable importance in considering the rights of the American citizens
who frequently appeal to the Legation for protection and assistance.

In the past it has been the practice of the Legation to deal with each case as
it arose, to endeavor to secure the statement of the reasons for the action
taken by the cantonal authorities and frequently to secure an extension of
the time limit fixed by the local authorities. It has recently become
increasingly evident, however, that the cantonal authorities, notably those of
the canton of Zurich, where most of the Mormon missionaries reside, have
adopted a definite policy of eliminating them gradually from the canton
through a refusal to renew their residence permits. Several of the
missionaries have recently been informed that their present permits will not
be renewed and that they will be expected to leave the canton of Zurich
before the end of the year. I am further informed that a number of other
missionaries expect such notification in due course. In view of this the
Department may wish to consider the entire question and to give the
Legation and consular officers in Switzerland some general instructions to
govern their action in dealing with this case.

It would be very helpful to me to have the Department’s instructions on the
following points:
1. Whether the Department is disposed to take exception to the
Swiss contention that those provisions of the Constitution bearing
upon religious liberty concern Swiss citizens only and cannot be
invoked by the missionaries as specifically covering their
proselytizing. If it is desired that I take exception to the Swiss
position I should like a statement of the Department’s views for
my guidance.
2. Whether the Department is disposed to contest the Swiss
contention that Article III of the Convention of Friendship,
Commerce and Extradition gives full warrant for refusing
residence permits to American citizens whose presence is
considered undesirable by the Swiss authorities; if so on what
grounds.

3. What action the Department desires me to take on behalf of
these missionaries. If it is desired that I support the contention of
these missionaries that they should be allowed to remain
indefinitely I should like a statement of the arguments to be
advanced on their behalf. In deciding this question the
Department will doubtless wish to bear in mind the possibility
that serious pressure on behalf of these people may compromise
the ability of the Legation to support the interests of other
Americans who are in need of its assistance.

Pending receipt of the Department’s instructions, I shall continue to deal
with each case individually, to seek an explanation of the reasons for
refusing to renew residence permits and where such action by me appears
warranted, to request that suitable extensions be granted.
In submitting the foregoing I venture to point out that action in some of the
cases now pending is contemplated not later than October 31st. I should be
glad, therefore, if I might be given full telegraphic instructions as soon as
possible.

I have [etc.]

HUGH GIBSON

[Document 212]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland
(Gibson)
missionaries is indicated in its instruction of October 7 to Consul at Zurich,
copy of which was sent to you by Department October 10.
advisable to make representations to Swiss authorities in favor of Mormon
missionaries on ground that Article I of the Convention of Friendship,
Commerce and Extradition of 1850 entitles them to privilege of residence in
Switzerland.

You would not be warranted in objecting to denial by appropriate Swiss
authorities of residence permits to Mormon missionaries found to have been
engaged in practices objectionable under laws of Switzerland. You may,
however, exercise good offices to prevent expulsion being accompanied by
undue hardship in individual cases.

If, as would appear from your despatch, it is intention of cantonal
authorities of Zurich gradually to refuse renewal of residence permits in
cases of all Mormon missionaries as a class, irrespective of whether they
have violated the laws of Switzerland, you should inform Foreign Office
that this Government considers that they should not be denied residence
permits merely because of their religious belief.

Department does not consider it advisable to discuss with Swiss authorities
question whether provisions in Article 49 of Swiss Constitution
guaranteeing religious freedom apply to Mormon missionaries, in view of
other provisions in Articles 50 and 51 placing limitations upon such
guarantee.

Grew

[Document 213]
The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, November 5, 1924.

[Received November 18.]

No. 206
SIR: I have the honor to refer to my despatch No. 166 of October 7th
requesting instructions with regard to the case of American Mormon
missionaries, resident in Switzerland, who have been refused renewal of
residence permits by certain cantonal authorities.
embodying instructions in the nature requested, I immediately drew up an
aide-mémoire based on these instructions which I left personally with Mr.
Dinichert, Chief of the Division of Foreign Affairs of the Federal Political
Department, on October 28, 1924. A copy of this aide-mémoire is
transmitted herewith. It will be noted that as the residence permits of
certain of these missionaries were to expire on October 31, 1924, I
specifically called attention to this fact in my aide-mémoire in the hope that
a reply might be received prior to that date.

Accordingly, on October 31, 1924, I received a memorandum from the
Political Department, a copy and translation of which are enclosed, in
answer to my aide-mémoire under reference. It will be noted that this
memorandum states that the question of religious freedom in Switzerland is
absolutely independent of the question of the residence of foreigners in this
country. Religious freedom does not carry with it the right of foreigners to
travel or to establish themselves in Switzerland. The exercise of this right
lies within the sovereignty of the cantons as expressly provided for by
federal legislation. It is therefore the cantons alone which, in each particular
case, are capable of deciding on questions of residence. Their decisions in
these matters are without appeal and the Federal authorities have no means

at their disposal to bring about a modification of the cantonal decisions. The
memorandum adds that, in view of the foregoing, the missionaries in this
country have never been disturbed in any way on account of their personal
religious convictions. The refusal of certain cantons to prolong the
residence permits of the missionaries in question has, on the contrary, been
especially necessitated by their proselytizing methods which have caused
trouble and disturbances in many Swiss families, disturbances which in turn
have led to general complaints. In view of these frequent unfortunate
experiences, the memorandum declares that there is nothing surprising in
the action of the cantonal authorities.

In discussing this matter with the appropriate official of the Political
Department, the Legation was clearly informed that the portion of this
memorandum which concerns the measures taken by the cantonal
authorities, alone relates to the missionaries the prolongation of whose
residence permits has at this time been refused—and in no way applies to
Mormon missionaries as a class. He went on to say that there were a large
number of missionaries residing in Switzerland whose activities had caused
no criticism whatsoever and so long as no complaints were generally
directed against these remaining missionaries they would be allowed to
reside undisturbed in Switzerland.

It would not appear that the Legation has grounds for making further
representations to the Federal authorities on behalf of the missionaries
whose prolongation of residence permits has been refused in view of the
nature of the foregoing memorandum. It has been definitely stated that the
cantonal authorities are supreme in matters of this sort; that their decisions
are without appeal; that their action in these cases under reference has in no
way been influenced by their religious beliefs, and that their decisions in
each case to refuse the prolongation of residence permits were solely based
on the fact that complaints had been generally directed against these
particular missionaries for having caused disturbances in various families.
In emphasizing this portion of the memorandum, the official of the Political
Department with whom this matter was discussed made the following
observation: He said that only a few days ago a member of the National
Council had come to his office with the request that representations be
made to this Legation with a view to securing for him permission to remain

[Document 214]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Germany
(Robbins)
WASHINGTON, April 27, 1925.

No. 3839
SIR: The Department has received your despatch No. 1015, of March 16,
1925, together with the enclosures thereto concerning the refusal of the
local authorities in East Prussia to permit Mr. Carvel M. James, an
American citizen, to remain in the province on the ground that his activities
as a Mormon missionary disturb the peace.

It appears that the Prussian authorities base their action on the ground that
Mr. James’ proselytizing was a source of disturbance in a number of
families in Selbogen. It also appears that the authorities declined to give Mr.
James a hearing and refused to accept the testimony of witnesses who were
prepared to testify in Mr. James’ defense.

You advise the Department that in bringing this case to the Embassy’s
attention, Mr. Nathaniel P. Davis, American Consul in Chargé at Berlin,
stated that, though he felt that the provincial authorities were within their
rights in refusing Mr. James permission to remain in East Prussia, it was felt
nevertheless that if the latter’s statements were correct, that he had not been
given an opportunity to defend himself or to produce witnesses in his
defense, it might be considered advisable for the Embassy to make some
representations to the Foreign Office in order that this case might not be
quoted later as a precedent for similar action in the future. You request to be
instructed in the matter.

While this Government does not contest the right of the authorities of East
Prussia to request an American citizen to leave the territory under their
jurisdiction in case he proves himself a cause of serious disturbance, it is
considered, however, that he should be given an opportunity to defend
himself respecting charges brought against him and that a failure of the
authorities to accord him a hearing constitutes an arbitrary exercise of the
right of expulsion. This Government considers, moreover, that the reasons
given by the local authorities for refusing to allow Mr. James to defend
himself against the charges, namely that he could not have disproved them
and that the witnesses produced by him would not be willing to testify
against him, are not convincing and, in fact, are contradictory. If the report
of this case as received by the East Prussian authorities is correct, they
might, it would seem, have been able to obtain the testimony of witnesses to
substantiate the charges and refute the defense set up by Mr. James and his
supporters.

In bringing the foregoing considerations to the attention of the German
Foreign Office, you will advise it that it is not sought to obtain a reversal of
the decision in this case since it appears that Mr. James does not desire to
return to East Prussia but that this Government has no doubt that the
German Government will readily agree that the expulsion of American
citizens without an opportunity to defend themselves against charges
brought against them constitutes an arbitrary procedure. You will further
advise the Foreign Office that this Government confidently hopes that the
necessary steps will be taken by the German Government to insure
American citizens in the future an opportunity to defend themselves before
an impartial authority against charges which, if established, would warrant
their expulsion from German territory under the appropriate German laws.
You are requested to transmit to the Consulate General at Berlin and the
Consulate at Koenigsberg for their information copies of this instruction,
which are enclosed.

JOSEPH C. GREW

Statements by the Secretary of State
that
the
question
of
Philippine
independence is exclusively a domestic
problem of the United States
[215] The Chairman of the Committee on Insular Affairs of the House
of Representatives (Fairfield) to the Secretary of State
Washington, March 25, 1924.

[Document 215]
The Chairman of the Committee on Insular Affairs of the House
of Representatives (Fairfield) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, March 25, 1924.

DEAR SIR: The Insular Affairs Committee of the House of Representatives has
directed me to inquire of the State Department as to whether the granting of
Independence at this time to the Philippine Islands would be contrary to any
provisions of the Four Power Pact.

An early reply would be very much appreciated.
Very sincerely yours,
LOUIS W. FAIRFIELD

[Document 216]
The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the Committee on
Insular Affairs of the House of Representatives (Fairfield)
WASHINGTON, April 3, 1924.

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of March 25,
1924, in which you inquire whether the granting of independence at this
time to the Philippine Islands would be contrary to any provisions of the
Four Power Pact.

The controversies referred to in paragraph two of Article I of the Treaty
concluded December 13, 1921 at Washington between the United States,
the British Empire, France and Japan, relating to their insular possessions
and insular dominions in the region of the Pacific Ocean do not, as
indicated in the declaration accompanying the Treaty, embrace questions
which, under the principles of international law, lie exclusively within the
domestic jurisdiction of the respective powers. The question whether
independence shall be granted to the Philippine Islands is one which lies
exclusively; within the domestic jurisdiction of the United States. I,
therefore, do not consider that the Treaty mentioned, the declaration
accompanying the Treaty, or the Treaty supplementary thereto, concluded
February 6, 1922, in any manner affect the exclusive right of this
Government to withhold or to grant independence to the Islands in question.
I have [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 217]
The Secretary of War (Weeks) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, May 7, 1924.

DEAR MR. SECRETARY: Do you think it advisable to make a suggestion or to ask for
a suggestion from foreign governments, particularly Great Britain, France
and Holland, relative to any action we may take in giving independence or
future independence to the Philippine Islands. Of course, the dependencies
of those countries are watching our action with a great deal of interest
because their people will naturally want about the same privileges as we
will give the Filipinos, and it may add greatly to their troubles.
On the other hand, you may conclude that it is really no affair of theirs what
we do, which is probably the case, but it seemed to me that I had better
have an expression of opinion from you about the desirability of making a
representation of that kind to them.

Sincerely yours,
JOHN W. WEEKS

[Document 218]
The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War (Weeks)
WASHINGTON, May 8, 1924.

MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: I have received your letter of May seventh asking
whether I think it advisable to make a suggestion, or to ask for a suggestion
from foreign governments, particularly Great Britain, France and Holland,
relative to any action we may take in giving independence or future
independence to the Philippine Islands. While I fully realize that our action
in this matter may be of considerable interest to the Powers, I do not think
that we should invite any suggestions from them as to what we should do
with our own possessions. It seems to me that any action inviting a
suggestion from the other Powers on this subject would easily give rise to
misapprehensions and would involve us in needless difficulties.
Faithfully yours,
CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 219]
Convention between the United States of America and Other
American Republics, Signed at Habana, November 14, 192454
Habana, November 14, 1924
The Presidents of Argentine, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Salvador,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, United States of America, Uruguay and Venezuela,
being desirous of entering into a sanitary convention for the purpose of
better promoting and protecting the public health of their respective nations,
and particularly to the end that effective cooperative international measures
may be applied for the prevention of the international spread of the
communicable infections of human beings and to facilitate international
commerce and communication, have appointed as their plenipotentiaries,
to-wit:
The Republic of Argentine:
Dr. Gregorio Araoz Alfaro.

Dr. Joaquín Llambías.

The United States of Brazil:
Dr. Nascimento Gurgel.

Dr. Raúl Almeida Magalhaes.

The Republic of Chile:
Dr. Carlos Graf.

The Republic of Colombia:

Dr. R. Gutierrez Lee.

The Republic of Costa Rica:
Dr. José Varela Zequeira.

The Republic of Cuba:
Dr. Mario G. Lebredo.

Dr. José A. López del Valle.

Dr. Hugo Roberts.

Dr. Diego Tamayo.

Dr. Francisco M. Fernández.

Dr. Domingo F. Ramos.

The Republic of El Salvador:
Dr. Leopoldo Paz.

The United States of America:
Dr. Hugh S. Cumming.

Dr. Richard Creel.

Mr. P. D. Cronin.

Dr. Francis D. Patterson.

The Republic of Guatemala:
Dr. José de Cubas y Serrate.

The Republic of Haiti:

Dr. Charles Mathon.

The Republic of Honduras:
Dr. Arístides Agramonte.

The Republic of Mexico:
Dr. Alfonso Pruneda.

The Republic of Panama:
Dr. Jaime de la Guardia.

The Republic of Paraguay:
Dr. Andrés Gubetich.

The Republic of Peru:
Dr. Carlos E. Paz Soldán.

The Dominican Republic:
Dr. R. Pérez Cabral.

The Republic of Uruguay:
Dr. Justo F. González.

The United States of Venezuela:
Dr. Enrique Tejera.

Dr. Antonio Smith.

Who, having exchanged their full powers, found in good and due form,
have agreed to adopt, ad referendum, the following

PAN AMERICAN SANITARY CODE
CHAPTER I.—OBJECTS OF THE CODE AND DEFINITIONS OF TERMS USED THEREIN
ARTICLE 1. The objects of this code are:
(a) The prevention of the international spread of communicable
infections of human beings.

(b) The promotion of cooperative measures for the prevention of
the introduction and spread of disease into and from the territories
of the signatory Goverments [sic].

(c) The standardization of the collection of morbidity and
mortality statistics by the signatory Governments.
(d) The stimulation of the mutual interchange of information
which may be of value in improving the public health, and
combating the diseases of man.

(e) The standardization of the measures employed at places of
entry, for the prevention of the introduction and spread of the
communicable diseases of man, so that greater protection against
them shall be achieved and unnecessary hindrance to international
commerce and communication eliminated.

ART. 2. Definitions. As herein used, the following words and phrases shall be
taken in the sense hereinbelow indicated, except as a different meaning for
the word or phrase in question may be given in a particular article, or is
plainly to be collected from the context or connection where the term is
used.

Aircraft.—Any vehicle which is capable of transporting persons or things
through the air, including aeroplanes, seaplanes, gliders, helocopters, air
ships ballons and captive ballons [sic].

Area.—A well determined portion of territory.

Disinfection.—The act of rendering free from the causal agencies of
disease.

Fumigation.—A standard process by which the organisms of disease or
their potential carriers are exposed to a gas in lethal concentrations.
Index, Aedes Aegypti.—The percentage ratio determined after examination
between the number of houses in a given area and the number in which
larvae or mosquitoes of the Aedes aegypti are found, in a fixed period of
time.

Inspection.—The act of examining persons, buildings, areas, or things
which may be capable of harboring, transmitting or transporting the
infectious agents of disease, or of propagating or favoring the propagation
of such agents. Also the act of studying and observing measures put in force
for the suppression or prevention of disease.

Incubation, Period of.—For plague, cholera and yellow fever, each 6 days,
for smallpox, 14 days, and for typhus fever 12 days.

Isolation.—The separation of human beings or animals from other human
beings or animals in such manner as to prevent the interchange of disease.
Plague.—Bubonic, septicemic, pneumonic or rodent plague.
Port.—Any place or area where a vessel or aircraft may seek harbor,
discharge or receive passengers, crew, cargo or supplies.
Rodents.—Rats, domestic and wild, and other rodents.

CHAPTER II
SECTION 1. NOTIFICATION AND SUBSEQUENT COMMUNICATIONS TO OTHER COUNTRIES
ART. 3. Each of the signatory Governments agrees to transmit to each of the
other signatory Governments and to the Pan-American Sanitary Bureau, at

intervals of not more than two weeks, a statement containing information as
to the state of its public health, particularly that of its ports.
The followings [sic] diseases are obligatorily reportable: Plague, cholera,
yellow fever, smallpox, typhus, epidemic cerebropinal [sic] meningitis,
acute epidemic poliomyelitis, epidemic lethargic encephalitis, influenza or
epidemic la grippe, typhoid and paratyphoid fevers, and such other diseases
as the Pan American Sanitary Bureau may, by resolution, add to the above
list.

ART. 4. Each signatory Government agrees to notify ‘adjacent countries and
the Pan American Sanitary Bureau immediately by the most rapid available
means of communication, of the appearance in its territory of an authentic
or officially suspected case or cases of plague, cholera, yellow fever, small
pox, typhus or any other dangerous contagion liable to be spread through
the intermediary agency of international commerce.
ART. 5. This notification is to be accompanied, or very promptly followed,
by the following additional information:
1. The area where the disease has appeared.
2. The date of its appearance, its origin, and its form.
3. The probable source or country from which introduced and
manner of introduction.
4. The number of confirmed cases, and number of deaths.
5. The number of suspected cases and deaths.
6. In addition, for plague, the existence among rodents of plague,
or of an unusual mortality among rodents; for yellow fever, the
Aedes aegypti index of the locality.
7. The measures which have been applied for the prevention of
the spread of the disease, and its eradication.

be addressed to diplomatic or consular representatives in the capital of the
infected country, and to the Pan American Sanitary Bureau at Washington,
which shall immediately transmit the information to all countries
concerned.
and 6 are to be followed by further communications in order to keep other
Governments informed as to the progress of the disease or diseases. These
communications will be made at least once weekly, and will be as complete
as possible, indicating in detail the measures employed to prevent the
extension of the disease. The telegraph, the cable, and the radio will be
employed for this purpose, except in those instances in which the data may
be transmitted rapidly by mail. Reports by telegraph, cable or radio will be
confirmed by letter. Neighboring countries will endeavor to make special
arrangements for the solution of local problems that do not involve
widespread international interest.

ART. 8. The signatory Governments agree that in the event of the appearance
of any of the following diseases, namely: cholera, yellow fever, plague,
typhus fever or other pestilential diseases in severe epidemic form, in their
territory, they will immediately put in force appropriate sanitary measures
for the prevention of the international carriage of any of the said diseases
therefrom by passengers, crew, cargo and vessels, and mosquitoes, rats and
vermin that may be carried thereon, and will promptly notify each of the
other signatory Governments and the Pan American Sanitary Bureau as to
the nature and extent of the sanitary measures which they have applied for
the accomplishment of the requirements of this article.

SECTION 2. PUBLICATION OF PRESCRIBED MEASURES
ART. 9. Information of the first non-imported case of plague, cholera, or
yellow fever justifies the application of sanitary measures against an area
where said disease may have appeared.

ART. 10. The Government of each country obligates itself to publish
immediately the preventive measures which will be considered necessary to
be taken by vessels or other means of transport, passengers and crew at any

port of departure or place located in the infected area. The said publication
is to be communicated at once to the accredited diplomatic or consular
representatives of the infected country, and to the Pan American Sanitary
Bureau. The signatory Government [sic] also obligate themselves to make
known in the same manner the revocation of these measures, or of
modifications thereof that may be made.

ART. 11. In order that an area may be considered to be no longer infected, it
must be officialy [sic] established:
1. That there has neither been a death nor a new case as regards
plague or cholera for ten days; and as regards yellow fever for
twenty days, either since the isolation, or since the death or
recovery of the last patient.
2. That all means for the eradication of the disease have been
applied and, in the case of plague, that effective measures against
rats have been continuously carried out, and that the disease has
not been discovered among them within six months; in the case of
yellow fever, that Aedes aegypti index of the infected area has
been maintained at an average of not more than 2 per cent for the
30-day period immediately preceding, and that no portion of the
infected area has had an index in excess of 5 per cent for the same
period of time.

SECTION 3. MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY STATISTICS
ART. 12. The international classification of the causes of death is adopted as
the Pan American Classification of the Causes of Death, and shall be used
by the signatory nations in the interchange of mortality and morbidity
reports.

ART. 13. The Pan American Sanitary Bureau is hereby authorized and
directed to re-publish from time to time the Pan American Classification of
the Causes of Death.

ART. 14. Each of the signatory Governments agrees to put in operation at the
earliest practicable date a system for the collection and tabulation of vital
statistics which shall include:
1. A central statistical office presided over by a competent
official.
2. The establishment of regional statistical offices.
3. The enactment of laws, decrees or regulations requiring the
prompt reporting of births, deaths and communicable diseases, by
health officers, physicians, midwives and hospitals, and providing
penalities [sic] for failure to make such reports.

ART. 15. The Pan American Sanitary Bureau shall prepare and publish
standard forms for the reporting of deaths and cases of communicable
disease, and all other vital statistics.

CHAPTER III.—SANITARY DOCUMENTS
SECTION 1. BILLS OF HEALTH
ART. 16. The master of any vessel or aircraft which proceeds to a port of any
of the signatory Governments, is required to obtain at the port of departure
and ports of call, a bill of health, in duplicate, issued in accordance with the
information set forth in the appendix and adopted as the standard bill of
health.

ART. 17. The bill of health will be accompanied by a list of the passengers,
and stowaways if any, which shall indicate the port where they embarked
and the port to which they are destined, and a list of the crew.
ART. 18. Consuls and other officials signing or countersigning bills of health
should keep themselves accurately informed with respect to the sanitary
conditions of their ports, and the manner in which this code is obeyed by
vessels and their passengers and crews while therein. They should have
accurate knowledge of local mortality and morbidity, and of sanitary
conditions which may affect vessels in port. To this end, they shall be

furnished with information they request pertaining to sanitary records,
harbors and vessels.

ART. 19. The signatory Governments may assign medical or sanitary officers
as public health attaches to embassies or legations, and as representatives to
international conferences.

ART. 20. If at the port of departure there be no consul or consular agent of
the country of destination, the bill of health may be issued by the consul or
consular agent of a friendly Government authorized to issue, such bill of
health.

ART. 21. The bill of health should be issued not to exceed forty eight hours
before the departure of the ship to which it is issued. The sanitary visa
should not be given more than twenty-four hours before departure.

ART. 22. Any erasure or alteration of a bill of health shall invalidate the
document, unless such alteration or erasure shall be made by competent
authority, and notation thereof appropriately made.

ART. 23. A clean bill of health is one which shows the complete absence in
the port of departure of cholera, yellow fever, plague, typhus fever, or of
other pestilential disease in severe epidemic form, liable to be transported
by international commerce. Provided, that the presence only of bona fide
imported cases of such disease, when properly isolated, shall not compel the
issuance of a foul bill of health, but notation of the presence of such cases
will be made under the heading of “Remarks” on the Bill of health.
ART. 24. A foul bill of health is one which shows the presence of non-
imported cases of any of the diseases referred to in Art. 23.

ART. 25. Specific bill of health are [sic] not required of vessels which, by
reason of accident, storm or other emergency condition, including wireless
change of itinerary, are obliged to put into ports other than their original
destinations but such vessels shall be required to exhibit such bills of health
as they possess.

ART. 26. It shall be the duty of the Pan American Sanitary Bureau to publish
appropriate information which may be distributed by port health officers,
for the purpose of instructing owners, agents and master [sic] of vessels as
to the methods which should be put in force by them for the prevention of
the international spread of disease.

SECTION 2. OTHER SANITARY DOCUMENTS
ART. 27. Every vessel carrying a medical officer will maintain a sanitary log
which will be kept by him, and he will record therein daily: the sanitary
condition of the vessel, and its passengers and crew; a record showing the
names of passengers and crew which have been vaccinated by him; name,
age, nationality, home address, occupation and nature of illness or injury of
all passengers and crew treated during the voyage; the source and sanitary
quality of the drinking water of the vessel, the place where taken on board,
and the method in use on board for its purification; sanitary conditions,
observed in ports visited during the voyage; the measures taken to prevent
the ingress and egress of rodents to and from the vessel; the measures which
have been taken to protect the passengers and crew against mosquitoes,
other insects, and vermin. The sanitary log will be signed by the master and
medical officer of the vessel, and will be exhibited upon the request of any
sanitary or consular officer. In the absence of a medical officer, the master
shall record the above information in the log of the vessel, in so far as
possible.

ART. 28. Equal or similar forms for Quarantine Declarations, Certificate of
Fumigation, and Certificate of Vaccination, set forth in the appendix, are
hereby adopted as standard forms.

CHAPTER IV.—CLASSIFICATION OF PORTS
ART. 29. An infected port is one in which any of the following diseases exist,
namely, plague, cholera, yellow fever, or other pestilential disease in severe
epidemic form.

ART. 30 A suspected port, is a port in which, or in the areas contiguous
thereto, a non imported case or cases of any of the disesases [sic] referred to
in Art. 23, have occurred within sixty days, or which has not taken adequate
measures to protect itself against such diseases, but which is not known to
be an infected port.

ART. 31. A clean port, Class A, is one in which the following conditions are
fulfilled: 1. The absence of non-imported cases of any of the diseases
referred to in Art. 23, in the port itself and in the areas contiguous thereto.
2. (a) The presence of a qualified and adequate health staff. (b) Adequate
means of fumigation.

(c) Adequate personnel and material for the capture or destruction of
rodents.

(d) An adequate bacteriological and pathological laboratory; (e) A safe
water supply.

(f) Adequate means for the collection of mortality and morbidity data; (g)
Adequate facilities for the isolation of suspects and the treatment of
infectious diseases.

(h) Signatory Governments shall register in the Pan-American Sanitary
Bureau those places that comply with these conditions.

ART. 32. A clean port, Class B, is one in which the conditions described in
other requirements of Art. 31, 2 are not fulfilled.

ART. 33. An unclassified port is one with regard to which the information
concerning the existence or non-existence of any of the diseases referred to
in Art. 23, and the measures which are being applied for the control of such
diseases, is not sufficient to classify such port.

An unclassified port shall be provisionally considered as a suspected or
infected port, as the information available in each case may determine, until
definitely classified.

ART. 34. The Pan American Sanitary Bureau shall prepare and publish, at
intervals, a tabulation of the most commonly used ports of the Western
Hemisphere, giving information as to sanitary conditions.

CHAPTER V.—CLASSIFICATION OF VESSELS
ART. 35. A clean vessel is one coming from a clean port, Class A or B, which
has had no case of plague, cholera, yellow fever, small pox or typhus
aboard during the voyage, and which has complied with the requirements of
this code.

ART. 36. An infected or suspected vessels [sic] is:
1. One which has had on board during the voyage a case or cases
of any of the diseases mentioned in Art. 35.
2. One which is from an infected or suspected port.
3. One which is from a port where plague or yellow fever exists.
4. Any vessel on which there has been mortality among rats.
5. A vessel which has violated any of the provisions of this code.
Provided that the sanitary authorities should give due consideration in
applying sanitary measures to a vessel that has not docked.
ART. 37. Any master or owner of any vessel, or any person violating any
provisions of this Code or violating any rule or regulation made in
accordance with this Code, relating to the inspection of vessels, the entry or
departure from any quarantine station, grounds or anchorages, or trespass
thereon, or to the prevention of the introduction of contagious or infectious
disease into any of the signatory countries, or any master, owner, or agent of
a vessel making a false statement relative to the sanitary condition of a
vessel, or its contents, or as to the health of any passenger, or person
thereon, or who interferes with a quarantine or health officer in the proper
discharge of his duty, or fails or refuses to present bills of health, or other

sanitary document, or pertinent information to a quarantine or health
officer, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of such laws,
rules or regulations, as may be or may have been enacted, or promulgated,
in accordance with the provisions of this Code, by the Government of the
country within whose jurisdiction the offense is committed.
CHAPTER VI.—THE TREATMENT OF VESSELS
ART. 38. Clean vessels will be granted pratique by the port health authority
upon acceptable evidence that they properly fulfill the requirements of Art.
35.

ART. 39. Suspected vessels will be subjected to necessary sanitary measures
to determine their actual condition.

ART. 40. Vessels infected with any of the diseases referred to in Art. 23 shall
be subjected to such sanitary measures as will prevent the continuance
thereon, and the spread therefrom, of any of said diseases to other vessels or
ports. The disinfection of cargo, stores and personal effects shall be limited
to the destruction of the vectors of disease which may be contained therein,
provided that things which have been freshly soiled with human excretions
capable of transmitting disease, shall always be disinfected. Vessels on
which there is undue prevalence of rats, mosquitoes, lice, or any other
potential vector of communicable disease, may be disinfected irrespective
of the classification of the vessel.

ART. 41. Vessels infected with plague shall be subjected to the following
treatment.
1. The vessel shall be held for observation and necessary
treatment.
2. The sick, if any, shall be removed and placed under appropriate
treatment in isolation.
3. The vessel shall be simultaneously fumigated throughout for
the destruction of rats. In order to render fumigation more
effective, cargo may be wholly or partially discharged prior to

such fumigation, but care will be taken to discharge no cargo
which might harbor rats,* except for fumigation.
4. All rats recovered after fumigation should be examined
bacteriologically.
5. Healthy contacts, excepts [sic] those actually exposed to cases
of pneumonic plague, will not be detained in quarantine.
6. The vessel will not be granted pratique until it is reasonably
certain that it is free from rats and vermin.
ART. 42. Vessels infected with cholera shall be subjected to the following
treatment.
1. The vessels shall be held for observation and necessary
treatment.
2. The sick, if any, shall be removed and placed under appropriate
treament [sic] in isolation.
3. All persons on board shall be subjected to bacteriological
examination, and shall not be admitted to entry until
demonstrated free from cholera vibrios.
4. Appropriate disinfection shall be performed.
ART. 43. Vessels infected with yellow fever shall be subjected to the
following treatment.
1. The vessel shall be held for observation and necessary
treatment.
2. The sick, if any, shall be removed and placed under appropriate
treatment in isolation from Aedes aegypti mosquitoes.
3. All persons on board non immune to yellow fever shall be
placed under observation to complete six days from the last
possible exposure to Aedes aegypti mosquitoes.

4. The vessel shall be freed from Aedes aegypti mosquitoes.
ART. 44. Vessels infected with small pox shall be subjected to the following
treatment.
1. The vessels shall be held for observation and necessary
treatment.
2. The sick, if any, shall be removed and placed under appropriate
treatment in isolation.
3. All persons on board shall be vaccinated. As an option the
passenger may elect to undergo isolaton [sic] to complete
fourteen days from the last possible exposure to the disease.
4. All living quarters of the vessels shall be rendered
mechanically clean, and used clothing and bedding of the patient
desinfected [sic].

ART. 45. Vessels infected with typhus shall be subjected to the following
treatment.
1. The vessel shall be held for observation and necessary
treatment.
2. The sick, if any, shall be removed and placed under appropriate
treatment in isolation from lice.
3. All persons on board and their personal effects shall be
deloused.
4. All persons on board who have been exposed to the infection
shall be placed under observation to complete twelve days from
the last possible exposure to the infection.
5. The vessel shall be deloused.

ART. 46. The time of detention of vessels for inspection or treatment shall be
the least consistent with public safety and scientific knowledge. It is the

duty of port health officers to facilitate the speedy movement of vessels to
the utmost compatible with the foregoing.

ART. 47. The power and authority of quarantine will not be utilized for
financial gain, and no charges for quarantine services will exceed actual
cost plus a reasonable surcharge for administrative expenses and
fluctuations in the market prices of materials used.

CHAPTER VII.—FUMIGATION STANDARDS
ART. 48. Sulphur dioxide, hydrocyanic acid and cyanogen chloride gas
mixture shall be considered as standard fumigants when used in accordance
with the table set forth in the appendix, as regards hours of exposure and of
quantities of fumigants per 1,000 cubic feet.

ART. 49. Fumigation of ships to be most effective should be performed
periodically and preferable [sic] at six months intervals, and should include
the entire vessel and its lifeboats. The vessels should be free of cargo.

ART. 50. Before the liberation of hydrogen cyanide or cyanogen chloride, all
personnel of the vessel will be removed, and care will be observed that all
compartments are rendered as nearly gas tight as possible.

CHAPTER VIII.—MEDICAL OFFICERS OF VESSELS
ART. 51. In order to better protect the health of travelers by sea, to aid in the
prevention of the international spread of disease and to facilitate the
movement of international commerce and communication, the signatory
Governments are authorized in their discretion to license physicians
employed on vessels.

ART. 52. It is recommended that license not issue unless the applicant
therefor is a graduate in medicine from a duly chartered and recognized
school of medicine, is the holder of an unrepealed license to practice
medicine, and has successfully passed an examination as to his moral and
mental fitness to be the surgeon or medical officer of a vessel. Said

examination shall be set by the directing head of the national health service,
and shall require of the applicant a competent knowledge of medicine and
surgery. Said directing head of the national health service may issue a
license to an applicant who successfully passes the examination, and may
revoke said license upon conviction of malpractice, unprofessional conduct,
offenses involving moral turpitude or infraction of any of the sanitary laws
or regulations of any of the signatory Governments based upon the
provisions of this code.

ART. 53. When duly licensed as aforesaid, said surgeons or medical officers
of vessels may be utilized in aid of inspection as defined in this code.
CHAPTER IX.—THE PAN AMERICAN SANITARY BUREAU
Functions and Duties
ART. 54. The organization, functions and duties of the Pan American
Sanitary Bureau shall include those heretofore determined for the
International Sanitary Bureau by the various International Sanitary and
other Conferences of American Republics, and such additional
administrative functions and duties as may be hereafter determined by Pan
American Sanitary Conferences.

ART. 55. The Pan American Sanitary Bureau shall be the central coordinating
sanitary agency of the various member Republics of the Pan American
Union, and the general collection and distribution center of sanitary
information to and from said Republic. For this purpose it shall, from time
to time, designate representatives to visit and confer with the sanitary
authorities of the various signatory Governments on public health matters,
and such representatives shall be given all available sanitary information in
the countries visited by them in the course of their official visits and
conferences.

ART. 56. In addition, the Pan American Sanitary Bureau shall perform the
following specific functions: To supply to the sanitary authorities of the
signatory Governments through its publications, or in other appropriate
manner, all available information relative to the actual status of the
communicable diseases of man, new invasions of such diseases, the sanitary

measures undertaken, and the progress effected in the control or eradication
of such diseases; new methods for combating disease; morbidity and
mortality statistics; public health organization and administration; progress
in any of the branches of preventive medicine, and other pertinent
information relative to sanitation and public health in any of its phases,
including a bibliography of books and periodicals on public hygiene.
In order to more efficiently discharge its functions, it may undertake
cooperative epidemiological and other studies; may employ at headquarters
and elsewhere, experts for this purpose; may stimulate and facilitate
scientific researches and the practical application of the results therefrom;
and may accept gifts, benefactions and bequest [sic], which shall be
accounted for in the manner now provided for the maintenance funds of the
Bureau.

ART. 57. The Pan American Sanitary Bureau shall advise and consult with
the sanitary authorities of the various signatory Governments relative to
public health problems, and the manner of interpreting and applying the
provisions of this Code.

ART. 58. Officials of the National Health Services may be designated as
representatives, ex-officio, of the Pan American Sanitary Bureau, in
addition to their regular duties, and when so designated they may be
empowered to acts [sic] as sanitary representatives of one or more of the
signatory Governments when properly designated and accredited to so
serve.

ART. 59. Upon request of the sanitary authorities of any of the signatory
Governments, the Pan American Sanitary Bureau is authorized to take the
necessary preparatory steps to bring about an exchange of professors,
medical and health officers, experts or advisers in public health of any of
the sanitary sciences, for the purpose of mutual aid and advancement in the
protection of the public health of the signatory Governments.
ART. 60. For the purpose of discharging the functions and duties imposed
upon the Pan American Sanitary Bureau, a fund of not less than $50,000
shall be collected by the Pan American Union, apportioned among the

signatory Governments on the same basis as are the expenses of the Pan
American Union.

CHAPTER X.—AIRCRAFT
ART. 61. The provisons [sic] of this Convention shall apply to aircraft, and
the signatory Governments agree to designate landing places for aircraft
which shall have the same status as quarantine anchorages.

CHAPTER XI.—SANITARY CONVENTION OF WASHINGTON
Sanitary Convention concluded in Washington on October 14, 1905, are
hereby continued in full force and effect, except in so far as they may be in
conflict with the provisions of this Convention.

CHAPTER XII
Be is understood that this Code does not in any may [sic] abrogate or impair
the validity or force of any existing treaty convention or agreement between
any of the signatory governments and any other government.

CHAPTER XIII.—TRANSITORY DISPOSITION
ART. 63. The Governments which may not have signed the present
Convention are to be admitted to adherence thereto upon demand, notice of
this adherence to be given through diplomatic channels to the Government
of the Republic of Cuba.

Made and signed in the city of Havana, on the fourteenth day of the month
of November, 1924, in two copies, in English and Spanish, respectively,
which shall be deposited with the Department of Foreign Relations of the
Republic of Cuba, in order that certified copies thereof, in both English and
Spanish, may be made for transmission through diplomatic channels to each
of the signatory Governments.

By the Republic of Argentine:
GREGORIO ARAOZ ALFARO
JOAQUIN LLAMBIAS
By the United States of Brazil:
NASCIMENTO GURGEL
RAUL ALMEIDA MAGALHAES
By the Republic of Chile:
CARLOS GRAF
By the Republic of Colombia:
R. GUTIERREZ LEE
By the Republic of Costa Rica:
JOSE VARELA ZEQUEIRA
By the Republic of Cuba:
MARIO G. LEBREDO
JOSE A. LOPEZ DEL VALLE
HUGO ROBERTS
DIEGO TAMAYO
FRANCISCO M. FERNANDEZ
DOMINGO F. RAMOS
By the Republic of El Salvador:
LEOPOLDO PAZ
By the United States of America:
HUGH S. CUMMING
RICHARD CREEL
P. D. CRONIN
By the Republic of Guatemala:
JOSE DE CUBAS Y SERRATE
By the Republic of Haiti:
CHARLES MATHON
By the Republic of Honduras:
ARISTIDES AGRAMONTE
By the Republic of Mexico:
ALFONSO PRUNEDA
By the Republic of Panama:
JAIME DE LA GUARDIA
By the Republic of Paraguay:

ANDRES GUBETICH
By the Republic of Peru:
CARLOS E. PAZ SOLDAN
By the Dominican Republic:
R. PEREZ CABRAL
By the Republic of Uruguay:
JUSTO F. GONZALEZ
By the United States of Venezuela:
ENRIQUE TEJERA
ANTONIO SMITH

[An appendix to the convention, containing forms of certificates and other
documents, and an annex are not printed here; but may be found in Treaty
Series No. 714 published by the Department of State in 1925.]

Boundary disputes

[Document 220]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Paraguay
(Southworth)
WASHINGTON, July 25, 1924.

No. 247
SIR: The Department is in receipt of your confidential telegram No. 14, of
with reference to the recrudescence of the boundary dispute between
Paraguay and Bolivia concerning the sovereignty over a portion of the
Chaco Boreal. You state that the Bolivian Government has protested to the
Paraguayan Foreign Office against the grant reported to have been made by
the Government of Paraguay to Canadian Mennonites of certain land in this
territory, and you add that the Chargé d’Affaires of Bolivia at Asuncion has
inquired whether you would not submit to him a memorandum containing
suggestions in regard to a possible intervention of the United States in this
problem, which he might transmit to his Government.

The Department desires to inform you in this connection that the
Government of the United States would not be willing to intervene in this
boundary dispute until it is requested to do so by both of the countries in
question.

JOSEPH C. GREW

[Document 221]
The Ambassador in Argentina (Riddle) to the Secretary of State
ASUNCIÓN, August 20, 1924.

[Received September 17.]

SIR: This afternoon the Minister for Foreign Affairs sent word he would like
to call on me at 4. and on his arrival at that hour he handed me a short
document in Spanish—a copy and translation of which are herewith
enclosed. This memorandum constitutes a summing up of the
communications exchanged between the governments of Bolivia and
Paraguay relative to the disputed question of the limitation of their frontiers
and indicates a disposition on the part of both governments to submit the
question to the arbitration of the United States.

The Foreign Minister in handing me this paper said that the President of
Paraguay requested me to forward it to my government at Washington.
I have [etc.]

J. W. RIDDLE
[Enclosure—Translation ]
Draft of an Agreement between Paraguay and Bolivia
ARTICLE 1. The Governments of Paraguay and Bolivia, not having
been able to reach a direct agreement in former negotiations,
agree to ask the Government of the United States of America to
act as arbiter in the arbitration of right (arbitrage de derecho) to
which they must submit their boundary dispute according to the
protocol of April 5, 1913, still in force.

[Document 222]
The Chargé in Paraguay (Southworth) to the Secretary of State
ASUNCIÓN, September 4, 1924.

[Received October 1.]

No. 1422
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the Department’s instruction No. 247
of July 25, 1924 concerning the Paraguay-Bolivia boundary dispute; in
which I am informed that the government of the United States would not be
willing to intervene in this dispute until it is requested to do so by both of
the countries in question.

Referring also to Ambassador Riddle’s despatch in this regard from
Asuncion, of August 20, 1924, enclosing a draft of an agreement between
Paraguay and Bolivia requesting the acceptance by the United States of the
role of judge, I would now inform the Department that it seems the above
draft is a copy of a counter-proposal made to Bolivia by President Ayala in
answer to one essentially similar, submitted just after the inauguration by
the Bolivian Special Ambassador, Señor Diez de Medina, who has since
returned to his regular post at Buenos Aires.

This information was offered me today by the new Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Dr. Manuel Peña; he continued by relating frankly the present
status of negotiations with Bolivia in the boundary dispute.
The protest recently made by the Bolivian Chargé against the grants of land
in the Chaco to Canadian Mennonites, and referred to in my telegram No.
informed, by the observation that the Paraguayan government had no part in
the concession to the Mennonites beyond passing a law requested by them
exempting them from compulsory military service and granting other
similar favors; and moreover that Señor Casado, of the Company which

sold them their lands, had personally demonstrated on the map that these
lands were not only not in Bolivian territory, but were between Parallels 59
and 60 of West Longitude.

Dr. Peña touched on historical aspects of this case, declaring—as Dr.
Manuel Gondra, ex-President and Foreign Minister has also recently
assured me—that since about 1911 it has been the Paraguayan desire to
have this question arbitrated by the United States. The language of the
Ayala-Mujía protocol of April 5, 1913, providing for the present status-quo,
bears this out to some extent in its use of precisely the same verbiage,
“arbitraje de derecho”, employed in the present draft agreement. The
President of Argentina had at that time declined to serve as arbiter.
Dr. Peña then referred to the representations telegraphed by the Department
in December, 191462 at the time that a Paraguayan military incursion into
the Chaco was reported; and stated that proofs of its non-existence were
immediately furnished to President Wilson. Paraguay could not but desire
American intervention in this problem, he continued, in view of the happy
settlement by President Hayes of the territorial dispute with Argentina also
involving a portion of the Chaco.

Negotiations with Bolivia will continue for the present in La Paz the
Minister stated; adding that what his government contemplates after signing
such an agreement as that drafted, is, first, direct conversations between
representatives of Bolivia and Paraguay in Washington, “with the friendly
aid of President Coolidge”; and later, in case no decision is reached in this
way, the consummation of the proposed “arbitration of right”, with the
President as umpire. I am informed that since Manuel Gondra has declined
the appointment as Minister to the United States on account of his health,
this will probably go to ex-President Eusebio Ayala; who will accordingly
be the Paraguayan negotiator if the proposed agreement with Bolivia is
reached.

In this regard I note from the President of Bolivia’s reply to Minister
Guggiari’s recent speech on presenting his credentials, furnished me by
Minister Cottrell, that Señor Saavedra declared his government was

[Document 223]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Paraguay (Southworth)
WASHINGTON, October 13, 1924.

No. 258
SIR: The Department is in receipt of the despatch dated Asunción, Paraguay,
August 20, 1924, from the American Ambassador to the Argentine Republic
referred to in your despatch No. 1422, dated September 4, the receipt of
which is hereby acknowledged, stating that the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Paraguay had handed him a memorandum in relation to the Paraguayan-
Bolivian boundary dispute and had added that the President of Paraguay
requested the Ambassador to forward it to Washington. Mr. Riddle encloses
a copy and translation of this document, copies of which are transmitted
herewith for your information.

You are instructed to inform the Minister for Foreign Affairs, orally and
informally, that the Department has received from Mr. Riddle a copy of the
memorandum in question. You should indicate to him, however, in the same
informal manner, the position of the Government of the United States in
regard to this boundary question, as described in the Department’s
For the Secretary of State:
JOSEPH C. GREW
222].

[Document 224]
The Chargé in Bolivia (Barker) to the Secretary of State
LA PAZ, November 26, 1924.

[Received December 18.]

No. 596
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s instruction No. 136, dated
October 13, 1924, with regard to the possibility of American arbitration of
the Bolivian-Paraguayan boundary dispute. I am informed by Dr. Germán
Costas R., Acting Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs, that since the
departure last September of Doctor Guggiari, former Paraguayan Minister
to Bolivia, there have been no further negotiations of any importance in
connection with the boundary dispute between Bolivia and Paraguay. It is
expected, however, that with the arrival of Señor Deconel, the newly
appointed Paraguayan Minister to Bolivia, Chile and Peru, negotiations will
again enter upon an active phase.

Doctor Costas today repeated to me his previous statement, reported in the
of having the United States chosen as arbitrator of the boundary dispute and
that his Government has approached the Paraguayan Government in this
sense. The Government of Paraguay has intimated to the Bolivian
Government that it also desires the selection of the United States as
arbitrator. The divergence in the views of the two Governments on this
boundaryquestion which still exists has no connection with the choice of the
arbitrator, Doctor Costas states, but is a question of what matters the
arbitrator shall be called upon to decide and the form in which the protocol
of arbitration is to be drawn up.

I may add that there is at present no evidence of any intention on the part of
the Foreign Office here to recede from its previous uncompromising

[Document 225]
Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with
the Colombian Minister (Olaya), March 13, 1924
March 13, 1924
[Extract]
The Minister then referred to relations with Panama as his Government was
most anxious to have an adjustment. He hoped the Secretary would
examine into the situation to see if something could not be done along the
lines that had been suggested before for the purpose of securing a
resumption of relations between Panama and Colombia. The Minister said
that from what he had heard he believed Panama would at this time be very
much disposed to listen to any suggestions the Secretary would make. The
Secretary referred to what had already been done and to the protocol that
had been arranged and to the difficulty that had arisen with respect to the
boundary question. The Secretary said he would look into the matter to see
if there would be any prospect of success if the matter were taken up again.

[Document 226]
Procès-Verbal of a Meeting between the Secretary of State, the
Colombian Minister (Olaya), and the Panaman Minister (Alfaro),
Doctor Enrique Olaya and Doctor Ricardo J. Alfaro, Envoys Extraordinary
and Ministers Plenipotentiary of the Republics of Colombia and Panama,
respectively, having on the invitation of the Secretary of State of the United
States, met with him in his office at the Department of State, Washington, at
Olaya and Alfaro to his office to confer with them regarding the institution
of diplomatic relations between the two Republics which is so cordially
desired by the Government of the United States.

The Secretary of State added that it would be most gratifying indeed for the
two neighboring Republics of Colombia and Panama to enter into regular
diplomatic relations, and he, therefore, asked the Minister of Colombia
whether, by reason of the recognition of Panama by Colombia as an
independent nation, he did not think the moment opportune for establishing
such relations and inquired whether it would please the Government of
Colombia to receive the representative that the Government of Panama
would accredit for that purpose to negotiate and conclude with the
Government of Colombia a boundary convention and a treaty of peace and
friendship and to adjust all questions of pecuniary liability as between the
two countries, in accordance with recognized principles of law and
precedents. He further inquired whether Colombia would also be prepared
to accredit a Minister to Panama.

Doctor Olaya replied that he was authorized by his Government to state
officially to the Panaman Minister that the Republic of Colombia
recognizes Panama as an independent nation and that his Government

would be pleased to receive the duly accredited agent whom the Republic
of Panama would despatch to negotiate and conclude with the Government
of Colombia a boundary convention and a treaty of peace and friendship
and to adjust all questions of pecuniary liability as between the two
countries, in accordance with recognized principles of law and precedents.
He added that the Government of Colombia would also be pleased to
accredit a Minister to the Republic of Panama.

Thereupon, the Secretary of State, addressing the Panaman Minister,
expressed the hope that the Panaman Government was ready to enter into
diplomatic relations with the Government of Colombia and inquired
whether his Government would be inclined, with a view to instituting
official relations between the two Republics, to accredit a diplomatic agent
to the Republic of Colombia, for the purposes mentioned, and to receive the
Minister whom the Republic of Colombia might accredit.

Doctor Alfaro replied that he was authorized by his Government to express
its gratification at the recognition of Panama by Colombia as an
independent nation and added that his Government would despatch a duly
accredited agent to negotiate and conclude with the Government of
Colombia a boundary convention and a treaty of peace and friendship and
to adjust all questions of pecuniary liability as between the two countries, in
accordance with recognized principles of law and precedents. He added that
his Government would be pleased to receive the Minister accredited by the
Government of Colombia.

The Secretary of State then stated that he desired to avail himself of that
opportunity to offer to serve as a medium for the request of the agrément of
the Ministers who should be accredited by the Republics of Colombia and
Panama, respectively, if Messrs. Olaya and Alfaro had instructions on the
subject.

The Panaman Minister stated that he was authorized by his Government to
inquire, in case the Minister of Colombia should have been instructed to
answer, whether Mr. Nicolas Victoria J. would be persona grata to the
Colombian Government.

The Colombian Minister replied that he was authorized by his Government
to accept as persona grata anyone whose name should have been suggested
by the Government of Panama, and he added that he was authorized by his
Government, in reciprocation, to inquire whether Doctor José Maria
González Valencia would be persona grata to the Government of Panama.
The Panaman Minister replied that he was authorized by his Government to
accept as persona grata anyone whose name should have been suggested by
the Government of Colombia.

The Secretary of State then expressed his appreciation of the good-will and
friendly attitude thus shown by the Governments of Colombia and Panama
towards each other, and his gratification that the sister Republics were to
establish regular diplomatic relations and undertake formally to adjust their
relations in accordance with recognized principles of law and precedents. It
was, he said, his understanding that both Governments earnestly desired the
establishment of regular diplomatic relations as soon as possible and to that
end it might be agreeable to both Governments to set a date for the
appointment of Mr. Victoria J. as Panaman Minister to Colombia and
Doctor Gonzalez Valencia as Colombian Minister to Panama. If so, he
would suggest May 15, 1924, as a suitable date, it being mutually agreed
that both representatives shall thereupon proceed forthwith to their
respective posts.

The Panaman and Colombian Ministers both replied that they were
authorized by their respective Governments to state that Messrs. Victoria J.
and Gonzalez Valencia would be appointed respectively as Panaman
Minister to Colombia and Colombian Minister to Panama on May 15, 1924,
and that they would thereupon proceed forthwith to their posts.

This procès verbal of the meeting, drawn up in triplicate in English and
Spanish, was signed by the Secretary of State and the Ministers of
Colombia and Panama. One copy will be retained by the Secretary of State,
who will send of the remaining two copies, one each to the Ministers of
Colombia and Panama respectively.

Cares E. Hycues
R. J . Araro

Enrique Orava

[Document 227]
The Panaman Minister (Alfaro) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, May 8, 1924.

No. 253
MR. SECRETARY: Referring to the conversations that have been held between this
Legation and the Department of State with regard to establishing diplomatic
relations between the Republic of Panama and the Republic of Colombia, it
affords me pleasure to inform Your Excellency that my Government, after
giving due consideration to a study of the different phases of the subject,
has reached the conclusion that the question of limits between the two
countries must be settled by establishing in a final manner the boundary line
existing now de facto and described as follows:
“From Cape Tiburón to the headwaters of the Rio de la Miel and
following the mountain chain by the ridge of Gandi to the Sierra
de Chugargun and that of Mali going down by the ridges of Nigue
to the heights of Aspave and from thence to a point on the Pacific
half way between Cocalito and La Ardita.”
Although the Government of Panama in the negotiations set on foot through
the powerful mediation of the Department of State had made a proposition
which implied the acceptance of the frontier above described as far as the
heights of Aspave, leaving open for future negotiation the small part of the
line lying between that point and the Pacific Ocean, it believes that there are
considerations of the highest order which make for a final immediate
agreement on the boundary question. I therefore have the honor to express
to Your Excellency in communicating to you the wish of Panama to agree
on the border line above described that the Minister Plenipotentiary that my
Government may accredit to the Government of Colombia under the terms

signed this day will carry instructions to sign as soon as it may be agreeable
to the Government of Colombia a special boundary convention establishing
the boundary as expressed in this note.

I avail myself [etc.]

R. J. ALFARO

[Document 228]
The Secretary of State to the Panaman Minister (Alfaro)
WASHINGTON, May 8, 1924.

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of today by
which you were so good as to inform me that your Government having
studied the question of establishing regular diplomatic relations between
Panama and Colombia has decided that the boundary question between
Panama and Colombia should be settled by establishing definitively the
frontier line existing in fact today and which is described as follows:
“From Cape Tiburón to the headwaters of the Rio de la Miel and
following the mountain chain by the ridge of Gandi to the Sierra
de Chugargun and that of Mali going down by the ridges of Nigue
to the heights of Aspave and from thence to a point on the Pacific
half way between Cocalito and La Ardita”.

You add that in order to bring this about the Minister Plenipotentiary
who[m] your Government is accrediting near the Government of Colombia
by virtue of the Procès Verbal signed today will bear instructions to sign as
soon as may be agreeable to the Government of Colombia a special
boundary convention which will fix the boundary as defined in your note
quoted above.

In expressing to you the satisfaction which it has afforded this Government
to learn that your Government has decided to settle this matter in the
manner stated I take this opportunity to inform you that a copy of your note
under acknowledgment is being transmitted by me today to the Colombian
Minister.

Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 229]
The Secretary of State to the Colombian Minister (Olaya)
WASHINGTON, May 8, 1924.

SIR: I have the honor to send you herewith English and Spanish original
copies of the Proces Verbal of the meeting between you and the Panaman
Minister held in my office today. I likewise take pleasure in enclosing
herewith a certified copy of a note dated May 8, 1924, from the Panaman
Minister70 in which he informs me that the Government of Panama accepts
as the boundary between Colombia and Panama the following, which you
will note is the boundary provided in Article III of the Treaty between the
United States and Colombia signed April 6, 1914:
“From Cape Tiburón to the headwaters of the Rio de la Miel and
following the mountain chain by the ridge of Gandi to the Sierra
de Chugargún and that of Mali going down by the ridges of Nigue
to the heights of Aspave and from thence to a point on the Pacific
half way between Cocalito and La Ardita.”
The note from the Panaman Minister adds that in consequence of the
acceptance of this boundary Señor Nicolas Victoria J. who will be
appointed Panaman Minister to Colombia will have specific instructions to
conclude as soon as may be agreeable to the Government of Colombia a
special boundary convention fixing the boundary as above provided.
This Government is not only mindful of its engagement under Article III of
the Treaty between the United States and Colombia signed at Bogotá April
6, 1914, but will also be prepared to contribute to the final solution of the
boundary question through the ratification by the Congress of Panama of
the boundary convention provided for in the note from the Panaman
Minister enclosed herewith.

It affords me great pleasure to transmit to you the two documents above
mentioned embodying the agreement of the Government of Panama on the
boundary between the Republics of Colombia and Panama as well as the
latter Government’s engagement to despatch a duly accredited agent to
negotiate and conclude with the Government of Colombia a treaty of peace
and friendship with a view to bring about the establishment of regular
diplomatic relations between the two countries and the adjustment of all
questions of pecuniary liability.

Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 230]
Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with
the Colombian Minister (Olaya), September 18, 1924
September 18, 1924
The Minister said that a treaty had been concluded with Panama in
accordance with the arrangement that had been stated in the procès verbal
which had been signed through the Secretary’s mediation. The Minister left
a copy of the treaty. The Minister said that this was to be submitted at once
to the Colombian Congress and that he understood the Congress of Panama
was now in session and he hoped that it would be submitted there promptly
as he understood that they would not have another session for two years. He
hoped the Secretary would use his friendly offices to have the treaty
considered at an early date by the Panaman Congress. The Secretary said
that we were gratified at the conclusion of the treaty and that it was hoped
that it would be ratified at an early date. The Secretary said that he would
inquire with respect to the situation in Panama.

The Minister spoke of the American Economic Mission to Colombia71 and
of its success. His Government was very much pleased and important
measures had resulted.

[Document 231]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
LIMA, January 15, 1924.

[Received January 30.]

No. 107
I have the honor to report that Congress adjourned the 11th instant.
The signed treaty of March 24, 1922,73a fixing the Colombian-Peruvian
frontier, was not submitted to Congress for ratification. This long-standing
controversy thus has no prospect of settlement for the present; probably not
before 1925. The new Congress, I understand, is not to convene until
October next, the time fixed for the celebration of the Ayacucho Centenary.
Since last reporting to the Department regarding the status of this treaty, I
had occasion again to see the President and, in the spirit of the
Department’s instructions on the subject, I once more raised the subject of
ratification—deeming this opportune in view of the Colombian Minister’s
categoric denial and representations to the Peruvian Government following
President Leguía’s statement that Mr. Lozano74 had acquiesced in
postponing ratification until the convening of the next Congress.
President Leguía again spoke of Brazilian opposition but volunteered the
information—in the form of a definite assurance—that he would submit the
treaty to Congress during the session which has just ended. The President
has not as yet offered me any explanation for not having carried out his
announced intention.

[Document 232]
The Minister in Colombia (Piles) to the Secretary of State
BOGOTÁ, February 1, 1924.

[Received March 8.]

No. 355
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge copy of despatch No. 88 of December
Ambassador has made to bring about an early ratification of the boundary
treaty between Colombia and Peru. Feeling that the knowledge of this
interest in Colombia’s welfare as well as the salient facts contained in the
despatch would be most welcome news to President Ospina, I called at the
Palace and informed the President as far as discretion would permit, of
course omitting all reference to the attitude of Brazil, relative to the extent
of the informal good offices of the United States in the matter.
The President appeared worried relative to the fate of the treaty and stated
how much, the negotiations mean to his administration. He was particularly
concerned over the obligatory absence from Lima at this juncture for
motives of health of the Colombian Minister and the necessity of leaving
representations in the hands of a young and relatively inexperienced Chargé
d’Affaires ad interim. I therefore ventured to suggest that the Chargé
d’Affaires, when he felt in need, have recourse to the advice of the
American Ambassador who is thoroughly conversant with all the angles of
the situation. President Ospina ended by expressing his profound
gratification for the sincere interest my Government is taking in the
settlement of this long standing frontier dispute and stated that it constitutes
one of the most friendly acts of one Government towards another that has
come within his experience.

I have [etc.]

Samuer. H. P ILES
= Not printed.

[Document 233]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Colombia (Piles)
WASHINGTON, March 28, 1924.

No. 657
SIR: The receipt is acknowledged of your despatch No. 355, dated February
1, 1924, in which you state that you had informed President Ospina as far as
discretion would permit of the substance of certain parts of despatch No.
regarding the boundary dispute and Treaty of 1922 between Colombia and
Peru.

As you are aware, the good offices of this Government are frequently
extended to assist in bringing about a settlement of a controversy between
two parties when both sides so request. In the case of the boundary dispute
between Colombia and Peru its friendly offices were extended at the request
of one of the parties after some assurance was had that such action would
not be unfavorably received by the other.

The Department has noted your statement that in the conversation with
President Ospina on this subject you suggested that the Colombian Chargé
d’Affaires at Lima, when he felt in need, have recourse to the advice of the
American Ambassador who is thoroughly conversant with all angles of the
situation. While the Department is gratified to learn of the President’s
appreciation as expressed to you, it trusts that the Colombian Government
fully realizes that this Government’s attitude in the matter is one of the
strictest impartiality, and that President Ospina has not been led by your
suggestion to believe that the efforts of this Government to be of assistance
to the Colombian and Peruvian Governments in this question might extend
beyond the informal and friendly acts already performed. The Department
does not desire to appear as the agency suggesting or initiating measures
which, if brought to the attention of the other party, might incline it to view

further informal action with disfavor. For that reason, the Department
considers that suggestions such as that made by you to the President of
Colombia should in the future be avoided.

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 234]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
WASHINGTON, October 7, 1924.

No. 127
SIR: Reference is made to your confidential despatch No. 107 of January 15,
giving translations of telegrams exchanged between President Leguía and

[Document 235]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
LIMA, November 17, 1924.

[Received December 3.]

No. 312
SIR: Referring to the Department’s confidential instruction No. 127 of
date, that from a conversation which I have had today with Doctor
Salomon, Peruvian Minister of Foreign Relations, I have formed the
conclusion that it is not likely that the Peruvian Congress will ratify the
treaty which has been formulated and signed by the executive
representatives of Colombia and Peru, fixing the boundary line between the
two countries.

Doctor Salomón showed me a copy of a formal memorandum which had
been submitted by the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Brazil to the Peruvian
Minister at Rio de Janeiro, supplementing a conversation which the
Brazilian Minister had with the Peruvian representative. This memorandum
raised two points of objection by Brazil to the ratification of the treaty:
First. It pointed out that in the agreement which Brazil had made with Perú,
—fixing a line running due south from the Caquetá River to the Amazon
River, as the boundary line, in that section, between Brazil and Peru,—
Brazil did not contemplate that an area of land contiguous to this boundary
line, and which, by the said agreement, came under the sovereignty of Peru,
would be transferred voluntarily or at all by the latter country to an entirely
new and different sovereignty. The memorandum also stated that in
agreeing to the provision of the treaty between Brazil and Peru, that in case
Colombia should be the winner in the controversy existing between that
country and Perú in regard to the identical territory lying west of and
contiguous to the said boundary line, then Brazil would negotiate with
Colombia in regard to the respective rights of the two countries thereto,—it

did not contemplate the cession of this territory by Perú to Colombia, by
treaty stipulation, but did suppose that the controversy would be submitted
to an arbitral or juridical decision by some impartial tribunal. In support of
this last statement, the memorandum called attention to the fact that in the
agreement between Perú and Brazil, in regard to this point, the language
used was “ganar la causa”, which, the Brazilian Minister of Foreign Affairs
argues, necessarily implied a cause to be tried before an arbitral or juridical
tribunal. The Brazilian Minister further stated, in the memorandum, that
Brazil was induced to make this agreement because of the implicit
confidence which it had that any impartial arbitral or juridical tribunal to
which the case might be submitted would necessarily decide in favor of
Perú, because of the incontrovertible merits and justice of the latter’s claim
to the territory in question;—the memorandum proceeding to state that it
was never conceived by Brazil that Peru would voluntarily cede its
jurisdiction over territory which was occupied by Peruvian citizens, and
over which its actual jurisdiction was daily enforced without interruption or
interference.

The memorandum then calls attention to the substantial interest which
Brazil has in the question as to whether Perú or Colombia shall exercise
sovereign jurisdiction over this strip of territory lying contiguous to her
boundary line, and that while Brazil is entirely willing, and has agreed, that
Peru should exercise sovereign jurisdiction over this territory, Brazil would
be compelled to protest against the transfer of it to Colombia.
Second. The memorandum of the Brazilian Minister pointed out that the
treaty between Colombia and Perú, which has just been submitted to the
Peruvian Congress for ratification, would, by its distribution of territory,
give Colombia access, to the main, navigable stream of the Amazon River;
and proceeds to state that this is a vital point with Brazil,—and that Brazil
would strenuously oppose the acquisition by a third sovereignty of territory
bordering upon this great river, whose banks were now controlled
exclusively by Brazil and Perú. The memorandum expressed surprise that
the treaty had been submitted to the Peruvian Congress for ratification.
Doctor Salomón stated to me that, aside from the memorandum, the
Peruvian Minister in Rio had been informed by the Brazilian Minister for

Foreign Relations that the Government of the latter country had learned
through its secret service that, if the pending treaty should be ratified before
the approaching Centenary of the Battle of Ayacucho, Colombia would send
a distinguished Mission to the Centenary; but that, on the contrary, if the
treaty should not be ratified, Colombia would send no Mission. Vis-à-vis to
this, the Brazilian Minister stated that, while Brazil expected to send a
Mission to do honor to Peru in the Centenary of the Battle of Ayacucho; that
in case the treaty referred to above, which concerns its interests so vitally,
should be ratified by the Peruvian Congress, Brazil would be compelled to
refrain from sending such a Mission. I judged from the tone and manner of
Dr. Salomón in stating this latter circumstance that he regarded it as of the
utmost importance and concern. The Peruvian Foreign Minister stated to
me, in quite a lengthy conversation on the subject, that he himself had never
approved of the terms of the treaty aforesaid, although he had signed it.
Upon my questioning he stated that he had signed it because of its approval
by President Leguía. He stated that Perú, by the unfortunate circumstances
in which it had been involved, in order to bring an end to controversies with
its neighbors and restore harmonious relations I with them, had been
compelled to cede to Bolivia and Brazil large areas of land to which it had a
clear right; that it had agreed to an arbitration with Ecuador of the dispute
involving great areas of territory to which the Minister believed the title of
Perú was indisputable; and that, for the same reason, Peru had formulated,
signed, and submitted for ratification, to the Peruvian Congress, the pending
treaty with Colombia. He stated, however, that if the ratification of this
treaty, which had for its object the gaining of the friendship of Colombia,
and the establishment of harmonious relations with that country, should
have the result of alienating Brazil and “making an enemy while gaining a
friend”, it would be of no profit to Peru. Throughout the conversation of the
Foreign Minister I gained the impression that the protest of Brazil had been
so pointed, and that either the hope of gaining favor with Brazil by
refraining from the ratification of the treaty in question, or the fear of
creating the enmity of that country by its ratification, had made such a
lively impression upon the Peruvian Government that the latter would bring
no pressure to bear upon Congress to secure favorable action. Doctor
Salomon stated to me that he showed me the memorandum and gave me the
information which I have related above under the direction of President
Leguía, which I am apprehensive tends to indicate that the latter also

regards both the circumstance and manner of the opposition and protest of
Brazil as an insuperable obstacle to the ratification of the treaty. In forming
this impression I have in mind also the significant intimations and inquiries
of President Leguía on the subject of the opposition of Brazil to the
ratification of the treaty, which I took occasion to report to the Department
In addition to the foregoing, Doctor Salomón informed me that the
Administration was compelled to respect the independence, and jealousy of
its rights, of the Peruvian Congress in the consideration of a treaty, and that
the Congress, in his opinion, would vigorously oppose the cession to
Colombia of land bordering upon the Amazon River. Dr. Salomón stated
specifically that he, himself, was also opposed to this, and that it was upon
this point that he had disagreed with President Leguía, and had disapproved
of the treaty, although signing it.

He stated, nevertheless, that the treaty had been submitted to Congress with
a recommendation for its ratification, and that, notwithstanding his personal
objections to some of the terms of the treaty, he would be entirely content
should Congress see fit to ratify it; but that, as Minister of Foreign
Relations, he would be compelled to submit to Congress full information as
to the protest of the Brazilian Government, and the grounds upon which it is
based. …
I expressed to Minister Salomón, as I have heretofore done to President
Leguía, the lively interest of the United States as a friendly sister American
nation, in the ratification of the treaty, and the profound regret which I knew
would be felt by the Government and people of the United States, if this
settlement of a long-standing controversy between two neighboring South
American countries, which had come so near to a peaceable solution,
should fail. I ventured to call the Minister’s attention to the fact that the
entire trend of modern international policy was towards the opening of great
navigable rivers to international navigation, and that a sound economic and
international policy should promote the accessibility of the interior, for the

purpose of its development and communication, to such a continental
stream as the Amazon.

I suggested to the Minister that Peru had profited a great deal in prestige, as
well as in economic stability, by the concessions which it had made in the
settlement of its boundary disputes with Bolivia and Brazil, and in the
prospective adjustment by arbitration, if necessary, of a similar dispute with
Ecuador; and the immense benefit that would accrue to the country by the
settlement of its dispute with Colombia,—a dispute which would
undoubtedly be reopened in an intensified form if the treaty should be
rejected.

From all I can learn, especially through conversations with the Minister of
Colombia in Peru, the rejection of the treaty by the Peruvian Congress, or
the failure of that body to ratify it, would cause very intense, hostile feeling
in the former country.

I have [etc.]

MILES POINDEXTER

[Document 236]
Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with
the Colombian Minister (Olaya), November 26, 1924
November 26, 1924
The Minister left a confidential memorandum dated November twenty-
sixth81 with respect to the Boundary Treaty signed in March, 1922, between
Colombia and Peru and the action which had been taken by Brazil in
relation thereto. The Minister explained the memorandum by saying that if
the Government of Brazil would withdraw its memorandum in opposition
to the ratification of the Treaty between Colombia and Peru he was
authorized to say that the Colombian Government would be glad to take up
the questions that might exist with Brazil in order to find an immediate
solution.

The Secretary said that he was already conversant to some extent with the
matter but that he would like to study the memorandum left with him by the
Minister of Colombia and such data as he had at hand and he would then

[Document 237]
The Colombian Legation to the Department of State
Supplementing the confidential memorandum of November 26, 1924, the
Minister of Colombia permits himself to emphasize the importance of the
friendly solution reached by the Governments of Colombia and Peru with
the signing of the Treaty of March, 1922.

The boundary question has been the cause of bitter disputes between the
two Republics for nearly a century, occasioning sharp diplomatic
correspondence and creating constantly a dangerous situation which in 1829
turned into war. Subsequently, this dispute has kept the two countries in a
state of prolonged anxiety. In 1907 and 1908 certain conflicts between
Colombian and Peruvian officials caused armed encounters. In 1911 this
state of things was repeated, armed forces of both governments
compromising themselves in the Caquetá region in a struggle of such an
alarming character that the diplomatic representatives of Brazil and
Venezuela in Colombia found it opportune, with the previous authorization
of their Governments, to offer their good offices. The continuous clashes
between Colombian and Peruvian colonists have been a cause of unrest and
anxiety on the part of the two Governments. In later years the negotiations
which culminated in the Boundary Treaty produced a favorable and well
marked change in the situation, but if the Treaty fails, that situation will
again assume its former deplorable character.

The said prolonged state of dispute created—as it could not fail to do—a
state of insecurity in that territory, particularly for the indian tribes, which
in consequence have been reduced to a state of actual slavery due to the fact
that the protection of the two governments does not fully reach them, in
zones of disputed sovereignty, thus making it easy for those guilty of such
slavery to elude and evade the action of justice. These are facts known by
the name of Atrocities and Crimes of the Putumayo, which have attracted
the attention of the world and concerning which there exists an extensive

[Document 238]
Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with
the Colombian Minister (Olaya), December 4, 1924
December 4, 1924
Mr. Hughes stated that he had examined the memorandum which had been
handed to him by the Colombian Minister on November 26, 1924, and the
supplementary memorandum of November 28, 1924, and that he had given
careful attention to the matters presented therein; that he would be glad to
see an amicable solution of this boundary problem and that while the
United States Government did not desire to intervene in the matter he was
disposed to offer such friendly advice as might tend to expedite a settlement
of the question.

Mr. Hughes said that he had noted from Doctor Olaya’s memoranda and
from other available information on the subject that the pending treaty
between Peru and Colombia, signed in 1922, provided for the cession by
Peru to Colombia of certain territory to the west of the line agreed upon by
Peru and Brazil in their Treaty of 1851 as the boundary between the two
countries. Mr. Hughes suggested that it might be a practicable solution of
the present difficulty if Colombia should agree to recognize the line
specified in the Treaty of 1851 between Peru and Brazil as the boundary
between Colombia and Brazil, in the event that the latter should withdraw
its objections to the Peruvian-Colombian Treaty of 1922 and the latter
Treaty should be ratified by Peru.

Mr. Hughes added that he was prompted to make this suggestion in view of
the fact that he understood that line had already been accepted by the
Executive branch of the Colombian Government in the unratified treaty
signed with Brazil at Bogotá July 25, 1853.

In conclusion Mr. Hughes stated that he would be pleased to communicate
this proposal informally to the Government of Brazil, should he be advised

that it would be acceptable to the Colombian Government.

[Document 239]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
WASHINGTON, December 11, 1924.

No. 955
SIR: There is enclosed for your information an English translation of a
memorandum presented to the Government of Peru by the Brazilian
Legation in Lima84 expressing the objections of Brazil to the boundary
convention signed by Peru and Colombia in 1922. The Portuguese text of
this document was left at the Department on November 14, 1924, by the
Brazilian Chargé d’Affaires.

In this connection the Department desires to refer to its strictly confidential
matter are awaited with interest.

[Document 240]
Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with
The Ambassador said that a difficulty had arisen with respect to this
boundary. Peru and Colombia had made a treaty in 1922 fixing the
boundary but Brazil had taken exception to this treaty upon the ground that
it affected her rights. Peru was very desirous that the whole matter should
be harmoniously adjusted and knowing the wish of the Government of the
United States to do all in its power to promote friendly relations in Latin
America, the Ambassador asked if the Secretary would look into the
question and see if some suggestion could be made which would provide an
harmonious solution.

The Secretary said that he greatly appreciated the Ambassador’s suggestion;
that the Government of the United States did not desire to intrude in matters
in which it was not concerned, but that the Government was always
desirous to aid by its friendly offices in the settlement of differences when
other Governments so desired. The Secretary said he would be glad to look
into the matter with which he was already to some extent conversant, and
that within a short time he would ask the Ambassador to come in and talk it
over. The Ambassador expressed his appreciation.

[Document 241]
Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with
Mr. Gracie, the Chargé d’Affaires, called under instructions by his
Government, to leave a memorandum86 relating to the question that had
arisen with respect to the treaty between Peru and Colombia defining their
boundaries. Reference was made to the note already sent to the Peruvian
Government by the Brazilian Government stating that this treaty affected
Brazilian interests and their desire that it should not be ratified. The
Brazilian Government desired an harmonious settlement between Peru,
Colombia and Brazil, and suggested that the matter might be disposed of by
arbitration. The Government of the United States was asked to consider the
question to see if some helpful suggestion in the direction of the settlement
could be made. The Secretary responded to Mr. Grade’s statement,
expressing his appreciation of the attitude of the Brazilian Government. The
Secretary said that this Government was always desirous to use its good
offices to aid in promoting settlements in Latin America when this was
agreeable to the Governments concerned. The Secretary said that he had
already studied this question somewhat and he would be glad to give the
memorandum and the subject further consideration and within a few days
he would ask Mr. Gracie to come in and talk this matter over.

[Document 242]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
between Peru and Ecuador at Quito, provides for submission boundary
settlement to arbitration in Washington. Delegates meet there immediately
after Tacna-Arica decision. Text follows by next pouch. Minister for
Foreign Affairs categorically states that above agreement in no way
prejudices Peruvian-Colombian treaty which will be submitted to Congress
for ratification immediately on convening.

POINDEXTER

[Document 243]
The Minister in Ecuador (Bading) to the Secretary of State
1923. The following protocol has been signed by the Ecuadorean Minister
for Foreign Affairs and the Peruvian Minister, preamble omitted:
“1st. The two Governments, with the previous assent of
that of the United States of America, shall send to
Washington their respective delegations to discuss there
in a friendly manner the? boundary question, in order
that, if they do not succeed in fixing a definite line, they
may determine by common agreement the zones which
each of the parties reciprocally recognize and the zone
which will have to be submitted to the arbitral award of
the President of the United States of America;
“2d. When one or the other of the above-mentioned
ends is obtained, the delegations shall sign a protocol
thereof which will be submitted to the approval of the
Congresses of both nations;
“3d. The delegations must be constituted in Washington
immediately after the question submitted to the
arbitration of the President of the United States by the
Governments of Peru and Chile has been decided. As
far as the appointment of the delegates is concerned,
both Governments shall have the power of appointing at
any time, but in any case, the delegations should be
organized at Washington within the term mentioned in
this article;

“4th. Regardless of what is established in the preceding
clauses, the two Governments, through their respective
Ministers shall try to anticipate the settlement of the
controversy.

“Signed in duplicate, in Quito, June 21st of the year 1924. Signed
N. Clemente Ponce90 and E. Castro Oyanguren.”
Details by mail.

BADING
Albania:

811. Rustem, Avni: Telegram

[Document 244]
The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
TIRANA, May 4, 1924—noon.

[Received 11: p.m.]
of Avni Rustem2 to launch agitation which may result in revolution.
Deputies attending funeral at Valona made speeches and telegraphed
majority party here demanding that Assembly meet elsewhere, alleging lack
of personal safety in Tirana. Receiving negative reply, they declared
intention not to return for the session opening 7th. Battalion; moved to
Valona. The Prime Minister made a proclamation warning that revolting
would probably result in dissolution of country. Fear of continued influence
of late Prime Minister3 of reactionary leanings and desire to force removal
of seat of government apparent actuating motives.

Copy to European Information Center.

GRANT-SMITH

[Document 245]
The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
[Received 5: p.m.]

Arms are being distributed here to reserves and others. Movement on
Scutari planned for this week. A portion of Tirana garrison of doubtful
loyalty. Should south join rebels, which seems probable, telegraph lines
would be cut. I recommend that a destroyer be sent to Durazzo for
communication purposes. Copy to European Information Center.
GRANT-SMITH

[Document 246]
The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
[Received 9: p.m.]

Government their objection to precipitating civil war by moving on Scutari.
The Assembly has sent delegation to confer with recalcitrant members at
Scutari. Prospects for peaceful solution brighter.
Destroyer not needed unless foreign communications with central Albania
interrupted. I recommend the Embassy at Rome be instructed to
communicate direct with Admiral in such case. Copy to European
Information Bureau.

GRANT-SMITH

[Document 247]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith)
Navy of substance of your telegrams and in accordance with your
recommendation has expressed desire that the Commander of United States
Naval Forces in European waters be authorized to despatch a destroyer to
Durazzo upon receipt of a request to that effect from you or the Embassy at
Rome. Embassy at Rome has been advised in the premises by telegraph.
HUGHES

[Document 248]
The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
[Received 8: p.m.]
104. I am just notified by the Foreign Office that as communication with
Durazzo is interrupted an Italian destroyer is being sent immediately to
Durazzo. In accordance with desire of Minister Tirana I have just relayed
his request for a destroyer to the naval attaché at Athens.
FLETCHER

[Document 249]
The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
105. Albanian revolution seems to be succeeding. Details as far as known
here are fully covered in Associated Press reports. Copy to European
Information Center.

FLETCHER

[Document 250]
The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
49. Armistice declared evening 4th at the instance of the Government. Beys
fearful confiscation of estates. The same day the majority of the
Government deputies, a number of officials and families, fled to Durazzo.
Tirana garrison immediately took effective measures to insure public safety.
Force of tribesmen raised by Ahmed Zogu dissolving, carrying off arms.
Nationalists insist upon immediate exile of Ahmed Bey … Destroyer
Bulmer arrived at Durazzo Wednesday afternoon. Copy to European
Information Center.

GRANT-SMITH

[Document 251]
The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 6: p.m.]
111. Following information regarding Albanian situation is confidential. I
have been requested by the Secretary General of the Foreign Office to
inform you that the Governments of Italy and Yugoslavia have no intention
of interfering in the internal affairs of Albania in any way and that on this
point the two Governments are completely in accord.
FLETCHER
Italian Foreign Office had issued a communiqué to the press of similar
purport to the statement reported in this telegram.

[Document 252]
The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
ROME, June 11, 1924—noon.

[Received 2: p.m.]
114. Following from Grant-Smith:
War Minister and Commander of Gendarmerie fled to Durazzo
today. Some hundreds of armed tribesmen still in Tirana. Local
authorities will probably be able to maintain order.
Government forces in south routed. Insurgent forces expected to
enter Tirana tomorrow.”
FLETCHER

[Document 253]
The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 8: p.m.]
56. The following Cabinet was announced the day before yesterday: Prime
Minister, Fan Noli; Foreign Affairs, Suleiman Delvino; War, Colonel
Kiafzezi; Finance, Gurakuchi; Interior, Colonel Shala; Public Works,
Kotsuli; Justice, Vinyau.

Foreign representatives were given the announcement formally in writing. I
have not answered. It is very questionable whether Peci, the one remaining
regent, has legal authority to authorize the formation of a cabinet.
The Italians much desire that the present regime be given support by the
admission of its legality. If this is not given they wish nevertheless that it
receive the support of early recognition. Of course the British Minister, who
left June 15 for London, is very much opposed to recognition. My French
colleague is not inclined to admit the legality of the regime and expresses
doubts regarding its stability. The Greeks and Servians may be expected to
seek the overthrow of the regime, though not openly.

The present regime is a minority in the Parliament which has gained power
with the help of the Army and is [not?] considered a legal government
under the present constitution until it has received a vote of confidence
from the reassembled Assembly or until new elections have been held. It
would appear that American interests would be served by the continuance
of the new regime, which is favorably inclined toward us at present and is
committed against the pretensions of the British. Until I receive instructions
I intend to refrain from any act which rightly could be construed as

recognition but I shall keep up friendly though informal relations with the
leaders.

GRANT-SMITH

[Document 254]
The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
which was sent to him direct from Fan Noli, and the notes which the
Albanian Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs addressed to my
Italian colleague have been formally acknowledged in terms which are
usual after there has been a normal change of Ministry. The question of
recognition was not mentioned. I have been informed by the Secretary
General of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs that a reply to Fan Noli’s
telegram has been received from the Yugoslav Prime Minister in similar
terms. The French Chargé has not received instructions as yet.
GRANT-SMITH

[Document 255]
The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
a plea for recognition by the United States. His plea was expressed in the
same terms as transmitted through the Albanian consul at New York. He
caused telegrams to be given to me which had been received from the
League of Nations and from the Greek, Italian, and Yugoslav Prime
Ministers acknowledging his announcement of the formation of a new
Albanian Government. The Greek and Yugoslav replies were cordial and
did not raise the question of recognition. The Italian Government had Fan
Noli notified of a fact yesterday which he did not mention to me, that the
telegram from Mussolini could not be construed as recognition should the
Allied Powers find serious reasons for withholding it.

I mentioned our policy of avoiding the impression of hasty actions
regarding recognition, especially in Europe, and reminded Fan Noli that the
late regime had failed to fulfill its promises as to equality of opportunity
and bringing the murderers to justice. He replied that his stand regarding
the former was so well known that he need not repeat it and that an early
favorable answer would be given regarding the punishment of the
murderers.

My recommendation is that we obtain from the new Government formal
engagements respecting the two matters mentioned above. Do I have
authority to take any action constituting recognition?

GRANT-SMITH

[Document 256]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith)
[Paraphrase]
has been changed, the question of recognition does not seem to arise. There
is no objection to your continuing to carry on with the present Government
the relations which you had with the preceding one if in your opinion it is
properly constituted, stable, and in control of the country. You are
authorized at your discretion to continue such relations. Department desires
telegraphic report of your action.

HUGHES

[Document 257]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith)
[Paraphrase]
records do not show receipt of any message from Fan Noli either through
consul of Albania at New York or from any other source.
Your suggestion that you should impress upon present regime the
importance attached by this Government to prompt and vigorous action for
the punishment of those responsible for the murder of Coleman and De
Long is approved.

sentence of your telegram. Telegraph promptly if you feel that additional
instructions are needed on this point.

HUGHES

[Document 258]
The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
unconditional recognition to Fan Noli’s government. The only failure to
reply to his direct telegram was by the British Prime Minister. The Greek
and Italian representatives have established formal relations with the
government, but in the latter case with the reservations previously reported.
The Servians will doubtless delay recognition. They are much concerned
over the Irredentist influence which is apparent in the new regime, and
Ahmed Zogu is at Belgrade. The French express [omission]. The only
remaining regent, whose term expires next fall, has gone on indefinite
leave, ostensibly for reasons of health, and his functions have been
professedly transferred to the Prime Minister who states that there will be
no elections before March 1925. Under these circumstances there is no
remaining head of the State and the government proposes to start its
program of much-needed agrarian and social reform unhampered by a
legislative body. There is no, longer any pretension that the government has
a legal status under the constitution.

I shall not address any formal communications to the Minister of Foreign
Affairs. I propose to hand to him impersonal memoranda of important
conversations if such action is needed.

GRANT-SMITH

[Document 259]
The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
71. I am mailing a report8 giving details of the alleged dissatisfaction which
is accumulating with respect to the present Government of Albania. The
opposition here and abroad is aided in accentuating differences between the
regions and parties which united to overthrow the former Government by
the uncompromising attitude of the present regime on land-tenure reforms
in contrast with its inability to pay salaries and its vacillating policy
concerning appointments. The British Minister does not conceal his belief
that a revolution will occur within two weeks. In other quarters, however,
the feeling is that a crisis will not develop, at least until after the harvest,
because of the work and contentment resulting from a very good crop.
Since the departure of Minister Grant-Smith there has been at no time such
a change of conditions as would justify my reopening the question of
recognition. …
KODDING

[Document 260]
The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
weakened position of the Albanian head of State and Cabinet, which
September 20.9a Both the Prime Minister and Finance Minister remain
abroad. An example of the failure to assure public safety is the throwing of
a rock yesterday into the state hospital here. Our expectations as to action
regarding the murder of the Americans have not been fulfilled.
I do not believe that it will serve American interests to take up formal
relations at present with the Nationalist regime, in view of all the facts and
considering that Greece is the only nation represented here which is not
reserving recognition for a more favorable time.

KODDING

[Document 261]
The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
TIRANA, November 20, 1924.

[Received December 10.]

No. 355
SIR: I have the honor to report that after protracted negotiations between the
various political groups M. Peci, acting as the “High Council of Regency”
signed on the 13th instant a decree calling for elections for a legislative
body to be held from December 20th to January 20th next. Notwithstanding
the fact that the Constituent Assembly which adjourned in May last had
constituted itself into a “regular” Parliament [which?] has never been
dissolved, nor [and] that none of the acts of the present régime nor [or] of
the sole Regent remaining since the last revolution have been legal
according to the terms of the Provisional Constitution of Lushnia, they go
merrily along choosing such phrases from the Constitution as suits their
purposes for the moment and ignoring the rest.

It is a provisional government sitting at a provisional capital acting illegally
under a provisional constitution. The anomaly will be further accentuated
after [apparent omission] through the expiration on that date of the term of
office of H. E. M. Sotir Peci, sole remaining Regent acting as the High
Council of Regency, whereupon all the honors and powers pertaining
thereto will devolve, according to the Constitution, of course, upon the
Prime Minister, Mgr. Fan Noli who will bear and discharge them until such
time as others are duly elected. This will doubtless be the first act of the
new “Parliament”; the second to overthrow Mgr. Fan Noli who has failed,
they complain, to execute the twenty points set forth in his programme
announced in June last.

I have [etc.]

U. Grant Soiru

[Document 262]
The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 7: p.m.]
91. Threats of incursion by refugees from Yugoslav territory increase as the
date for the election approaches. Reports in the foreign press that a
revolution has started in Albania are premature.
GRANT-SMITH

[Document 263]
The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
bands announced in the south from Greece and near Ochrida and Prizren,
the latter bands reported well armed; also number Wrangel’s Russian and
Stambouliski Bulgarian refugees participating. Strategic points to the east
reported occupied by Ahmed Bey’s forces. Fighting has occurred along
Yugoslav border. Public demonstrations Yugoslavia held yesterday in Tirana
and Durazzo and League of Nations and Great Powers appealed to by
telegraph.

GRANT-SMITH

[Document 264]
The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
100. Ahmed Bey Zogu entered Tirana this morning. Quiet reigns. No signs
of Servians or Russian refugees among his ragged followers. Total
casualties not greater than last revolution. Zogu’s opponents may continue
show of resistance in south for the short time. Scutari and Koushidacha [sic]
reported in hands of his partisans.

GRANT-SMITH

[Document 265]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith)
WASHINGTON, March 25, 1924.

No. 83
date a Treaty of Commerce and Navigation was signed at Rome between
Italy and Albania11 has been received.

The Department desires your opinion as to the advisability of undertaking
the negotiation of a treaty in the near future to define and regularize the
relations between the United States and Albania. Your views as to the points
which it might eventually be desirable to cover in such a treaty would also
be helpful. In this connection a copy of the Albanian Treaty with Italy,
which you say you will forward to the Department as soon as it can be
obtained, would be useful.

[Document 266]
The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
TIRANA, June 2, 1924.

[Received June 24.]

No. 274
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s
instruction No. 83 of March 25th last, with regard to the advisability of
undertaking the negotiation of a treaty in the near future to define and
regularize the relations between the United States and Albania.
The relations between the two Governments are now based on the notes
Commissioner, the Honorable Maxwell Blake, and the Albanian President
of the Council (of Ministers)—Minister for Foreign Affairs, H. E. Monsieur
Xhafer Ypi, copies of which were transmitted to the Department with the
Albanian Government engaged itself, in return for official recognition on
the part of the Government of the United States, to
(1) “recognize the passports given by the authorities of the United
States of America to persons of Albanian origin, who are
naturalized Americans in conformity with the American laws
concerning nationalities”
and,
(2) in case a commercial treaty should be concluded between the
Government of the United States and that of Albania, to insert in
the said treaty, the ‘“most favored nation clause”’ … and, pending
the conclusion of the treaty above mentioned, the American
interests in Albania will receive the most favored nation

treatment. Furthermore, the Albanian Government is ready to
show all kinds of facilities to the installation of American capital
in Albania, as well as to accord concessions to American
concerns”.

The Department is aware of the difficulties which have been encountered in
our efforts to insure most-favored-nation treatment for American
corporations in Albania in spite of the fact that certain ones were invited by
the Albanian Government to submit offers for the development of the
petroleum resources of the country. On several occasions the representatives
of those corporations have been on the point of withdrawing from the field
but on each occasion the Albanian Government has urged them to remain.

The terms of the notes above referred to, reinforced by the declarations
made by the United States on March 2, 1923, in support of the principle
of the “open door”, and accepted by the Albanian Government without
demur, would seem to afford the United States a sufficient basis for
carrying on the relations between the two countries until a more propitious
moment should arrive. In order that the Government of Albania might have
no shadow of excuse on account of frequent changes of Ministry, lack of
organization, inexperience or otherwise, for not giving due weight to the
claims of the United States in their negotiation of treaties with the other
Powers, I ventured to address a note to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
under date of April 17, 1924, (a copy of which is herewith enclosed)
wherein was quoted that portion of his predecessor’s note of June 25, 1922,
relative to most-favored-nation treatment. I took this precaution after the
present incumbent, Ilias Bey Vrioni, had expressed to me the opinion that
“no one” had a right to see the text of a treaty until it had been ratified by
the legislative body.

The enclosed copy of the Albano-Italian Treaty of Commerce and
Navigation, with accompanying protocol and supplementary declarations

was given me privately by my Italian Colleague. The Italian aim at
economic penetration is clearly shown, especially in Articles 6
(establishment of bonded warehouses), 9 (right of Italian companies to
operate in Albania), 10 (monopolies), 13 (equal rights for imports, exports,
transit or warehousing goods, transportation in national bottoms), 14 (rights
of captains and boats or barges to navigate interior waters), 16 (use of
interior means of communication, ports, etc.), 17 (coastal shipping), 18
The Yugoslav Government is opposed to the treaty on this account and may
cause serious opposition to be raised against its ratification by the
Constituent Assembly or subsequent legislative body. The British, it is said,
object especially to the provision covering monopolies and have succeeded
in focussing public attention on Article 10. The Italians, however, have
countered by expressing a willingness to fix the interpretation of that article
by an exchange of notes. My Italian colleague desired me to support him
with regard to Article 10 on the ground that it was in consonance with the
demands put forward by the American, Italian, and French Governments on
Government to the policy of the open door. In reply I pointed out that the
article, as now phrased, might be interpreted in the sense that no concession
of any character whatsoever might be accorded to foreigners by the
Albanian Government unless Italian capital participated therein; that, for
example, telephone service, the country was too small to admit of more
than one operating company. The American view would be met, I thought,
if open and fair international competition were assured for all concessions,
whether monopolistic or otherwise. Doubtless, certain of the Italian
negotiators hoped that Article 10 might pass unchallenged which would
have given Italy a veritable “strangle hold” on Albania. My Italian
colleague did not, however, combat my criticisms with much vigor and
mentioned the proposals, referred to above, to fix the interpretation of that
article by an exchange of notes with the Albanian Government.
Should the revolution which is now in progress result in a decisive victory
for either side a longer period of calm might follow and consequently of

[a?] more stable government which would be more favorable for
negotiations suggested. The Italian treaty and those concluded with Turkey
are still unratified and there would seem no prospect of their being acted on
at the earliest before the coming winter.

I have [etc.]

U. GRANT-SMITH
[Enclosure]
The American Minister (Grant-Smith) to the Albanian Minister for Foreign Affairs (Vrioni)
TIRANA, April 17, 1924.

No. 62
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to transmit herewith, for the information of your
Excellency’s Government, a copy, with translation into Albanian of a letter
addressed to me by Mr. E. S. Sheffield, the representative of the Standard
Oil Company of New York. After carrying on negotiations, on behalf of
his company, with the Ministry of Public Works over a period of several
months, he finally, under date of February 25, 1923, deposited with that
Ministry signed proposals for a concession for the development of the
petroleum resources of certain areas in Albania.

It is with some surprise that I learn that these proposals have been held at
the Ministry of Public Works since that date without having been brought
before the Council of Ministers for consideration with a view to their being
submitted, in the regular course, to the legislative body for final action.
It can be readily understood, in consequence, that the representative of the
Standard Oil Company of New York should have gained the impression of a
“lack of any serious intention on the part of the Albanian Government as
regards the business in question”. Such delay whether due to administrative
neglect or to other causes, has operated to the serious detriment of the
company above mentioned and would also be in contravention of the rights

and treatment formally guaranteed to American citizens and companies by
the Government of Albania.

In bringing the foregoing to the attention of your Excellency I have the
honor to request that the necessary remedial steps may be taken without
further delay and avail myself [etc.]

U. GRANT-SMITH
Bolivia:

[Document 267]
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Latin American
Affairs, Department of State (White)
[WASHINGTON,] May 5, 1924.

The Bolivian Minister called on the Secretary of State at twelve o’clock on
Monday, May 5. The Secretary stated that he had invited the Minister to
come in as Mr. White had told him that the Minister desired to speak with
him regarding his note1 asking the United States to use its good offices to
bring about a modification of the Treaty of 1904 between Bolivia and
Chile2 in order that the former might obtain an outlet to the sea.
The Minister stated that if the Department’s reply to his note was to be
favorable he merely desired to thank the Department but if however the
Secretary could not see his way clear to giving a favorable answer he would
like to discuss the matter with him. The Secretary replied that it is the desire
of this Government to be helpful to the other countries of America in
composing and settling their difficulties and that it is very glad to do so
when asked by all parties concerned which in this case would be Bolivia
and Chile; that this Government of course cannot take such action unless it
is requested to do so by all concerned and in this case Chile had not yet
asked this Government to take any action in the matter and the Secretary
must therefore to his regret decline to take the action requested.
The Minister stated that he was sure that the desire existed in Chile for a
settlement of this question; that he had been told so by President Alessandri
himself and also by the Minister of Foreign Affairs and other Cabinet
officers of Chile. The Secretary stated that while this Government was glad
at all times to be of help it would soon fritter away the helpful position
which it now has should it intervene in questions between two foreign
governments without knowing that it was agreeable to both sides; that it
was not sufficient for one party to say that it desired the intervention of the

United States and it felt sure that the other side would also; that if this
desire existed in Chile it would be very easy for the Chilean Government to
inform us thereof or it could be made evident in the correspondence
comprising the negotiations between Bolivia and Chile and that until this
Government was informed by both parties it could not take the action
requested. The Secretary added that in the Tacna-Arica case this
Government had taken no action until it had been assured that both parties
to the dispute would welcome the assistance of the United States. The
Minister stated that in the Tacna-Arica case he had seen, as he was then
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bolivia, in the interchange of telegrams
between Chile and Perú that the negotiations fell through and that the
United States had inquired of both Governments whether an invitation to
come to Washington to carry on the negotiations would be acceptable and
that both parties had agreed. There was evidence he said in the direct
exchange of telegrams between the Chilean and Peruvian Foreign Offices
that such a meeting would be acceptable to both parties; that what Bolivia
now wants is the United States to inquire of Bolivia and Chile whether an
invitation from the United States for those Governments to send
representatives to Washington to discuss the matter would be agreeable.
The Secretary replied that in the Tacna-Arica case the inquiry as to whether
an invitation would be acceptable had been sent only after this Government
had been informally advised by both parties that such action on the part of
the United States would be agreeable to the two parties to the dispute. The
Secretary added that even after the Peruvian and Chilean delegates had
arrived in Washington the United States took no part in bringing about
agreements or arrangements between them except when asked to use its
good offices by both parties.

The Minister then inquired whether this statement by the Secretary was to
be taken as a definite statement of policy of the United States for all time, in
other words could he take it that the United States would never enter into a
discussion between two Latin American countries or in his country’s case
between Bolivia and any of its neighbors unless requested to do so by both
parties. The Secretary replied that he was not formulating any rules of law
nor could he of course prescribe what action his successors in office might
adopt nor could he discuss any suppositional or hypothetical questions; that

this Government dealt with each question as it came up as wisdom and
friendship would seem to dictate and that it could not permit the discussion
to take the phase of binding the United States to any definite policy in the
future in cases which had not arisen. The Minister said that he understood
the Secretary’s point of view; that in this case if the United States would not
take action his Government had misinterpreted the addresses of the
Secretary and President Coolidge which had expressed a desire to be
helpful to Latin American countries. The Secretary replied that of course
this Government as President Coolidge had stated desired to be helpful in
any way it properly could but that it could not take action without the
request of both parties.

Referring back to the question of policy the Minister stated that he was
talking purely and simply of the matter connected with his note which dealt
with the ardent desire of Bolivia to have an outlet to the sea. Bolivia was
now moved with a great feeling in this regard, the question had been taken
up in the League of Nations and then directly with Chile and now with the
United States and he wanted to know whether the determination of the
United States not to take part in this discussion meant that the United States
as far as this question was concerned would in its future developments
refuse to take any part whatsoever.

The Secretary replied that he would not bind this Government’s action for
the future; that the case before him was the note of the Bolivian Minister
dealing with the situation that actually exists; that in the case as it now is
the United States has not been requested by Chile to intervene in the matter
and he very much regretted that this Government could not at this time
intervene as requested by Bolivia. The Secretary could not foresee what the
situation might be in the future or what later developments might occur and
he therefore would do nothing now which might hamper the action of this
Government in dealing in the future with a case which might arise, that in
the actual case the United States could not meet the Bolivian Minister’s
desires. As the Minister was leaving the Secretary expressed his regret to
him that he was unable to comply with his wishes in the matter.
WHITE

Boundary dispute with Paraguay. (See
under General.)

Brazil:
Expression of concern by the Department of State at Brazil’s
naval building program (Documents 268-274)

[Document 268]
The Chargé in Brazil (Crosby) to the Secretary of State
[Extract–Paraphrase]
[Received 6: p.m.]
24. … Bear Admiral Vogelgesang, the head of the American Naval Mission
in Brazil, has just informed me that his recommendations to the Minister of
Marine on proposed naval building for the next 10 years, which provide for
battleships 70,000 tons, will be submitted immediately to the President.
CROSBY

[Document 269]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Brazil (Crosby)
[Paraphrase]
building plan submitted by Rear Admiral Vogelgesang is most disturbing to
the Department. While from a purely naval technical point of view this
program may be justifiable, the outlay appears to be exorbitant and out of
all proportion to the necessities of a country like Brazil that is menaced
from no quarter. This Government’s cardinal policy in Latin America is
peace and the promotion among the Latin American countries of the most
friendly relations. Severe criticism has been directed against this
Government’s Naval Mission to Brazil. The motive of the Mission was
friendship to Brazil, for if an American mission had not been sent a similar
mission from some European country would have been contracted for
instead and this Government would in consequence have lost the
opportunity to exert its influence for moderation in naval armaments. To
carry out a program on the scale proposed would afford ample justification
for the criticism which has already been directed against the Mission.
Please explain the views of the Secretary of State under these premises to
Rear Admiral Vogelgesang and express to him the grave concern with
which the Department has received this information; request him to give
you a full explanation regarding the matter for transmission to the
Department by cable. If possible you will also request him to stop any
further steps from being taken in this matter while it is under the
Department’s consideration.

HUGHES

[Document 270]
The Chargé in Brazil (Crosby) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 6: p.m.]
27. I have just had an interview with Rear Admiral Vogelgesang who has
been confined to his bed with a fever but is better. Neither the chief nor any
other member of the Naval Mission is pushing the naval construction
program. The Admiral informed me that the President wishes to initiate a
program of replacement for old and, worn-out units and that at the request
of the Minister of Marine a replacement program covering a period of 10
years was submitted. There has been no new construction since 1912;
existing submarines are no longer useful and only 5 of the 11 destroyers are
now in service; the others are undergoing extensive overhauling and are of
little military value. Battleships have not been contemplated or
recommended except that battleship tonnage should be utilized for the
replacement of the São Paulo and the Minas Geraes, the two existing
battleships. Construction will be governed by the financial situation in any
event, and there has been no materialization of the rumored loan reported in
are likely to be provided for. The Admiral informs me that Ambassador
Morgan, now in the United States, has a copy of the recommendations
which were made to the Minister of Marine relative to the replacement
building program and in which was outlined the Mission’s attitude on
general naval policy of Brazil in response to a request of the Minister of
Marine. Admiral Vogelgesang has stated to me that the attitude of the
Mission to new construction is to harmonize as nearly as possible the views
of the Secretary of State as known to him and the desires of the Brazilian
Government to modernize strong naval defense.

CROSBY

- Not printed.

[Document 271]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Brazil (Crosby)
[Paraphrase]
to Minister of Marine relative to Brazilian naval program shown to
Department by Ambassador Morgan. The Department fully understands that
it is unlikely that any new construction will be undertaken in the immediate
future but it desires to point out to Admiral Vogelgesang that the existence
of such a program as the one proposed will make it necessary for Argentina
and Chile to elaborate likewise their naval programs and thus there may be
started a competition in naval construction. The Brazilian building program
is spoken of as a program of defense. The Department does not know by
what power Brazil is threatened that she should need such a large defensive
eventual replacement, are called for by the program; of the 15,000 tons for
the 60,000 tons for cruisers are new construction; and the Minas Germs is
to be replaced in 1929 and the São Paulo in 1930 by battleships each of
35,000 tons, or a total of 70,000 tons.

As the Minas Geraes and the São Paulo and other units in the Brazilian
Navy are practically obsolete, it is true that Brazil is now in an inferior
position compared with Argentina and Chile, but the new program instead
of putting Brazil on a footing of equality with those countries will place her
in a very superior position which will necessitate new naval construction by
them for the same reason which now moves Brazil to desire new
construction; namely, the desire not to be left in a position of inferiority.
Any such result as this would be most unfortunate and there would be
brought about a condition of rivalry in armaments in this hemisphere which
up to the present has happily not existed.

The Department’s feeling about this matter is so strong that it would rather
recall the Naval Mission than assume the responsibility for the naval
program that the Mission has proposed. Explain the Department’s position
to Admiral Vogelgesang and request him to take the first opportunity to
revise the naval program on the principle of no new construction or
replacement of tonnage in any category that will be greater than the
maximum which exists at present in any one of the three states, Argentina,
Brazil, or Chile.

Ambassador Morgan has been made fully aware of the Department’s
position in the matter, and immediately upon the Ambassador’s return to
Rio de Janeiro he will discuss it with Admiral Vogelgesang.
HUGHES

[Document 272]
The Chargé in Brazil (Crosby) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
RIO DE JANEIRO, July 1, 1924—noon.

[Received 3 p.m.]
inform the Secretary of State that in accordance with the Secretary’s wishes
the recommendations for a naval program for Brazil made by the Naval
Mission were withdrawn for revision. In the revised recommendations all
reference to a concrete building program and any suggestions in regard to
tonnage, types, or number of units have been canceled and omitted.
CROSBY

[Document 273]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
77. The New York Times this morning carries despatch from Buenos Aires,
dated December 8, stating that the Naval Committee of the Brazilian
Chamber of Deputies adopted a resolution recommending the construction
of 12 warships. The resolution provides for 2 cruisers of approximately
that further aviation development is also recommended. Please cable facts.
HUGHES

[Document 274]
The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
Committee of Chamber corresponds to information contained in
Department’s telegram 77 following Minister of Marine’s recommendation
renewed frequently in recent years. Naval Mission in no wise responsible.
Unlikely that national resources will make it possible to carry out any such
program. Attaché Glenn Howell, who leaves today, will fully report. Orders
will probably be placed abroad if at all in several countries with the firms
which grant longtime payments irrespective of cost.

MORGAN

Bulgaria:
Extradition treaty between the United States and Bulgaria,

[Document 275]
Treaty between the United States of America and Bulgaria,
Signed at Sofia, March 19, 19241
The United States of America and Bulgaria desiring to promote the cause of
justice, have resolved to conclude a treaty for the extradition of fugitives
from justice between the two countries and have appointed for that purpose
the following Plenipotentiaries:
The President of the United States of America,
Charles
S.

Wilson,
Envoy
Extraordinary
and
Minister
Plenipotentiary of the United States of America to Bulgaria, and
His Majesty, the Bang of the Bulgarians,
Christo Kalfoff, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Worship of
Bulgaria,
Who, after having communicated to each other their respective full powers,
found to be in good and due form, have agreed upon and concluded the
following articles: ARTICLE I
It is agreed that the Government of the United States and the Government
of Bulgaria shall, upon requisition duly made as herein provided, deliver up
to justice any person, who may be charged with, or may have been
convicted of, any of the crimes specified in Article II of the present Treaty
committed within the jurisdiction of one of the High Contracting Parties,
and who shall seek an asylum or shall be found within the territories of the
other; provided that such surrender shall take place only upon such
evidence of criminality, as according to the laws of the place where the
fugitive or person so charged shall be found, would justify his apprehension
and commitment for trial if the crime or offense had been there committed.

ARTICLE II
Persons shall be delivered up according to the provisions of the present
Treaty, who shall have been charged with or convicted of any of the
following crimes:
1. Murder, comprehending the crimes designated by the terms
parricide, assassination, manslaughter when voluntary, poisoning
or infanticide.
2. The attempt to commit murder.
3. Rape, abortion, carnal knowledge of children under the age of
twelve years.
4. Abduction or detention of women or girls for immoral
purposes.
5. Bigamy.
6. Arson.
7. Wilful and unlawful destruction or obstruction of railroads,
which endangers human life.
8. Crimes committed at sea:
(a) Piracy, as commonly known and defined by the law
of nations, or by statute;
(b) Wrongfully sinking or destroying a vessel at sea or
attempting to do so;
(c) Mutiny or conspiracy by two or more members of
the crew or other persons on board of a vessel on the
high seas, for the purpose of rebelling against the
authority of the Captain or Commander of such vessel,

or by fraud or violence taking possession of such
vessel.

(d) Assault on board ship upon the high seas with intent
to do bodily harm.
9. Burglary, defined to be the act of breaking into and entering the
house of another in the night time with intent to commit a felony
therein.
10. The act of breaking into and entering the offices of the
Government and public authorities, or the offices of banks,
banking houses, savings banks, trust companies, insurance and
other companies, or other buildings not dwellings with intent to
commit a felony therein.
11. Robbery, defined to be the act of feloniously and forcibly
taking from the person of another goods or money by violence or
by putting him in fear.
12. Forgery or the utterance of forged papers.
13. The forgery or falsification of the official acts of the
Government or public authority, including Courts of Justice, or
the uttering or fraudulent use of any of the same.
14. The fabrication of counterfeit money, whether coin or paper,
counterfeit titles or coupons of public debt, created by National,
State, Provincial, Territorial, Local or Municipal Governments,
bank notes or other instruments of public credit, counterfeit seals,
stamps, dies and marks of State or public administrations, and the
utterance, circulation or fraudulent use of the above mentioned
objects.
15. Embezzlement or criminal malversation committed within the
jurisdiction of one or the other party by public officers or
depositaries, where the amount embezzled exceeds one hundred
dollars or Bulgarian equivalent.

16. Embezzlement by any person or persons hired, salaried or
employed, to the detriment of their employers or principals, when
the crime or offense is punishable by imprisonment or other
corporal punishment, by the laws of both countries, and where the
amount embezzled exceeds one hundred dollars or Bulgarian
equivalent.
17. Kidnapping of minors or adults, defined to be the abduction or
detention of a person or persons, in order to exact money from
them, their families or any other person or persons, or for any
other unlawful end.
18. Larceny, defined to be the theft of effects, personal property,
or money, of the value of twenty-five dollars or more, or
Bulgarian equivalent.
19. Obtaining money, valuable securities or other property, by
false pretences or receiving any money, valuable securities or
other property knowing the same to have been unlawfully
obtained, where the amount of money or the value of the property
so obtained or received exceeds one hundred dollars or Bulgarian
equivalent.
20. Perjury or subornation of perjury.
21. Fraud or breach of trust by a bailee, banker, agent, factor,
trustee, executor, administrator, guardian, director or officer of
any company or corporation, or by any one in any fiduciary
position, where the amount of money or the value of the property
misappropriated exceeds one hundred dollars or Bulgarian
equivalent.
22. Crimes and offenses against the laws of both countries for the
suppression of slavery and slave trading.
23. Wilful desertion or wilful non-support of minor or dependent
children.

24. Extradition shall also take place for participation in any of the
crimes before mentioned as an accessory before or after the fact;
provided such participation be punishable by imprisonment by the
laws of both the High Contracting Parties.

ARTICLE III
The provisions of the present Treaty shall not import a claim of extradition
for any crime or offense of a political character, nor for acts connected with
such crimes or offenses; and no person surrendered by or to either of the
High Contracting Parties in virtue of this Treaty shall be tried or punished
for a political crime or offense. When the offense charged comprises the act
either of murder or assassination or of poisoning, either consummated or
attempted, the fact that the offense was committed or attempted against the
life of the Sovereign or Head of a foreign State or against the life of any
member of his family, shall not be deemed sufficient to sustain that such
crime or offense was of a political character; or was an act connected with
crimes or offenses of a political character.

ARTICLE IV
No person shall be tried for any crime or offense other than that for which
he was surrendered.

ARTICLE V
A fugitive criminal shall not be surrendered under the provisions hereof,
when, from lapse of time or other lawful cause, according to the laws of the
place within the jurisdiction of which the crime was committed, the
criminal is exempt from prosecution or punishment for the offense for
which the surrender is asked.

ARTICLE VI
If a fugitive criminal whose surrender may be claimed pursuant to the
stipulations hereof, be actually under prosecution, out on bail or in custody,

for a crime or offense committed in the country where he has sought
asylum, or shall have been convicted thereof, his extradition may be
deferred until such proceedings be determined, and until he shall have been
set at liberty in due course of law.

ARTICLE VII
If a fugitive criminal claimed by one of the parties hereto, shall be also
claimed by one or more powers pursuant to treaty provisions, on account of
crimes committed within their jurisdiction, such criminal shall be delivered
to that State whose demand is first received.

ARTICLE VIII
Under the stipulations of this Treaty, neither of the High Contracting Parties
shall be bound to deliver up its own citizens.

ARTICLE IX
The expense of arrest, detention, examination and transportation of the
accused shall be paid by the Government which has preferred the demand
for extradition.

ARTICLE X
Everything found in the possession of the fugitive criminal at the time of his
arrest, whether being the proceeds of the crime or offense, or which may be
material as evidence in making proof of the crime, shall so far as
practicable, according to the laws of either of the High Contracting Parties,
be delivered up with his person at the time of surrender. Nevertheless, the
rights of a third party with regard to the articles referred to, shall be duly
respected.

ARTICLE XI
The stipulations of the present Treaty shall be applicable to all territory
wherever situated, belonging to either of the High Contracting Parties or in

the occupancy and under the control of either of them, during such
occupancy or control.

Requisitions for the surrender of fugitives from justice shall be made by the
respective diplomatic agents of the High Contracting Parties. In the event of
the absence of such agent from the country or its seat of Government, or
where extradition is sought from territory included in the preceding
paragraphs, other than the United States or Bulgaria, requisitions may be
made by superior consular officers. It shall be competent for such
diplomatic or superior consular officers to ask and obtain a mandate or
preliminary warrant of arrest for the person whose surrender is sought,
whereupon the judges and magistrates of the two Governments shall
respectively have power and authority, upon complaint made under oath, to
issue a warrant for the apprehension of the person charged, in order that he
or she may be brought before such judge or magistrate, that the evidence of
criminality may be heard and considered and if, on such hearing, the
evidence be deemed sufficient to sustain the charge, it shall be the duty of
the examining judge or magistrate to certify it to the proper executive
authority, that a warrant may issue for the surrender of the fugitive.

In case of urgency, the application for arrest and detention may be
addressed directly to the competent magistrate in conformity to the statutes
in force.

The person provisionally arrested shall be released, unless within three
months from the date of arrest in Bulgaria, or from the date of commitment
in the United States, the formal requisition for surrender with the
documentary proofs hereinafter prescribed be made as aforesaid by the
diplomatic agent of the demanding Government or, in his absence, by a
consular officer thereof.

If the fugitive criminal shall have been convicted of the crime for which his
surrender is asked, a copy of the sentence of the court before which such
conviction took place, duly authenticated, shall be produced. If, however,
the fugitive is merely charged with crime, a duly authenticated copy of the
warrant of arrest in the country where the crime was committed, and of the

depositions upon which such warrant may have been issued, shall be
produced, with such other evidence or proof as may be deemed competent
in the case.

ARTICLE XII
In every case of a request made by either of the High Contracting Parties
for the arrest, detention or extradition of fugitive criminals, the appropriate
legal officers of the country where the proceedings of extradition are had,
shall assist the officers of the Government demanding the extradition before
the respective judges and magistrates, by every legal means within their
power; and no claim whatever for compensation for any of the services so
rendered shall be made against the Government demanding the extradition;
provided, however, that any officer or officers of the surrendering
Government so giving assistance, who shall, in the usual course of their
duty, receive no salary or compensation other than specific fees for services
performed, shall be entitled to receive from the Government demanding the
extradition the customary fees for the acts or services performed by them, in
the same manner and to the same amount as though such acts or services
had been performed in ordinary criminal proceedings under the laws of the
country of which they are officers.

ARTICLE XIII
The present Treaty shall be ratified by the High Contracting Parties in
accordance with their respective constitutional methods and shall take effect
on the date of the exchange of ratifications which shall take place at Sophia,
as soon as possible.

ARTICLE XIV
The present Treaty shall remain in force for a period of ten years, and in
case neither of the High Contracting Parties shall have given notice one
year before the expiration of that period of its intention to terminate the
Treaty, it shall continue in force until the expiration of one year from the

date on which such notice of termination shall be given by either of the
High Contracting Parties.

In witness whereof the above-named Plenipotentiaries have signed the
present Treaty and have hereunto affixed their seals.
Done in duplicate at Sophia this nineteenth day of March nineteen hundred
and twenty-four.

[SEAL] CHARLES S. WILSON
[SEAL] CHR. KALFOFF

Canada:

[Document 276]
The Under Secretary of State (Phillips) to the Canadian Deputy
Minister of Marine and Fisheries (Johnston)
WASHINGTON, January 10, 1924.

MY DEAR MR. JOHNSTON: I have received from the Consul General at Ottawa a copy
of your courteous letter of December 28, 1923, communicating the opinion
of the Deputy Minister of Justice on certain questions in regard to the
interpretation of the Northern Pacific Halibut Fishery Act passed by the
Canadian Parliament in June, 1923.

The views of the Deputy Minister of Justice were communicated to Senator
Lodge, Chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee of the Senate, and
also your statement that there is no intention on the part of Canada to
relieve British vessels from seizure and forfeiture for breach of any of the
provisions of the treaty and that if reasonable doubt arises in the mind of
anyone that this would be possible under the Act of 1923, steps will be
taken to remedy it during the next session of Parliament. I have also had a
conversation with Senator Lodge in regard to the matter.

The President has referred the Halibut Fisheries Convention to the Senate
for further consideration. Confidentially I may say that Senator Lodge
desires to bring it up for action and it is believed that there is no disposition
on the part of Senators to insist on the understanding which was made a part
Senator Lodge is apprehensive, however, that the provisions of Section 9 of
the Act of the Canadian Parliament under which vessels of the United States
would be liable to seizure and forfeiture for the causes to which that Section
relates whereas vessels navigated according to the laws of the United
Kingdom or of Canada would expressly not be so liable under that Section
will make it difficult to obtain the approval of the Senate to the Convention
without a reservation.

Senator Lodge said to me personally that he would be willing to endeavor
to obtain the advice and consent of the Senate to the ratification of the
convention without a reservation if he could first have an assurance from
the Premier of Canada that the Canadian Government would construe and
enforce the Act as the Deputy Minister of Justice stated in his letter to you it
should in his opinion be construed. I cannot but believe, however, that as a
permanent measure it would be more satisfactory to this Government if the
Act of Parliament were amended so that the ambiguity which arises out of
Section 9 would be removed. If I may be permitted to make a specific
suggestion I should say that this might be accomplished by eliminating
Section 9.

As favorable action on the Convention by the Senate seems to depend on an
adjustment with reference to Section 9 of the Canadian Act, I should be
appreciative of any action which you could take either in the direction of
obtaining an expression of the views of the Premier or of putting the matter
in course to obtain an amendment of the Act at the next session of
Parliament. I should also be grateful for any information which you could
furnish me as to progress in either direction.

WILLIAM PHILLIPS

[Document 277]
The Prime Minister of Canada (Mackenzie King) to the Secretary
of State
OTTAWA, January 30, 1924.

[Received February 2.]

MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: I have had an opportunity quite recently of perusing the
letters and telegrams that have been exchanged between Mr. Phillips, the
Under-Secretary of State at Washington and the Deputy Minister of Marine
and Fisheries in the matter of the North Pacific Halibut Treaty.
I am in entire agreement with the view outlined by the Department of
Marine and Fisheries and by the Department of Justice that section 9 of the
Act passed last session of Parliament should be eliminated. It has therefore
been decided that the Minister of Marine and Fisheries will, on behalf of the
Government, introduce as early as opportunity will permit after the opening
of the forthcoming session of Parliament, the necessary legislation to that
end.

In this connection I may be permitted to observe that I am exceedingly
anxious that the Treaty should at as early a date as it will be convenient to
do so, be ratified in its present form by the Senate of the United States. The
Canadian Parliament has been summoned to meet on the 28th of February
next. If I were put in a position to announce either at the opening of
Parliament or very shortly thereafter, that the Treaty had been ratified, it
would go a very long way towards calming the apprehension of those who
are more directly interested in the industry on the Pacific Coast. I need
scarcely say that anything that can be done to expedite final consideration
of the matter will be very sincerely appreciated.

Yours sincerely,
W. L. MACKENZIE KING

[Document 278]
The Canadian Deputy Minister of Marine and Fisheries
(Johnston) to the Under Secretary of State (Phillips)
OTTAWA, 31 January, 1924.

[Received February 2.]

MY DEAR MR. PHILLIPS: This will confirm my telegram to you of the 21st instant
which read:—
“Regret delay replying your letter January tenth. Act of last
session has received further consideration law officers with result
that amending Act will be submitted to Parliament forthcoming
Session repeal section nine. Will obtain confirming letter from
Department Justice and will forward to you. Suggested also that
we amend section six by inserting after the word ‘waters’ in line
seven the words ‘during the close season’.”
I now attach a copy of the letter received from the Department of Justice4 in
which, you will observe, it is explained that there is no objection to the
repealing of section 9 of the Northern Pacific Halibut Fishery Protection
Act of last session. You will also observe that the Department concurs in;
the view that section 6 of the Act should be amended by adding the
obviously omitted words ‘during the close season’ at the appropriate place.
Legislation making these two changes will be submitted to Parliament as
soon after the opening of the forthcoming session as possible. There will go
forward today or tomorrow a letter addressed to Mr. Secretary Hughes from
the Prime Minister, with reference to this matter, which I trust will be
accepted as an assurance of our determination to act in such a way as to
meet the views of your Department and your Senate.

Yours very truly,

A. J OHNSTON

+ Not printed.

[Document 279]
The Secretary of State to the Prime Minister of Canada
(Mackenzie King)
WASHINGTON, February 26, 1924.

MY DEAR MR. MACKENZIE KING: I have not failed to consider most carefully the
questions relating to the ratification of the North Pacific Halibut Treaty and
I was highly gratified to receive your letter of January thirtieth stating that
you were in entire agreement with the view, outlined by the Dominion
Department of Marine and Fisheries and by the Department of Justice that
section 9 of the Act passed at the last session of the Dominion Parliament
should be eliminated. From the advices that I have received from the
Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate I am
convinced that it will not be possible for this Government to proceed to the
ratification of the treaty until the legislation repealing section 9 has been
enacted. I am glad to be advised of the intention of your Government to
introduce a bill to that effect and I am quite confident that as soon as the bill
has been passed the United States Senate will give its assent to the treaty
and it may then promptly be ratified by the President.

With assurance [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 280]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, May 8, 1924.

No. 408
SIR: In his note of October 4th, 1923, Mr. Phillips was so good as to inform
Mr. Chilton that the President of the United States had expressed his
readiness to re-submit to the Senate the Convention, concluded between the
United States and Great Britain on March 2nd, 1923 for the protection of
the Northern Pacific halibut fishery, with a view to obtaining the advice and
consent of the Senate to the ratification of the Convention as signed, that is
As the Government of Canada are taking steps to pass legislation in
connection with the Convention, I have the honour to ask you to be so good
as to inform me at the earliest possible moment whether this Convention
has been re-submitted to the Senate and whether the Senate has agreed to its
ratification without the reservation above referred to.

I have [etc.]

ESME HOWARD

[Document 281]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, May 12, 1924.

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note No. 408
of May 8, 1924, relating to the Convention for the preservation of the
halibut fishery of the northern Pacific Ocean signed by representatives of
the United States and Great Britain on March 2, 1923, and to legislation
which the Government of Canada is taking steps to enact in connection with
the Convention.

The President resubmitted the Convention to the Senate on December 11,
1923, for determination by that body whether it would reconsider its
resolution of March 4, 1923, and advise and consent to the ratification of
the Convention as signed.

I understand that it is the purpose of the Chairman of the Committee on
Foreign Relations to bring the matter up for consideration as soon as
advices have been received that the legislation under consideration by the
Canadian Government to amend the Northern Pacific Halibut Fishery
Protection Act of 1923 has become law.

Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 282]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, May 16, 1924.

No. 439
SIR: I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 12th
instant, regarding the Northern Pacific Halibut Fishery, in which you were
good enough to inform me that as soon as he is informed that the Canadian

[Document 283]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, May 21, 1924.

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note No. 439,
of May 16, 1924, in further reference to the Convention for the preservation
of the Halibut Fishery of the Northern Pacific Ocean signed by
representatives of the United States and Great Britain on March 2, 1923,
and to legislation which the Government of Canada has under consideration
in connection with the protection of the halibut fishery.

The reference in the first paragraph of your note to the purpose of the
Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate to bring the
Halibut Fishery Convention up for reconsideration by the Senate as soon as
he is informed that the Canadian Parliament has passed the legislation
represents inaccurately the circumstance as stated in my note of May 12
that the Chairman of the Committee will take such action as soon as the
legislation has become law. It may be that this discrepancy of statement is
of little practical importance since from the statements in your note it
appears that the Royal assent is regarded as a formality of the execution of
which there is no uncertainty.

I am bringing your statement of the situation to the attention of the
Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Relations for his consideration.
Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 284]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, May 27, 1924.

EXCELLENCY: With further reference to the convention for the preservation of the
Halibut Fishery of the Northern Pacific Ocean, signed by the United States
and Great Britain on March 2, 1923, which is now before the Committee on
Foreign Relations of the Senate and the legislation which the Government
of Canada has under consideration in connection with the protection of the
Halibut Fishery, I have the honor to state that the Chairman of the
Committee on Foreign Relations has informed me that he cannot expect the
committee to act on the convention until the Royal assent shall have been
given to the Canadian legislation.

The Chairman desires to bring the convention up for final action at the
earliest possible moment. Unless approval of the convention is given by the
Senate during the present session of Congress, which probably will adjourn
within a short time, it may not be possible to bring the convention into
operation before the beginning of the proposed close season in November
next, the effective operation of the convention thereby being postponed for
another year.

This Government is hopeful that the Governor General will find it
convenient to give his formal assent at an early date to the Halibut Fishery
Amendment Act recently passed by the two houses of the Canadian
Parliament.

Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 285]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, May 28, 1924.

No. 479
SIR: I have the honour to refer to the note which you were so good as to
address to me on the 27th instant regarding the convention for the
preservation of the Halibut Fishery of the Northern Pacific, signed on
March 2nd, 1923, and to inform you that I am in receipt of a
communication from the Government of Canada to the effect that the
Halibut Fishery Amendment Act, recently passed by the two Houses of the
Canadian Parliament, received the Royal assent on the evening of the 27th
instant. The Bill in question thus becomes effective as law.
I have [etc.]

ESME HOWARD

[Document 286]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, June 4, 1924.

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor and the pleasure to inform you that the Senate, by
its Resolution of May 31, 1924, gave its advice and consent to the
ratification of the Convention between the United States and His Britannic
Majesty for the preservation of the halibut fisheries of the northern Pacific
Ocean and including Bering Sea, signed at Washington on March 2, 1923,
and that I shall be prepared to effect the exchange of ratifications8 at your
convenience.

Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES
State and the Minister of Justice for Canada; proclaimed by the President,

[Document 287]
The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
WASHINGTON, November 17, 1923.
that the Canadian Government had not had opportunity to give to the report
of the International Joint Commission in regard to the St. Lawrence River
improvement scheme and the accompanying report of the engineers the
careful consideration which the importance of the subject merits and that on
account of the magnitude of the project and the large outlay of public
money involved the Canadian Government was of the opinion that it was
not expedient to deal with the matter at that time.

Because of the interest which continues among the people of the United
States in the project for the improvement of the St. Lawrence River, I have
the honor to inquire whether the Canadian Government would now be
inclined to give consideration to the matter and to enter into negotiations
Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 288]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, January 30, 1924.

No. 97
SIR: I have the honour to refer to the note which you were so good as to
address to me on November 17th last, regarding the St. Lawrence River
improvement scheme and to inform you, by request of His Excellency the
Governor-General of Canada, that the Dominion Government have had
under consideration the contents of your note addressed to Sir Auckland
Geddes on May 17th, 1922. In that note you suggested either the immediate
conclusion of a treaty looking to the development of the St. Lawrence
waterway along the lines recommended by the International Joint
Commission in its report and providing for the constitution of a Joint
Commission charged with the formulation of a complete plan which would
be subject to the approval of the two Governments, or, alternatively, the
constitution of a Joint Commission of experts to make preliminary studies
and investigations and to frame the draft of a treaty.

The Dominion Government point out that the report of the International
Joint Commission recommended that, before any work was carried out, the
Joint Engineering Board, whose proposals it generally approved, should be
enlarged, and that once so enlarged the said Board should further consider
the technical aspects of the problems in detail and decide upon the plan
which should be adopted.

While the Government of Canada desire to give further consideration to the
suggestions put forward in your note of May 17th, 1922, they are of opinion
that the proposal made by the International Joint Commission should be
acted upon without further delay. The Dominion Government are

accordingly prepared to appoint additional engineers to enlarge the Joint
Engineering Board with a view to the Board undertaking the preparation of
a final report covering the engineering features of the whole project,
including its cost. The Government of Canada intend, further, to form a
committee which will, in consultation with the Canadian members of the
Joint Engineering Board, enquire fully from a national standpoint into the
wide questions involved, and they hope shortly to be in a position to take
further action on the proposals made by the United States Government.
Meanwhile the Government of Canada would be glad to learn the views of
the United States Government in regard to the number of additional
engineers who should be appointed by each Government to the Joint
Engineering Board. The Dominion Government are also ready to nominate
one or more technical officers to discuss with similar United States officers
the form which the instructions to the enlarged Joint Engineering Board
should take, and the time within which the Board should be directed to
report.

In expressing the hope of the Government of Canada that the above
proposals will be agreeable to the United States Government, I have the
honour to inform you that Lord Byng of Vimy would be grateful if
arrangements could be made by telegraph for their publication
simultaneously in Washington and Ottawa.

I have [etc.]

H. G. CHILTON

[Document 289]
The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
WASHINGTON, February 27, 1924.

SIR: In your note of January 30, 1924, in regard to the project for joint action
by the United States and Canada for the improvement of the St. Lawrence
River between Montreal and Lake Ontario for navigation and the
development of water power, you informed me that while the Government
of the Dominion of Canada desires to give further consideration to the
suggestions brought forward in my note of May 17, 1922, to Sir Auckland
Geddes with a view to carrying out the recommendations made by the
International Joint Commission, the Dominion Government is nevertheless
prepared to act without delay on the recommendation for the enlargement of
the Joint Engineering Board which assisted the Commission in making! the
investigation of the project and to appoint additional engineers to the Board
with a view to having it undertake the preparation of a final report covering
the engineering features of the whole project, including its cost.
You informed me also that the Government of Canada intends to form a
committee which will in consultation with the Canadian members of the
Joint Engineering Board, inquire fully from a national standpoint into the
wide questions involved in the project.

In reply permit me to say that this Government is gratified to learn that the
Canadian Government hopes shortly to be in a position to take further
action on the proposals made in my note of May 17, 1922, and meanwhile
is especially pleased to be advised that the Government of Canada intends
to create a committee for the, purpose described in your note. This
Government, similarly, will immediately constitute a national committee
which will in consultation with the American members of the Joint
Engineering Board make adequate inquiry from a national standpoint into
the questions involved to the end that the project for the improvement of the

St. Lawrence River for navigation and the development of its water power
may be carried forward as speedily as possible.

This Government is glad to give its assent to the suggestion that the Joint
Engineering Board should be enlarged and, in response to the request of the
Canadian Government for its view as to the number of additional engineers
which should be appointed, suggests that two engineers be added to the
Board by each Government, the membership of the Board thus being
increased to six, three of whom would be representatives of the United
States and three would be representatives of Canada. In connection with
this enlargement of the Board it may be noted that the first of the
recommendations made by the International Joint Commission was that the
Governments of the United States and Canada enter into an arrangement by
way of treaty for a scheme of improvement of the St. Lawrence River
between Montreal and Lake Ontario. It would appear that the Commission
did not contemplate that negotiations for a treaty should be postponed until
after a report should be made by an enlarged board of engineers but that
negotiations should forthwith be opened, that the proposed works between
Montreal and Lake Ontario should “be based upon the report of the
Engineering Board” accompanying the report of the Commission, and that
the Governments should have the benefit of the advice of an enlarged Board
of Engineers before a “final decision” should be reached.

This Government would propose that the instructions to the enlarged
Engineering Board should be prepared in joint conference by the two
advisory committees which the Governments of Canada and the United
States intend to establish, as indicated in your note and this reply, and that
the two committees should accordingly be empowered to meet in joint
conference for the purpose of formulating such instructions. However, the
instructions would be given to the Board of Engineers by the Governments
and the report of the engineers would be made to the Governments.
As it appears that the report of the Board of Engineers of June 24, 1921,
while of a preliminary character, as contemplated in their instructions,
nevertheless presented a general plan believed to be practicable in its main
features, this Government would desire to have included in the first
instructions to the enlarged Board the two fundamental questions whether

the scheme for the improvement of the St. Lawrence Waterway which the
Board presented in its report of June 24, 1921, is practicable and whether
the estimates of costs made by it require revision. The time within which
the Board should make its report should, as was suggested by the Canadian
Government, be determined in advance and stated in the instructions. It is
believed that the fundamental questions can be reported upon within a short
time. If the suggestion that the instructions to the Joint Engineering Board
be prepared by the two advisory committees in joint conference be
acceptable to the Canadian Government the appointment of technical
officers especially for this purpose as proposed by the Canadian
Government would not be necessary.

This Government further suggests that the two committees be empowered
to meet from time to time in joint session in order to prepare supplemental
instructions for the Board of Engineers as occasion may require, and to
consider and develop the broader aspects of the whole matter so that each
committee may be as helpful to the other as possible.

This Government is hopeful that the foregoing proposals will be acceptable
to the Government of Canada and I should be pleased if arrangements can
be made by telegraph for publishing them simultaneously at Washington
and Ottawa.

Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 290]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, March 12, 1924.

No. 228
SIR: I have the honour to inform you that the Government of Canada have
had under consideration the contents of the note which you were so good as
to address to Mr. Chilton on the 27th ultimo in connection with the
proposed improvement of the St. Lawrence River Waterway, and they
concur in the suggestion of the Government of the United States that two
additional engineers be appointed by each Government to the Joint
Engineering Board whose membership will thus be increased to six, three
members thereof representing the United States and three representing the
Dominion of Canada. The Canadian Government desire me to express
regret, however, that, owing to the death on the 3rd ultimo of Mr. W. A.
Bowden, the late Canadian member of the Board, all three Canadian
representatives will have to be new appointees.

The Dominion Government have noted the proposal of the United States
Government that the national committees to be appointed by the two
Governments concerned should meet from time to time for the purpose of
formulating the terms in which the matters to be enquired into by the
enlarged Joint Engineering Board should be defined. In this connection I
would point out that the intention of the Dominion Government in
constituting a national committee is that the body in question should be
advisory to the Government of Canada, and it is felt that to impose upon
this body, at all events at the outset, the duties suggested would be
inconsistent with the purpose which it is intended to serve and would
change the character of the said body from one primarily national to one of
international significance. The Government of Canada consider that the
terms of reference can, at least in the first instance, be settled quite
adequately and in all probability more promptly in the manner set forth in

the note which Mr. Chilton had the honour to address to you on January
30th last, and they desire me to express the hope that the Government of the
United States will concur in this view. Immediately upon being advised to
that effect the Government of Canada will be ready to appoint a technical
officer for the purpose named, and in the event of the Government of the
United States considering the appointment of more than one such officer to
be desirable, they would have no objection to making an additional
appointment.

The Government of Canada are entirely agreeable to the inclusion in the
first instructions to the enlarged Joint Engineering Board of the two
fundamental questions referred to in your note under reply, namely, whether
the scheme for the improvement of the St. Lawrence Waterway which the
Engineering Board submitted in their report of June 24th, 1921, is
practicable and whether the estimates of the costs put forward by the Board
require revision. On their part, the Dominion Government would suggest
that amongst other matters, the Board should be directed to enquire into the
extent to which the water levels in the River at and below Montreal, as well
as the River and lake levels generally may be affected.

The Dominion Government desire me to suggest that, subject to the
concurrence of the United States Government, this correspondence may be
released on the night of Friday the 14th instant for publication
simultaneously in Washington and in Ottawa on the morning of Saturday
the 15th instant, and in these circumstances, I have the honour to request
that I may be favoured with the views of the United States Government on
this matter as soon as possible.

I have [etc.]

ESME HOWARD

[Document 291]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, April 28, 1924.

EXCELLENCY: In your note of March 12, 1924, you informed me further in regard
to the views of the Canadian Government with reference to the proposal for
joint action by the United States and Canada for the improvement of the St.
Lawrence River between Montreal and Lake Ontario for navigation and the
development of water power.

In pursuance of the intention of this Government, as stated in my note of
February 27, 1924, the President has appointed a national committee of nine
members having as its Chairman the Honorable Herbert Hoover, Secretary
of Commerce, which will act as an advisory committee to this Government
on all questions that may arise in the consideration of the project.
While regretting that the Canadian Government does not desire that the
committees for the two Governments shall meet in joint conferences, at
least at the outset, to prepare instructions for the enlarged joint engineering
board and to consider the broader aspects of the project for the proposed
development of the St. Lawrence waterway, this Government would be
grateful if you would inform the Canadian Government that the National
Committee for the United States will be prepared at all times to meet in
conference with the Canadian Committee in the event that circumstances
should develop which in the view of the Canadian Government would cause
it to appear that joint conferences by the two committees or by
representatives of the committees might be desirable for the consideration
of any questions arising in connection with the project.

This Government is pleased to note that the Canadian Government concurs
in its suggestion that the enlarged Joint Engineering Board shall consist of
six members, three representing the United States and three representing
Canada, and to accept the proposal of the Canadian Government that two

technical officers be appointed by each Government for the purpose of
formulating the terms in which the matters to be inquired into by the Board
shall be defined.

The United States will be represented on the Joint Engineering Board by
Colonel Edgar Jadwin, Colonel William Kelly, and Lieutenant Colonel
George B. Pillsbury, Corps of Engineers, United States Army. Colonel
Jadwin and Lieutenant Colonel Pillsbury will also act as technical officers
for the United States to formulate in collaboration with the technical
officers to be designated by the Canadian Government the instructions
which will be given to the engineers.

This Government is also pleased to note the acceptance by the Government
of Canada of the proposal of this Government that there shall be included in
the first instructions to the Joint Engineering Board the two fundamental
questions, whether the scheme for the improvement of the St. Lawrence
River waterway which the Engineering Board submitted in its report of
June 24, 1921, is practicable and whether the estimates of the costs of the
project made by the Board require revision, and to agree to the suggestion
made by the Dominion Government that amongst other matters the enlarged
Board shall be directed to inquire into the extent to which the water levels
in the St. Lawrence River at and below Montreal, as well as the river and
lake levels generally, will be affected by the execution of the project.
It will, of course, be understood that the instructions drafted by the
technical officers will be subject to review and approval by the appropriate
officials of the respective Governments before they would be given to the
Board of Engineers by the Governments in conformity with the remark
made on that point in my note of February 27, 1924. In connection with
such review and approval, the instructions drafted by the technical officers
will be submitted by the officers for the United States to the National
Committee for this Government.

This Government would be pleased to be informed at the early convenience
of the Canadian Government of the names of the technical officers
appointed by that Government in order that the officers for the two
Governments may make arrangements with as little delay as possible to
collaborate in the drafting of the instructions for the joint engineering

Board. This Government would also be pleased to be informed in due
course of the names of the Canadian members of the Joint Engineering
Board.

Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 292]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, December 29, 1923.

No. 1111
SIR: My attention has been drawn by the Government of Canada to the fact
that about the month of June last the Government of the United States were
granted an injunction restraining the Sanitary District of Chicago from
diverting water from Lake Michigan, but that this injunction would not take
effect for a period of six months in order to allow time for the Sanitary
District of Chicago to appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States. I
understand that such an appeal has been lodged but that the Supreme Court
has not yet acted upon it.

I have the honour to inform you that the Government of Canada have
received numerous communications from various bodies and interests
directly concerned with this question, protesting against this diversion of
water from Lake Michigan and I would further explain that, owing to the
injurious effects of such diversion both upon navigation and water power,
the Dominion Government still maintain their attitude of opposition as
already explained to the United States Government in Sir Auckland
In these circumstances, the Governor General of Canada has asked me to
enquire the present status of the legal proceedings instituted by the
Government of the United States with a view to preventing any increase in
the diversion of water from Lake Michigan, and to add that the Dominion
Government confidently hope that these legal proceedings will be
vigorously pressed by the United States Government.

I have [etc.]

[Document 293]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, February 13, 1924.

No. 144
SIR: I have the honour to inform you that the Government of Canada have
recently noted that a special Committee of the United States Senate has
been appointed by the Vice-President to investigate the problem of a nine-
foot channel in the waterway from the Great Lakes to the Gulf of Mexico
and to enquire into the navigability of the Mississippi, Ohio and Missouri
rivers, with a view presumably to exploring the possibility of establishing
direct maritime communication between the Great Lakes and the South
Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. The Dominion Government further understand
that certain legislation now before Congress proceeds, after defining the
nature of the work to be undertaken in the stretch above mentioned, to
confer upon the Sanitary District of Chicago the legal right to divert for
sewage dilution and navigation purposes, 10,000 cubic feet of water per
second from Lake Michigan upon condition that the said district shall pay
into the Treasury of the United States such sums as may be estimated to be
its reasonable share of the cost of constructing compensating works at
several points for the purpose of controlling and restoring to the lakes in
question the levels lost by reason of this diversion of water.
In this connection, the Dominion Government observe that no provision is
made for the restoration of the levels of the St. Lawrence River from its
head to tidewater. In other words, the restoration to be provided in the
legislation above-named is to be in the waters where United States
navigation predominates but no such restoration is provided for the waters
so extensively used by Canadian shipping.

Reports submitted to the Canadian Government during recent months refer
not only to the loss of levels that affect navigation, but also to the diversion

of water for power purposes both in the international stretches where
compensation may be determined and in the international stretches below
Cornwall in the Province of Quebec. In that regard, Lord Byng of Vimy
desires me to point out that the limit of 10,000 cubic feet of water per
second, as contemplated by the proposed legislation, is about 1. cubic
[feet] per second more than is being diverted at present, and His Excellency
considers it possible that the proposed legislation may mean that 10,000
cubic feet per second is allowed for diversion and power at Lockport, while
additional water power will doubtless be required for lockages.

In view of the above, I have the honour to inform you that the Government
of Canada are unalterably opposed to the proposed diversion of water from
the Great Lakes watershed to that of the Mississippi, to the great detriment
of navigation from Sault Ste. Marie to tidewater. The diversion that has
already taken place at Chicago has lowered the waters of the Great Lakes to
an extent that is now common knowledge. This affects harbours upon which
many million dollars have been expended in deepening operations. It also
affects the locksills of the Sault Ste. Marie Canals, the Welland Canal and
the St. Lawrence Canals and, further, this diversion of water has a most
injurious effect upon the ocean shipping channel between Montreal and the
sea, where the Government of the Dominion have spent many more
millions of dollars in dredging operations. How great have been the injuries
sustained by navigation interests may be seen from the fact that every inch
of navigable water means an additional 60 to 80 tons of carrying capacity.
The waters of the Great Lakes are the heritage of both the people of the
United States and the people of Canada, and the Dominion Government are
of opinion that it is quite obvious that these waters should be conserved for
the interests of both peoples. The Government of Canada, therefore,
sincerely hope that the Government of the United States will not only not
permit any further diversion of water from Lake Michigan, but will intimate
to, and if necessary insist upon, the Sanitary District of Chicago adopting
some more scientific method of sewage disposal than is foreshadowed at
present.

I have the honour to request that I may in due course be furnished with an
expression of the views of the United States Government upon the contents
of this note, for communication to His Excellency the Governor-General of
Canada.

I have [etc.]

H. G. CHILTON

[Document 294]
The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
WASHINGTON, February 16, 1924.

SIR: With further reference to your note of December 29, 1923, in regard to
the legal proceedings instituted by the Government of the United States
against the Sanitary District of Chicago to prevent the unauthorized
diversion of water from Lake Michigan, I have the honor to inform you that
the Department has been advised by the Solicitor General of the United
States that an appeal has been taken by the Sanitary District of Chicago
from the decision of the United States District Court in favor of the
Government and that the appeal is still pending in the Supreme Court of the
United States. The Solicitor General further stated that as soon as the record
of the case shall have been printed a motion will be submitted to the court
to advance the case for early argument.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
LELAND HARRISON

[Document 295]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, March 21, 1924.

SIR: I have the honour to refer to the note which you were so good as to
address to Mr. Chilton on February 16th last and to inform you, by request
of His Excellency the Governor-General of Canada, that the question of the
diversion of water from the St. Lawrence River watershed into that of the
Mississippi continues to cause grave concern to the Government and people
of Canada, more especially in view of the provisions of the bill which has
been introduced into Congress in regard to this matter. The Dominion
Government desire me to express the hope that no action will be taken
either to confirm or permit the claim of the Sanitary District of Chicago to
continue the diversion of water referred to above, inasmuch as this would
adversely affect navigation on the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River
as well as the actual or prospective development of power upon river and
inter-lake connecting waters.

The attitude of the Government of Canada in opposition to and in protest
against the most injurious effects of this proposed diversion of water has
been consistently maintained throughout and has been made known to the
United States Government. The Dominion Government feel that it would be
most unfortunate if, now that the development of the St. Lawrence
Waterway for navigation and power purposes is under consideration, any
action should be taken which might adversely affect the possibility of such
development, and they trust that these views will meet with the agreement
of the United States Government.

In this connection I would draw your particular attention to the contents of
Mr. Chilton’s note No. 144 of February 13th, the receipt of which you were
good enough to acknowledge on the 15th ultimo, and to enquire whether
you are yet in a position to inform me of the attitude of the United States
authorities in this matter. At the same time it would be a matter of

[Document 296]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, April 2, 1924.

EXCELLENCY: Further reference is made to the note from your Embassy No. 130
of February 9, 1924, in which it was stated that the Government of the
Dominion of Canada desired to send Mr. W. J. Stewart, Chief Hydrographer
of the Dominion Government to be present in its behalf at hearings of a
special committee of the Senate appointed to investigate the problem of a
nine foot channel in the proposed waterway from the Great Lakes to the
Gulf of Mexico, and to the inquiry made in your note No. 256 of March 21,
1924, in regard to the date on which these hearings will be held, and
whether Mr. Stewart will be at liberty to be present.

The Committee of the Senate to which reference was made in the
Embassy’s note of February 9, 1924, has not held hearings during the
present session of Congress or yet arranged to hold them.

I am informed by the Chairman of the Committee on Rivers and Harbors of
the House of Representatives that this Committee has arranged to resume
hearings on April 15, on bills dealing with the diversion of waters from
Lake Michigan, the most important one, I understand, being known as the
Hull Bill (H. R. 5475). The Committee desires to obtain all the information
it can which will be helpful towards a correct determination of the matters
which it has under consideration. It will welcome the help of all who have
information of value relating to these matters, and will be glad to have Mr.
Stewart attend the hearings.

Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 297]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, June 13, 1924.

No. 533
SIR: I have the honour to refer to my note No. 256 of the 21st of March and
to other correspondence on the subject of the diversion of water from the
Great Lakes as a result of the Chicago drainage system, and at the request
of His Excellency the Governor General of Canada to call your attention to
the fact that this matter has come up for discussion in the Canadian
Parliament on several different occasions during the current session.
On each occasion, and with increasing emphasis amounting to unanimity,
demands have been made upon the Dominion Government to renew the
protests which have already been lodged against the action of the Sanitary
District of Chicago, in continuing and seeking to extend their claim to
diversion of water from the St. Lawrence Watershed into that of the
Mississippi, with consequent adverse effect upon important interests in the
navigation both of the Great Lakes and of the St. Lawrence River, and the
development of power, actual and prospective, upon the River itself and
upon the waters connecting the Lakes.

The Dominion Government are constrained to believe that unless; some
reassuring message can be made to the people of Canada that favourable
progress is being made in the matter, public opinion throughout the
Dominion will become so aroused as to render exceedingly difficult the
amicable consideration and discussion of the far less-reaching problem and
issue incident to the Great Lakes and the International Waterway. The
Government of Canada are fully aware that in many parts of the United
States public opinion is similarly being aroused, and are not ignorant of the
fact that the United States Government is not less anxious than they are to
see a settlement speedily effected.

It is for these reasons, therefore, while unwilling to prefer any request or
take any steps which might add to the existing embarrassment, the
Dominion Government feel that they must once again direct the attention of
the United States Government to the serious situation, which has developed,
and in doing so express the (hope that it may be possible now to obtain an
expression of the views of the United States Government on the points
raised in my note of March 21st. The Government of Canada feel that it
would be most advantageous for them to obtain a statement from the
competent United States authorities which will definitely define the position
as it now stands, and they trust that such a statement will be of a reassuring
character as to probable future developments.

In bringing these facts to your notice, I venture to hope that I may receive
an expression of the views of the United States Government at your earliest
convenience for communication to the Dominion Government.

In this connection I would add that the Dominion Government propose to
publish forthwith the note No. 256 which I addressed to you on March 21st.
I have [etc.]

(For the Ambassador)
HERBERT W. BROOKS

[Document 298]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, June 28, 1924.

EXCELLENCY: I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your note No. 533
of June 13, 1924, in further reference to the diversion of water from Lake
Michigan at Chicago.

In previous correspondence in regard to this matter reference was made to
the suit brought by this Government to restrain the Sanitary District of
Chicago from diverting a larger quantity of water from Lake Michigan than
is authorized by the permit issued to the Sanitary District by the Secretary
of War and to bills introduced in Congress during the past session with
reference to the construction of the proposed waterway from Lake
Michigan to the Mississippi River and the sewage disposal system of
Chicago.

The suit for an injunction, which is now pending on appeal in the Supreme
Court of the United States, has been assigned for argument on November
10, 1924, early in the next term of the court. The position of the United
States as plaintiff in this litigation is evidence of the interest which this
Government has in the preservation of the navigability of the Great Lakes
system of waterways. Until the Court has rendered an opinion in the case
this Department will not be in a position to furnish the Canadian
Government with further information in regard to the views of this
Government concerning the questions involved in the litigation.
Hearings were held in March, April and May, 1924, by the Committee on
Rivers and Harbors of the House of Representatives on the several bills
introduced in Congress. In order that the Committee might be fully
informed of the views of the Canadian Government in regard to the
diversion of water from Lake Michigan I sent copies of your notes of

I have also sent him a copy of your note of June 13, 1924. In my note of
April 2, 1924, I informed you that the Committee would be glad to have Mr.
W. J. Stewart, Chief Hydrographer of the Canadian Government attend the
hearings. The bills were still before the Committee on the adjournment of
the session of Congress on June 7, 1924.

I regret that the formulation of a comprehensive statement of the views of
this Government concerning the diversion of water from Lake Michigan
will have to be deferred for a time because certain of the questions involved
are under consideration by Congress and the Supreme Court both of which
are at the present time in recess. This Government is prepared, however, to
include consideration of the diversions of water from Lake Michigan
among the questions to be referred by the United States and Canada to the
Joint Board of Engineers appointed for the further investigation of the
proposed Saint Lawrence Waterway, as will be fully explained in my note
in regard to the instructions to be given to the engineers. It would be
understood, of course, that the submission of this question to the Joint
Board of Engineers would be without prejudice to the rights of this
Government with reference to the diversion of water from Lake Michigan
or the position which it may take concerning questions that may arise
because of such diversions.

In connection with the statement made in your note under acknowledgment
that it is the purpose of the Canadian Government to publish forthwith your
Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES
includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291].

Chile:
Resignation of President Alessandri and the exercise of
informal relations between the United States Embassy and
the new administration at Santiago (Documents 299-306)

[Document 299]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
53. Alessandri resigned last night rather than accede to Junta’s demands.
He dissolved Congress. He arrived at Embassy accompanied by various
members of his immediate family at 3 a.m. seeking asylum which was
granted for the night. General Altamirano, head of the Government and now
acting President, was duly informed. I gave out the following statement to
the press:
“Don Arturo Alessandri came to the American Embassy after
midnight accompanied by members of his family stating that he
has resigned as President of Chile. He asked the hospitality of the
Embassy. It was granted to him. No Chilean ever asked the
hospitality of the Embassy and was refused.”
COLLIER

[Document 300]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 8: p.m.]
55. Foreign Minister in his personal capacity and in the name of the
Government called to express thanks for the hospitality which I extended to
Alessandri; also for the form of press statement included in my number 53,
September 9. Several hundred people, including many of the opposition,
have visited the Embassy with full permission of the Government to pay
their respects to Alessandri. All appeared deeply touched by the fact that I
had refrained from saying that I had afforded him asylum and instead had
stated that I had extended him hospitality thereby avoiding the implication
that his life was in danger. Complete calm and order prevail.
COLLIER

[Document 301]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
56. Tonight Alessandri and family depart for Buenos Aires with Europe as
their ultimate destination. I shall accompany them to Mendoza, returning
Friday evening. I am taking this course at the request of the family and with
the full permission of the Government. On two occasions Alessandri
tendered his resignation but each time it was rejected by Congress. The
latter, however, under the Constitution has granted him a leave of 6 months.
He stated to me that he intends again to resign when he crosses the frontier,
inasmuch as he believes it to be inconsistent with his self-respect and
dignity to remain in office when he is not permitted by the military junta to
perform the duties of his office. In a sense his resignation is absolutely
voluntary although his departure from Chile is a result of his knowledge
that if he did not depart he would be forced to by the junta. The junta wants
him to accept the leave granted and not resign. In keeping with the
Constitution General Altamirano as Minister of the Interior assumed full
power as Acting President. The Cabinet offered to send in their resignations
but the members have all been retained. No other faction or party claims to
be the Government. Thousands of people throughout Chile undoubtedly do
not approve of what has happened. However, I have learned of no protests,
especially by organized factions. Everything has been done according to
constitutional forms. The exertion of pressure has been by intimation rather
than by direct threats. No act of violence has yet occurred, but if
compliance had not been given force would undoubtedly have been used.
The nation as a whole seems inclined to accept the present Government at
least until a new Constitution is adopted or until new elections bring about a
change. The legality of the Government is not challenged by the press.
Under the existing situation I believe that the new Cabinet must be

recognized as legal and General Altamirano as constitutionally selected. I
believe most and possibly all members of the diplomatic corps hold this
view. It is practically certain, however, that the present Congress will be
done away with. … It cannot be constitutionally dissolved but the junta will
certainly ask its members to resign and if necessary dissolve it by force.
Please instruct me concerning the recognition of the new Government.
COLLIER

[Document 302]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
40. Since you have stated that constitutional forms have been observed in
the executive branch of the Government, the Government of the United
States does not desire to raise the question of recognition.
Department believes it advisable to avoid discussion of recognition and to
let relations continue as at present without making public statements which
seemingly are not called for.

HUGHES

[Document 303]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
junta has accepted Alessandri’s resignation. It is reported from Buenos
Aires that Alessandri has made statement that he was banished and that
there is no constitutional government in Chile.

You are instructed to avoid any formal relations with the new regime until
the situation clears up, but do not make your course conspicuous. Should a
situation arise where it would be impossible to remain noncommittal
telegraph Department at once.

HUGHES

[Document 304]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
43. Department appreciates desirability of avoiding any steps which might
have an unfavorable reaction on the local situation. However, the attitude of
the Government of the United States so far as the recognition of the new
regime is concerned must be guided not simply by the sincerity and
objectives of those in control but also by those general principles which
must govern our policy in extending recognition to any administration
which may come into power in another nation by extra-constitutional
means. At the present time it does not seem clear that the Government of
the United States would be justified in assuming that the new regime was
sufficiently established to warrant formal relations. For the present you will
maintain frank, friendly, but informal relations, and you may make it clear
that the United States is only pursuing that course which it invariably takes
in like cases in other parts of the world.

HUGHES

[Document 305]
The Secretary of State to the Chilean Ambassador (Mathieu)
WASHINGTON, October 9, 1924.

EXCELLENCY: While it is not the intention of this Government to discontinue
dealing with you as Ambassador of Chile, I desire to state in order to avoid
misapprehension that it should be understood that this Government’s action
in so doing is not to be construed as a recognition of the régime now
functioning in Chile as other than the de facto authorities in control of the
administration of Chile.

Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 306]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
issued by officials mentioned and authenticate their signatures indicating
that the officials in question are the de facto authorities now functioning in
Chile. Such legalization with such indication does not constitute recognition
of a new government. It is the policy of the United States either to
recognize or not to recognize a new government as such. It does not now
recognize a régime functioning in a country as a so-called de facto
government. Until circumstances impel it to recognize a régime as the
government of a country the dealings with that regime are to be deemed
merely dealings with the authorities actually in control and as having no
other significance. Their character should therefore be made clear in order
to prevent misconstruction.

HUGHES
China:

[Document 307]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
304. For past month rumors have been current of possibilities of conflict
involving Wu Pei-fu; Chi Hsieh-yuan, Inspector General of Kiangsu, Anhui
and Kiangsi; Lu Yung-hsiang, Anfu leader and Tuchun of Chekiang in
control of Shanghai; and ultimately Chang Tso-lin. Lately and especially
within the past few days rumors have crystallized and reports now to hand
from reliable sources to the effect that war is quite probable between
Chekiang and Kiangsu, men and stores being mobilized and warlike activity
increasingly evident in those regions. Real cause for apprehension is not
conflict between above Provinces but that if clash occurs there it will
almost inevitably bring on a Chihli-Fengtien war.

Factors against present conflict are flood conditions, lack of funds, and
mutual jealousies. As however it is impossible to gauge ramifications of
Chinese politics which may actuate Wu, Chi, Lu and Chang at any given
time, it is impossible to say with any degree of certainty what course events
will take although optimistic tone seems to prevail that armed clash will be
averted.

Am keeping in as close touch as possible with situation and will report
further if and when it seems expedient.

BELL

[Document 308]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
“August 27, 6 p.m. Conditions becoming graver hourly. Military
took charge of the railway stations, closing gates this morning,
but through intervention of British consul general, General Ho
was induced to allow existing foreign and Chinese staff to
continue operating trains, they accepting requests for required
transportation for the military and promising permit regular
service continue. Morning trains were canceled, afternoon
continued, but this arrangement may be upset at any time.
Rice has risen today 30 percent. Dollar exchange continues
upward.

Suggest as precautionary measure immediate despatch of naval
force of two destroyers to be promptly increased in the event of
outbreak of hostilities to the strength indicated in my telegram
August 25, noon. Regard as significant General Ho’s remark
today that the time for heavy fighting had not yet arrived.”
Cunningham’s telegram repeated to Admiral Washington with my
concurrence in his suggestion. Following from American consul, Nanking:
“Mails still continue regularly.

Twenty thousand Kiangsu troops border Chekiang between Ihsing
and Kunshan near Soochow. Hostilities almost certain.”

Morning press reports to effect Nanking-Shanghai railroad service
interrupted and that fighting had commenced between General Chi and
General Ho Feng-lin’s troops. Not confirmed.
BELL

[Document 309]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
and Japanese Ministers, French Chargé d’Affaires, and I yesterday
addressed following note to Minister for Foreign Affairs;
“We, the undersigned representatives of Great Britain, Japan,
France and the United States learning of the grave danger of
hostilities breaking out between the provincial authorities of
Kiangsu and Chekiang feel it our duty to remind the Chinese
Government of the terms of the communication addressed by us
to you on August 11, 1923 and to repeat and reaffirm in the most
solemn manner the declarations contained in that communication
regarding the obligations of the Chinese Government in the
present crisis, to prevent loss of life and property to members of
the foreign community in and around Shanghai.”
BELL

[Document 310]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
Shanghai dated August 28, 6 p.m.:
“This
morning
commissioner
of
defense
notified
the
superintendent of customs that Chinese naval vessels had left
Nanking and Foochow to attack Woosung forts and urged the
superintendent to issue notice that shipping should be on guard
off Woosung without limiting the area. This might create a virtual
blockade of the port of Shanghai. It is anticipated the official
notice will be received tomorrow. Since that time superintendent
has informed the commissioner of defense that the consular body
should properly be notified. In anticipation of such notice the
Legation’s instructions are requested as to the proper attitude to
be taken in conjunction with colleagues.

Admiral Tu, commander in chief of the Chinese Navy, has issued
notice through the North China Daily News warning shipping not
to proceed up river between Woosung and Kiangyin at night.
Request above be transmitted to commander in chief so that he
may protect American shipping at Woosung and on the lower
Yangtze.

Suggest all telegrams be sent via Great Northern. Understand
Chinese mail and telegrams being censored but have no reports of
censorship foreign correspondence.”

Substance telegraphed Admiral Washington who has sent three destroyers to
Shanghai to arrive this morning pursuant to Cunningham’s telegram of
BELL
includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308].

[Document 311]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
315. After a conference this morning regarding situation at Shanghai,
British and Japanese Ministers, French Chargé d’Affaires and myself called
on Minister for Foreign Affairs and explained to him that we could not
regard with equanimity the situation threatening Shanghai by sea. The
whole river from the arsenal to Woosung was practically one vast harbor
full of ships of every nationality, and the idea of a naval battle in the
greatest harbor of the East was unthinkable and, as far as we were
concerned, could not be tolerated. Battle between Woosung forts and
Nanking navy would practically result in blockade of Shanghai to say
nothing of damage to foreign shipping by misdirected fire and excursion up
to [sic] the river of navy to attack arsenal, and Lu’s ships would probably
result in injury if not destruction of settlements which we could not
contemplate. We desired to be absolutely neutral in this matter and did not
wish to interfere with China’s internal wars but simply could not
contemplate such situation as the foregoing. We hoped to receive from Koo
a declaration of neutrality in respect of the whole river and its mouth,
failing which we proposed to enforce same ourselves and we had the ships
and men to do it. Koo did not take these representations amiss and promised
to consult Minister of the Navy and give us a reply.

Meanwhile I am telegraphing foregoing to Admiral Washington, and consul
general at Shanghai so they can concert with British, Japanese and French
colleagues.

BELL

[Document 312]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
[Received September 3—1 a.m.]

“September 1, noon. I gather from usual source stage all set here
for a fight. Efforts of peacemakers will fail. They have not offered
Chi control of Shanghai and he is prepared to fight for it. Lu not
sanguine of military success but thinks he will get better terms if
he puts up a fight. Expected hostilities will open about September
4th.

On August 28th Wu asked Chi to hold off for one week to enable
him to complete arrangements for mobilization against Fengtien.
Chi has acceded so ball may be expected to open near here about
Thursday. Lu has funds to finance his campaign derived from
contributions raised by his subordinates and a small dole from
Mukden. Chang is giving money cautiously to Lu through third
party here.

Littles left last night. I sail Wednesday. Goodbye to all.”
2. Above-mentioned source believed to be G. E. Sokolsky who
had interview for North China Daily News with Marshal Chi at
Nanking, August 27th, of which following are pertinent excerpts
and of whose credibility military attaché’s office thinks [highly?]:
3.

“Everybody talks about the unification of China but
what are the facts? We have been negotiating for almost

10 years. We are still negotiating. No authority is
recognized.

The time comes when there must be action. Kiangsu
has always recognized itself as being a part of the
Republic of China and loyal to it. General Lu considers
Chekiang independent of the Republic of China. The
fact that the most important commercial city in China,
Shanghai, is a buffer between Kiangsu and Chekiang
makes for danger to the whole country. Shanghai is
historically, traditionally, and geographically a city of
Kiangsu. By a political accident the control of Shanghai
has become vested in so-called independent officials of
Chekiang. This has led to grave political difficulties as
every Chinese and foreigner knows.

According to the peace agreement (of that year)
Chekiang should have disarmed rebel troops of Fukien.
These rebel troops are now being used to attack
Kiangsu. General Lu has broken the peace agreement
by these activities.

Anyone who has studied my career will realize I am not
impetuous. I would not take this step unless I had the
authority to do so and the consent of my colleagues.
This effort is designed only to establish what is right,
namely, the inclusion politically of Shanghai in
Kiangsu, as Shanghai is geographically a part of
Kiangsu. My colleagues in the Government and in the
neighboring provinces desire that I should take this
step, and I have their hearty support and cooperation.
Y our newspaper may assure the people of Shanghai
that my troops will be orderly. I love peace. I am ready
to make peace but China must be unified and if it is
necessary to unify China by war then there must be
war.”

4. I have it from reliable source that Peking Government has
raised $3,000,000 within last few days partly from railroads;
$1,000,000 given to General Feng Yu-hsiang, disposition of rest
unknown.
impossible to forecast with any degree of certainty what course
events will take but in view of Cheney’s telegram, other
information, and general undercurrent of opinion locally, am
inclining more and more to belief that Marshal Chi, Wu, and
Peking Government intend to eliminate Lu and return Shanghai
before many days and possibly at this time and are setting stage
for such eventuality.
6. I also fear that Chang Tso-lin will attack Wu Pei-fu in the rear
in which case the whole of China [will] be the melting pot.
General Connor and Captain Smith are both in Mukden and I
hope to have reliable information from them regarding Chang’s
intentions in a few days.

BELL

[Document 313]
The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary
of State
Reliably informed that hostilities broke out at 10 o’clock this morning at
Hwangtu 15 miles west of Shanghai between forces of Military Governor
Chi and Commissioner of Defense Ho. British, American, Japanese, French,
Italian naval contingent in the harbor prepared to land forces to protect
foreign settlement if necessary. French consul general has just advised that
French naval forces will land at 5 p.m. today in the French concession.
CUNNINGHAM

[Document 314]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
1. Commander in chief inquires whether you approved position
there indicated, as otherwise he considers he should use force on
Yangtze only to protect life and American property.
2. Chinese admirals of opposing factions have issued orders
restricting traffic on Yangtze for about 80 miles up stream from its
mouth and representatives of powers possessing naval vessels in
Chinese waters have accordingly decided to inquire of their
respective governments whether the latter will approve use of
force to prevent application of restrictions.
3. While favoring action indicated in my 315 if it becomes
necessary, I feel that proposal in paragraph 2 of this telegram
would not be justified.
4. Please reply to both above inquiries.

BELL

[Document 315]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 6, 1924—noon.
yesterday from Harbin and Mukden, reports after careful inspection he
could find no evidence of Marshal Chang Tso-lin intending to move in
immediate future. His attitude appeared to be one of watchful waiting.
BELL

[Document 316]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Bell)
1. The Department considers that the use of naval forces on the
Yangtze should be confined to the protection of American life and
property.
2. The Department does not feel that the situation has reached a
stage so critical as to justify the use of force in preventing the
application of the restrictions on the Yangtze to which you refer,
although the right of free navigation on this stream is accorded by
treaty.
employed as indicated in paragraph 1 above, but the exigencies of the
situation seem to demand an appropriate cooperation and that the river
should be kept open from Shanghai to the open sea since this stretch of
water is to all intents and purposes the harbor of Shanghai. It is assumed
that the naval authorities of the powers represented in those waters will use
all proper means to that end.

Department desires to be kept fully informed concerning developments and
should situation demand more drastic action than that contemplated herein
Department would be glad to have the benefit of your recommendations as
well as those of Admiral Washington and the Consul-General at Shanghai.
HUGHES

[Document 317]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
regard to use of force on Yangtze only for protection of American life and
property, leaves me in some doubt as to your wishes regarding use of force
on Whangpoo.

You state in paragraph 3 that force is to be employed on Whangpoo only as
in manner indicated above with respect to Yangtze but you at the same time
assume that naval authorities of the powers represented in Whangpoo River
will use all proper means to keep open Whangpoo from Shanghai to the
open sea which may require different and more drastic action.
These instructions appear somewhat contradictory. Most drastic action
contemplated so far is, as outlined in my 315, the enforcement of neutrality
in respect of whole Whangpoo River and its mouth.

In order to avoid any possible misunderstanding please elucidate
Department’s position with regard to use of naval force on Whangpoo.
Your telegram and this reply repeated to Admiral Washington, for his
information.

BELL

[Document 318]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
Mukden:
“September 7, 3 p.m. Marshal Chang Tso-lin called together
consuls at Mukden 11 a.m. today and stated as Chihli advance
troops are within 10 li of Shanhaikwan, mobilization will be
immediately ordered in the Three Eastern Provinces. He stated
that he does not wish war and will not take offensive but will
probably be obliged to fight in self-defense. The rights and safety
of foreigners were guaranteed. He is attempting to transmit funds
to Shanghai and as the Bank of Chosen apparently refused to
remit he took the matter up with the Japanese consul general. The
latter stated that Bank of Chosen are [is] under the inspectors
executives [sic] in Japan where there is a gold embargo and made
no promise to facilitate shipment. Further information will be
submitted later.”
BELL

[Document 319]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
that the Chekiang admiral states he will comply with the notification that no
firing on the Whangpoo will be permitted and that the Nanking admiral has
already informed him that he has no intention of attacking the arsenal.
BELL

[Document 320]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
1. Presidential mandate of September 7th quotes telegram to
President from Marshal Chi describing rebellious attitude of
General Lu Yung-hsiang as defying Central Government and in
company with Ho Feng-lin mobilizing rebel forces for attack on
Kiangsu, launching said attack on September 4th to which
Kiangsu troops had to offer armed resistance for sake of self-
defense and requesting that a punitive order be immediately
issued by the President. The mandate then states same request
made by Wu Pei-fu; Wang Cheng-pin, Deputy Inspector General
of Chihli, Honan and Shantung; Hsiao Yao-han, Inspector General
Hupeh and Hunan; Wang Hwai-ching, Inspector General Jehol,
Chahar and Suiyuan; and Feng Yu-hsiang, Inspector General the
Army. After reviewing deplorable situation caused by continued
disorder and floods and pointing out that Kiangsu military
authorities had been instructed not to take any rash action,
Presidential mandate decrees that Lu Yung-hsiang and Ho Feng-
lin are now detailed from respective offices and deprived of all
ranks and decorations; Marshal Chi ordered to mobilize troops to
suppress rebels and cope with situation at his discretion and to do
best to bring war to close as soon as possible and that proper
measures should be adopted for protection of all Chinese and
foreign life and property.
2. Military situation. Troops of Kiangsu and Chekiang at war on
front from Liuho on Yangtze through Hwangtu and Kunshan on
Nanking-Shanghai Railway to Suchow on east side of Taihu and

at Ihsing on west side of Taihu. Kiangsu being reenforced by
small number of inferior troops from Shantung and Honan.
Respective strengths of opposing forces estimated at 60,000.
Fighting so far only skirmishes and confined to vicinity of
Shanghai.
3. Captain Baldwin is being sent by military attaché to Mukden to
observe and report situation which according to 330, September
8, 11 a.m., appears to be assuming more threatening aspect.
4. Far Eastern Times September 3rd contained an alleged letter to
President Tsao from Minister for Foreign Affairs Chang, dated
August 30th, sharply critical in tone of Peking administration
arraigning Tsao Kun government for lack of thought for people
and further impairment of China’s present international position if
Government goes to war for selfish motives and advising
President to stop troops’ movements directed against Chekiang
and threatening armed intervention unless advice taken. Replying
to my telegram regarding authenticity of above letter, consul at
Mukden reported on September 4th that commissioner of foreign
affairs at Mukden stated that letter similar to one published but
without threat of armed intervention was sent to President Tsao by
Marshal Chang.
5. Apparently in connection with a recent movement reported
from time to time in the press that certain radical Chinese wish to
proclaim September 7th as a day of national humiliation since
Boxer protocol signed on that date, printed handbills headed “To
Foreigners” [were distributed?] yesterday in the Legation Quarter
and vicinity north of Chienmen warning foreign diplomats and
citizens that Chinese can no longer tolerate further acts of
violence and insults by our Governments and threatening our
lives if we do not give up predatory treaties which strangle China
and protocol of 1901. I do not attach any great importance to this
occurrence but send it for what it may be worth as straw in the
wind.

In order to save time and relieve Legation in present understaffed condition
I have directed consular officers at Shanghai and Nanking to telegraph
direct to Department information concerning Kiangsu- Chekiang situation
which they might deem essential Department should know, telegraphing
only to the Legation other information in that regard which necessary for
me to know but not essential for the Department.

BELL

[Document 321]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
each of the four Legations in question to make an oral reply to our
démarche of August 30th. Message vague and unsatisfactory stated
Government troops would spare no effort to protect foreign lives and
property and assure safety of foreign settlements in Shanghai but omitted
any reference to a declaration of neutrality of Whangpoo River and
contained a louder [sic] reference to our declaration “that our Governments
would not if requested intervene in the possible developments of the
situation” which of course we never made.

In order to avoid misunderstanding British and Japanese Ministers, French
Chargé d’Affaires and myself and Italian Minister, who was absent from
Peking on August 30th but who on return joined us in our representations,
have today sent memorandum to Minister for Foreign Affairs pointing out
that while our Governments had no desire to intervene and did not wish to
take sides they could not possibly allow naval engagement to take place in
the Whangpoo River or its approaches and that they might have to take
steps even possibly of a forcible nature to prevent such hostilities.
Memorandum took note of assurances that no effort would be spared to
protect foreign lives and property and foreign settlements Shanghai but
expressed regret that Koo’s message contained no reference to
neutralization of Whangpoo River.

BELL

[Document 322]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Bell)
for protection of American lives and property. You should, of course,
understand that the Executive, unless otherwise authorized by Congress,
can use American naval forces only for this purpose. This should be clear,
but manifestly there are situations in which suitable protection of American
lives and property will require appropriate cooperation. Such a situation is
deemed to exist on Whangpu because of the commingling of foreign
interests. You were therefore instructed that the exigencies of the situation
there seemed to require appropriate cooperation with the naval authorities
of the other Powers represented in those waters in keeping that stream open
show importance of this. Department hopes that traffic will be kept moving
confirms this view.

Preponderant naval forces of Powers on the Whangpu should be able to
protect by their cooperation foreign shipping and thus suitably protect
American lives and property without actual combat with Chinese forces.
As to Yangtze, it should be said that if restrictions imposed by Chinese
should endanger American lives and property the American naval
authorities would be expected to take the necessary steps to afford
paragraph, that such a situation had not yet arisen.

HUGHES

[Document 323]
The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary
of State
The fighting has continued intermittently since September 3rd on front
running roughly from Liuho on Yangtze 33 miles from Shanghai, to
Kiating, Hwangtu and Tsingpu. Apparently nearest point about 9 miles from
Shanghai. No decisive results so far. Large numbers machine guns and
considerable artillery used but practically no airplanes.
Morale both armies excellent. Reports indicate Kiangsu offensive
developing on both flanks of this front with Woosung forts on left and
Shanghai-Hangchow Railway and Kiangnan Arsenal on right as objective.
Chekiang troops reported on the offensive west of Taihu Lake since Sunday.
No reliable reports of results. Hundreds of Chekiang wounded being
received in Shanghai hospital.

Combined Nanking and Fukien naval forces said to consist of two cruisers,
two gunboats, four torpedo boats and two transports anchored off Liuho but
so far inactive. Both Chekiang and Kiangsu naval commanders promised
not to fire in Whangpoo River.

As precautionary measures only, foreign naval contingents landed at
daybreak today and took up stations as did Shanghai Volunteer Corps.
Aside from financial stringency and nervousness of Chinese, conditions in
thousand daily. Food supply adequate for the present. Necessary

arrangements for care are being made. Chairman Municipal Council states
he has no fears as to safety of foreign lives and property.
CUNNINGHAM

[Document 324]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Japan (Caffery)
disturbance in China has been to afford adequate protection to American
life and property and to maintain an attitude of strict neutrality. There is no
thought of any other course of action and it is assumed that the other
principal Powers entertain similar views. There has been no interchange of
views with any of the Powers whose interests might be affected by the
developments in China. For your information there is quoted below a copy
of a telegram sent to Peking on September 8: [Here follows text of telegram
HUGHES

[Document 325]
The Chargé in Japan (Caffery) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
227. Foreign Minister Shidehara in the course of a conversation today told
me informally that Japan intended to keep neutral with respect to the
present struggle in China. … He spoke of reports published in newspapers
here alleging that Wu Pei-fu was backed by; the United States and Chang
Tso-lin by Japan. Both of these reports, he said, were obviously incorrect,
and he expressed the hope that they would not gain credence in America. …
Shidehara also referred to London press despatches printed here to the
effect that the British and American Governments were exchanging views
on the position to be taken in the present situation. He quickly added that he
had not considered such reports to be of much importance.

Shidehara told me as I was leaving that he is disposed to treat me with
perfect frankness and would keep me informed of the situation should his
Government find it necessary to take action to protect Japanese interests in
China.

I have informed Peking.

CAFFERY

[Document 326]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
commissioner on the one side and Nanking admiral on the other have both
agreed to the neutralization of the Whangpoo River and to the revocation of
the regulations regarding navigation of the lower Yangtze and of the
Whangpoo.

This if true is very satisfactory.

BELL

[Document 327]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Japan (Caffery)
Shidehara the essential portion of the first paragraph of the Department’s
China.”
You may repeat to Peking for its information the above mentioned first
paragraph of the Department’s 151.

HUGHES

[Document 328]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
1. American, British, French, Italian, and Japanese senior naval
officers present at Shanghai at a meeting September 8th decided
that Woosung forts should be “neutralized”, that is, that Chekiang
garrison should be driven out and that flags of five nations above
mentioned should be hoisted over the fort.
2. They referred this question to us through Italian consul general
as senior representative at Shanghai of powers having ships of
war on China station.
3. Above-referred-to representatives including myself have today
telegraphed Italian consul general Shanghai that in view of Ho
and Tu’s present state of mind, as reported in my 339, we
consider that our men-of-war’s activities should be limited to
protecting the town of Shanghai (foreign settlement understood),
the Whangpoo and its mouth, and, if necessary, navigation night
and day on the lower Yangtze and at its mouth.
4. We do not agree that foreign detachments should occupy
Woosung forts and hoist foreign flags.

BELL

[Document 329]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
states in brief that our memorandum of August 28 has been communicated
to Ministries of Navy and War and telegraphed to high military authorities
in provinces concerned asking them to give strictest attention thereto;
Chinese Government has great regard for safety of lives and property of
foreign nationals in vicinity of Shanghai and would be very loath to have
them suffer any losses. Sincere and earnest efforts will be made to utmost of
Chinese Government’s ability to afford them protection. In order to
facilitate protection [it is] requested that warning be issued to foreign
nationals that they should on no account involve themselves in any way in
present hostilities.

I am sending mail circular to all consuls instructing them to issue warning
requested as far as American citizens are concerned.

BELL

[Document 330]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Bell)
paragraphs numbered 3 and 4 has the Department’s approval. Apropos of
the situation at Shanghai there is quoted below for your confidential
information the text of a letter addressed by the Department to the Secretary
of the Navy on September 12, 1924, on this subject:
“I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of a copy of a
telegram, dated September 10, 1924, addressed to you by the
Commander in-Chief of the Asiatic Station, concerning
conditions incident to the civil war in the vicinity of Shanghai.
In the above mentioned telegram it is noted that the Commander
in-Chief states that two destroyers are en route to Woosung and
that they will deliver a letter from the senior naval officers
(presumably of the Powers represented in the Shanghai waters) to
the two Chinese gunboats, and further that the substance of the
letter is that the Nanking navy will not be permitted to enter the
Whangpu and that no firing will be allowed in the Whangpu
River. A careful reading of the telegram does not disclose that any
notice of a similar character was communicated to the Nanking
navy and it does not appear that any notice was communicated to
the two Chekiang boats that they would not be permitted to
remain in the Whangpu (apparently the two Chekiang boats are at
Woosung, presumably just inside the mouth of the Whangpu). It
appears that the ‘Chinese gunboats’ referred to are affiliated with
the Chekiang forces which are defending Shanghai. A correct
interpretation of the telegram therefore would seem to be that the
senior naval officers have informed the Chekiang commander that
the Nanking navy, which represents the Kiangsu forces that are

[Document 331]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
Consul Mukden reports by telegraph heavy troop movements from Mukden
southward in last three days. I have no information that they have gone
further south than Great Wall.

BELL

[Document 332]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Bell)
action in circularizing consuls as indicated in last paragraph.
HUGHES

[Document 333]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
1. Following from American consul Mukden:
“September 16, 7 p.m. It is reported on good authority
Fengtien forces yesterday disarmed two battalions
Chihli troops on Chihli side of border east of
Chaoyang.”
2. Reports received by military attaché confirm that Fengtien
forces are at Chaoyang within Chihli border.
3. Heavy troop movements north from Peking continue.
4. According to best information available Wu Pei-fu arrived in
Peking this morning and will probably establish himself at
Fengtai junction point of Peking-Mukden and Peking-Hankow
Railways some 6 miles out of Peking.

BELL

[Document 334]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
telegram from British consul general at Shanghai stating that Admiral
Anderson, commanding British Yangtze Patrol and senior foreign naval
officer present at Shanghai, has now informed the Chekiang gunboats that
they must not leave the Whangpoo, has informed the Nanking admiral of
this action and has also informed Nanking admiral that he must not enter
the Whangpoo.

I trust this will meet the Department’s views as to neutrality. To force the
Chekiang gunboats to leave Whangpoo River would perhaps cause an
engagement with Nanking navy and to allow Nanking naval force to enter
Whangpoo could only result in precipitating a naval engagement in that
river which we are agreed is to be considered as forming the port of
Shanghai and which is the one thing above all others, that in the interest of
protecting foreign life and property, we have been striving to prevent, and
which I venture to point out we have up to the present been successful in
preventing.

Admiral Washington agrees in foregoing.

BELL

[Document 335]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
memorandum reiterating the charge that Chekiang started the fighting,
which of course is untrue, taking exception to our statement that we might
have to use forcible measures to prevent fighting in Whangpoo River,
renewing assurances of desire to safeguard foreign lives and property in
Shanghai, expressing desire to restrict as much as possible area of military
operations and with this in view making a statement of China’s views as to
neutralization of “certain areas of Shanghai and Woosung.”
Memorandum does not specifically ask foreign representatives to mediate
but even if it is so intended we are unanimously of opinion that we should
be unable to do so as terms for neutralization of Shanghai which Koo
proposes are of such a nature that for us to present them to Chekiang faction
would be tantamount to inviting them to give large military advantage to
Kiangsu. Terms include dismantling of Woosung forts and closing of
arsenal and powder factory all of which are in hands of Chekiang forces,
disarming of Chekiang gunboats in Whangpoo River and disarming of
Chekiang troops in area to be neutralized in return for which area of 5 miles
around Shanghai, 3 miles around Woosung forts and the banks of the
Whangpoo are to be neutralized.

Representatives of Italy, Great Britain, Japan and France and I have
accordingly replied this afternoon as follows:
“While the five representatives welcome the statement therein
contained that it is in line with the policy of the Chinese
Government to restrict as much as possible the area of the
military operations between the Kiangsu and Chekiang forces,

they regret that they are unable to express any opinion on the
scheme outlined in the Wai Chiao Pu’s memorandum for the
neutralization of certain areas of Shanghai and Woosung, as the
realization of any such project must obviously be left to the
contending parties to settle by agreement among themselves. The
five representatives earnestly hope that an arrangement for the
neutralization of the area surrounding Shanghai and the
Whangpoo River including its mouth at Woosung may be reached
but they must again impress upon the Chinese Government that
failing such agreement between the combatants they must
maintain the declaration made in their memorandum of
September 7th that their respective Governments cannot possibly
allow a naval engagement to take place in the Whangpoo River
and its approaches and that they reserve to themselves the right to
take steps even of a forcible nature to prevent such hostilities or
any interference with foreign shipping between the port of
Shanghai and the open sea.”
BELL

[Document 336]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
356. Presidential mandate, dated September 17, issued this morning, states
that Wu Pei-fu and others have reported various hostile preparations in
Manchuria, that the Fengtien troops are advancing along five routes, that it
is apparent that Chang Tso-lin is thus taking advantage of the disorder in the
Southeast to create a disturbance in China proper and that he must be
suppressed by military force. Orders given to all commanders of troops to
proceed against him. Protection of Chinese and foreign civilian life and
property is ordered.

Other Presidential mandates, also dated September 17th, announce
appointment Wu Pei-fu as commander in chief of the forces for the
suppression of the rebellion and Wang Cheng-pin, vice commander in chief;
Peng Shou-hsin, second army; and Feng Yu-hsiang, third army; Tu Hsi-
kwei, commander in chief of the naval forces; and Wen Shu-teh, vice
commander in chief. Appointments of many lesser military officials also
published.

BELL

[Document 337]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
364. Chang Tso-lin having bombed Shanhaikwan several times recently by
aeroplane although with small success and having, it is reported, also
announced intention of bombing Peking, the commandants of the various
legation guards memorialized diplomatic body of danger to Legation
Quarter from such attacks; as result of which diplomatic body resolved to
send memorandum on the subject to the Chinese Government and to Chang.
Memorandum sent yesterday summarized as follows:
“Outbreak of hostilities in China makes probable the extensive
use of aircraft in conduct of campaign. Though resolved not to
interfere in any way in regrettable conflict the heads of legations
in Peking deem it necessary to point out that they view with
gravest concern use of this weapon against objectives other than
military forces in the field, fortified places, or naval units.
Bombing of undefended towns is act of wanton destruction and
crime against peaceful population. Inaccuracy of bombing such
that all buildings in immediate neighborhood of objective are in
great danger. In Peking there are not only legations but numerous
palaces, temples, and other historical buildings which are
monuments of great value in history of mankind. Bombing of
towns and villages cannot have military value and can only cause
great misery and suffering to inoffensive noncombatants and
destruction of priceless monuments. Moreover lives and property
of foreign nationals who are nonparticipants and who intend to
maintain absolute neutrality would be put in grave and constant
danger. For these reasons the heads of legations feel it their duty
to make this appeal and while giving expression to this [their
satisfaction] that intention was made known to afford full

protection to lives and property of foreigners they trust that no air
attacks will be made endangering the lives of their nationals.
However should foreign lives be lost or property destroyed as a
result of aeroplane attack on Peking or any treaty port they would
feel obliged to hold the authority who ordered the attack strictly
responsible therefor.”
BELL

[Document 338]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
foreign naval officers at Shanghai informed Admiral Tu of Government
forces that in order to [insure?] neutrality of Whangpoo they would not
permit any vessel of his fleet to enter and simultaneously notified Admiral
Lin of Chekiang forces that his vessels might not fire guns in Whangpoo
and that if they left the river they could not return. On September 19th I
received report from Admiral McVay that Tu had undertaken not to enter
Whangpoo provided restrictions against Lin were maintained. Message
further stated Lin had previously agreed not to fire guns in the river. Lin’s
vessels left Whangpoo September 21st as reported in my telegram 362,
October 1st Tu asked senior naval officers if his ships might enter
Whangpoo and was informed not until end of hostilities. Tu thereupon came
to Peking. October 6th the Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs through
representative privately informed British Minister and me that in view of
changed circumstances and absence of hostile vessels in Whangpoo
Admiral Tu desired to be relieved of undertaking described above and
wished to enter river and take steps against arsenal and powder factory. Koo
considered that moral effect of vessels’ presence in rear of Chekiang forces
would induce surrender and save much useless bloodshed without fighting
by vessels themselves. I consulted with the British Minister and we
concurred that passage of Tu’s ships up Whangpoo or any other settlements
to attack the arsenal would certainly be resisted by Chekiang forces and that
this would incur all the dangers to shipping and settlements we originally
contemplated at the time of our representation to Koo August 30th. Our
respective consular and naval authorities at Shanghai when consulted by
telegraph concurred in this view. October 8, 1 p.m., the British Minister and

[Document 339]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
383. Marshal Wu Pei-fu left Peking early this morning to direct operations
at the northern front. Colonel Barnard and Captain Woodbridge
accompanied him as observers at his invitation. British, French and
Japanese officers also accompanied Wu in like capacity.
BELL

[Document 340]
The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary
of State
… source of most reliable police information during war states that
Generals Lu and Ho have deserted possibly going about 3 a.m. today. Will
report later whether confirmation obtained.
CUNNINGHAM

[Document 341]
The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary
of State
Referring to my telegram today 10 a.m. Practically certain Generals Lu and
Ho went aboard Shanghai Maru between 4 and 5 this morning. Vessel
sailed for Nagasaki at 8: a.m. Military headquarters at Lunghua
completely deserted. Well-founded rumor to the effect that mutineers from
the front reached military headquarters about midnight creating great
confusion which possibly was the immediate cause of the generals’
deserting their loyal troops.

CUNNINGHAM

[Document 342]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
386. General Connor has just informed me that no trains other than Chinese
troop trains having left Tientsin for Shanhaikwan since 9th or arrived from
there since 7th, it was decided today at a commandants’ meeting, on the
urgent representation of the Japanese and French commandants, to send an
international train to Shanhaikwan tomorrow to be followed by two per
week until more normal traffic restored.

Trains will carry supplies for foreign troops guarding railway beyond
Tientsin, will have mixed guards from all foreign forces guarding railway,
will take no civilians into war area but will bring in any to Tientsin who
desire.

BELL

[Document 343]
The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary
of State
My telegram of October 13, 10 a.m. confirmed. Probably cause absconding
generals due shortage of ammunition, dissension among troops, disloyalty
of troops and apparent ultimate defeat by opponents. New commissioner of
police for Shanghai and Woosung, Huang Tien-wen, announced to arrive
this afternoon to take up duties relinquished by Ho’s appointee. Volunteers
called out in full strength and naval forces increased as precautionary
measure believing that the Chekiang forces likely retreat in disorder seeking
shelter in concessions.

CUNNINGHAM

[Document 344]
The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary
of State
SHANGHAI, October 15, 1924—noon.

Kiangsu troops consisting of 1,500 Fifth Hupeh Brigade, General Chang
Yuen-min commanding, occupied Lunghua Arsenal and yamen without
opposition yesterday afternoon. Wen Shih-tsin assumed charge as
commissioner for foreign affairs late 14th. Wong Kuo-pan takes up
permanent appointment of commissioner of police Shanghai for Woosung
constabulary today. General Sun Chuanfeng is believed to have returned to
Hangchow to begin rehabilitating province. Rumors of disaffection officers
Kiangsu forces minimized by new Chi officials not regarded serious.
Efforts to reorganize Chekiang forces under new leaders will delay
restoration of normalcy. Wen and others are confident that Hsü Shu-tseng,
known as Little Hsu, who is prominent in these efforts and who has
collected a small Chekiang force well armed and is reported this morning to
be digging trenches on Markham Road, Chapei, within a hundred yards of
concessions cannot offer serious prolonged opposition. Marshal Chi
probably arrives today as his personal troops have reached Chenju, 4 miles
from Shanghai. Have been reassured by new officials as to protection of
Americans for property [sic]. Local conditions regarded quite safe.
CUNNINGHAM

[Document 345]
The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary
of State
Marshal Chi probably returning Nanking without visiting Shanghai. Present
headquarters Chenju. General Sun Chuan-fang has returned Hangchow.
General Bei Bao-shan commander military district corresponding to former
commissioner of defense for Shanghai and Sungkiang. Local conditions
improving daily. Shanghai Volunteers demobilized yesterday. Naval landing
force is being withdrawn. Huron sails tomorrow. Refugees returning to rural
districts. Rice only one dollar above pre-war days. Railway service south of
Sungkiang continues interrupted, also to Nanking.

CUNNINGHAM

[Document 346]
The Consul General at Tientsin (Gauss) to the Secretary of State
Following message by radio from Chargé d’Affaires at Peking repeated at
his request:
“General Feng Yu-hsiang troops are returning to Peking and are
now in peaceful occupation of the city. Feng has posted
proclamation stating he will fight no longer and wishes peace
negotiated. All railway, telegraph and telephone connections are
cut. Will telegraph again when situation develops further,
meanwhile I do not think international train is necessary.”
Tientsin situation undisturbed at the present time.
GAUSS

[Document 347]
The Consul General at Tientsin (Gauss) to the Secretary of State
[Received 5: p.m.]

Following by radio from Chargé d’Affaires at Peking:
“Number 402, October 23rd. C. T. Wang has just been to see me,
informs me he participated in Feng Yu-hsiang’s coup d’état as did
Huang Fu, Minister of Education, formerly Minister of Foreign
Affairs. Wang Ko-ming, Minister of Finance, had been arrested as
had General Li of the President’s office. President and other
Cabinet Ministers were at present under surveillance and would
later be sent from Peking after which there will be a government
by a committee which would invite Chang Tso-lin, Sun Yat-sen,
Tuan Chi-jui and other prominent leaders to a round-table
conference with the object of unifying China, adjusting debts and
disbanding superfluous troops and forming new government. I
told Wang if communications were not restored at once there will
be serious trouble with foreign governments and he assured me it
would be done as soon as possible. Peking quiet.”
GAUSS

[Document 348]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
Chi-jui, has just conveyed message from latter saying Tuan will come to
Peking probably October 26th to be commander in chief of the “National
People’s Army”. Tuan transmitted request for moral support of the
American Government for this attempt to rehabilitate Chinese peacefully
and disclaimed all pro-Japanese or pro-Anfu leanings.

From well-informed source I learned that this coup d’état was formulated
and executed by three military leaders, Feng Yu-hsiang commanding 30,000
men, Hu Ching-yi commanding perhaps 20,000 unpaid and unreliable
Shensi troops, and Sun Yao commanding about 5,000 men in Peking who
admitted Feng’s forces yesterday. These leaders and their immediate
followers profess to be animated by desire to secure peaceful unification of
country and to end selfish militaristic warfare and waste of country’s
resources.

This afternoon under military coercion the President’s bodyguard was
disarmed and the President was compelled to issue following mandates:
First, deploring war in the northeast and ordering both sides to cease
fighting and maintain their respective positions until the Central
Government shall devise a settlement. Mandate ends with threat to use
force against either side if necessary to secure obedience to it.
Countersigned by Premier and entire Cabinet except Huang Fu, Minister of
Education, whose failure to sign is not explained. Second mandate
addressed posts of commanders and vice commanders of anti-rebel forces
and directs military authorities of Chihli Province, Wang Cheng-pin and
Peng Shouhsin, to keep forces in Shanhaikuan region under control.
Countersigned by Premier and military. Third mandate deprives Wu Pei-fu

[Document 349]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
410. Wu Pei-fu arrived Tientsin noon today with some of his troops
apparently expecting to effect agreement with troops of Chi Hsieh-yuan
coming north. I believe Wu has left force to confront Chang Tso-lin at
Shanhaikwan and intends trying to reestablish himself in Peking.
BELL

[Document 350]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. Peking quiet but decided uneasiness evident in Chinese
population. One hundred and twenty-five additional marines
arrived October 28, midnight, and the same number on two
destroyers en route Peking.
2. It is reported that after some dispute Tuan Chi-jui has been
elected commander of the National People’s Army replacing Feng
Yu-hsiang. This army now composed of the respective forces of
Generals Feng and Hu Ching-yi and Sun Yao. I learn that
resignation of President Tsao Kun and appointment of new
Cabinet are deferred pending elimination of Wu Pei-fu but leaders
expect announcement within week. There seems to be
considerable difficulty in agreeing upon appointees for various
posts, and forecasts are premature. Some jealousy and friction
exists in the above triumvirate. Minor officers like directors of
railways and commandant gendarmerie are being replaced by
henchmen of the above. Kuomintang names prominent in
discussions. C. T. Wang active and influential under Feng’s
patronage.
3. Whether Feng or Wu will receive support of different
provincial leaders is determining factor in the present situation
but continues doubtful. Wu’s defeated provincial militarists may
support Feng coalition or form new groups among themselves.
Chang Tsolin has announced intention of coming to Peking.
Please repeat to War Department.

“ SMLLIUC HE

‘+ [dpparent omission] repeated to Tokyo.

Maver
Not printed.

[Document 351]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
418. American consul Tientsin advises despatch of American naval vessel to
Tientsin to afford additional protection American life and property if
necessary. Ships of other nationalities now present. I have recommended to
commander in chief Asiatic Fleet accordingly.
MAYER

[Document 352]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. Presidential mandate October 31st, state[s] all former Cabinet
Ministers excepting Huang Fu, Minister of Education, have
submitted their resignations which are accepted. Huang Fu is
appointed concurrently Acting Premier and Minister of
Communications. Other new appointments are C. T. Wang,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, concurrently Minister of Finance.
Although latter’s relations with Kuomintang have been strained
by the service with Chihli Party, he may still be considered
member of Kuomintang and a politician of radical and some say
Soviet tendencies. Minister of the Interior is Wang Yung-chiang,
now Civil Governor of Fengtien, who is hardly likely to take post.
Minister of War is Li Shucheng, Kuomintang, not prominent
heretofore. Minister of Marine Tu Shi-Kwei, evidently appointed
in attempt to secure allegiance to the Navy. Minister of Justice
Chang Yao-tseng has had post previously, member of Ch’eng
Hsueh Shi [Hui?] Party composed of progressive men but not
influential. Minister of Agriculture and Commerce Wang Nai-pin
has had post previously, member of Fengtien Party. Huang Fu is
Kuomintang, formerly Minister for Foreign Affairs. …
2. I doubt if this Cabinet possesses element of strength or
permanence although C. T. Wang has formulated admirable plans
for national improvements in all directions and professes desire
for foreign cooperation economic and otherwise. Government
departments at present exist in name only, control of Peking being
in the hands of the military.

3. C. T. Wang told me October 31, noon, Chang Tso-lin’s troops
had Lutai near Tangku and that Yangtsun was invested by Feng
Yu-hsiang’s forces.
4. Hsu En-yuan yesterday stated to Chinese secretary that due to
confused situation it was uncertain when Tuan Chi-jui would
come to Peking.
5. Attitude of provincial leaders toward Feng Yu-hsiang still
generally noncommittal. Military Governor Shangtung has
declared he will try to prevent reinforcements reaching Wu Pei-fu
from south and is apparently so acting. The public does not feel
optimistic in regard to Feng’s plan for national conference of
heterogeneous political leaders to determine future of the country
and the possibility exists that another long period of provincial
discord has been initiated.

MAYER

[Document 353]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
information from Connor, Tientsin, sent November 2, 11 p.m.:
“Wu’s Yangtsun position collapsed. Feng’s troops now at Peitang;
all precautions taken against entry soldiers into Tientsin. Feng
warned to observe protocol.”
2. While complete details not received it is now known Chang Tso-lin
captured Shanhaikwan and Chinwang-tao October 30th and controls
railroad to Peitang. Wu’s troops partly disorganized and captured and partly
embarked on vessels, destination unknown. Wu appears to be still at

[Document 354]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[Received 3: p.m.]

Number 1. Under date of November 3rd, Minister for Foreign
Affairs officially notified me that President Tsao resigned
November 2nd having handed seals to Cabinet with instructions
to the latter to perform the duties of the President’s office and that
on November 2nd, Cabinet announced its assumption of these
duties.
that Wu left Tangku by commercial vessel November 3, 3 a.m.,
destination, unknown; that Feng’s troops and municipal police
began disarming Wu’s troops November 3rd and continued
without disorder. About 12,000 Fengtien troops proceeding to
Chunliangcheng,
miles
from
Tientsin
to
assist
in
reorganization, Tangku quiet.

Number 3. Yesterday Peck returned my card to Feng and latter
stated that previous to coup d’état of October 23, he had protested
to Wu against lack of preparations for expedition and repeatedly
urged President Tsao to reform the Government without effect.
Recent action by Feng, Hu and Sun prompted by their duty to the
country to secure peace and reunification by conference of
leaders. Feng evidenced great desire for American approval and
assistance. He placed full responsibility for international and
financial affairs on C. T. Wang. He seemed somewhat dispirited
and anxious.

Number 4. Jenkins telegraphs Sun leaving Canton November 6th,
for Shanghai.

Number 5. International train from Tientsin arrived November 5,
daily train to Tientsin.

Number 6. Repeated to Tokyo.

MAYER

[Document 355]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
269. Tokyo Embassy telegraphs November 518 that Japanese Consul at
Tsingtau advises his Government our Consul there has agreed with Japanese
and British colleagues to advise Wu Pei-fu not to land in the event of his
arrival there.

[Document 356]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
434. 1. Chinese Government troops yesterday compelled Manchu ex-
Emperor and entourage to vacate Forbidden City and they removed to
Prince Chun’s palace, where now residing. Today, by orders of the
metropolitan police, as I am informed, the streets are beflagged to celebrate
the initiation of “a genuine republic.”
2. British, Netherlands and Japanese Ministers called on Minister for
Foreign Affairs yesterday afternoon in relation to subject of ex-Emperor’s
safety, Sir Ronald Macleay having called upon Netherlands Minister and
expressed opinion that King George would be solicitous for personal safety
of the youth who was formerly Emperor of China and with whose family
the British Royal Family had been on terms of friendship; Japanese
Minister believes that his own sovereign animated by similar sentiments. At
this interview British Minister informed Dr. Wang that if harm should befall
ex-Emperor the credit reposed in the Chinese Government by foreign
powers would be seriously impaired and referred to “terms of favorable
treatment” to be given ex-Emperor and Imperial House as embodied in
agreement between Chinese Government and ex-Emperor in 1912. See
substantially same remarks, Netherlands Minister saying very little.
3. Minister for Foreign Affairs replied that agreement had been already
revised by Yuan Shih-kai in 1916; that it was now intended to effect another
revision in consultation with the ex-Emperor. Dr. Wang stated most
positively that the Government would take precautions that no harm should
befall ex-Emperor either in respect of his own person or private property.

4. Belief by credible persons that above action Bolshevik inspired, working
through Kuomintang for purpose finally eliminating monarchical
restoration and further inciting anti-imperialist feeling and so anti-foreign
feeling. I am reliably informed that C. T. Wang; has seen Karakhan20 daily
for past week or two. …
5. Repeated to Tokyo.

MAYER
upon with respect to the treatment of the Imperial Family is not printed.

[Document 357]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[Received November 7—11 a.m.]
435. 1. Following is the most significant paragraph of the statement given
to press by Minister for Foreign Affairs yesterday.

“As Minister for Foreign Affairs I wish to speak frankly. We shall
live up to the letter and spirit of our treaty engagements. In so
doing we wish to remind the friendly powers that China has a
right of her own existence. Any conditions derogatory to her
rights to exist as a free and independent nation must by necessity
be rectified by mutual arrangement as quickly as the exigency of
circumstances requires. It will be my bounden duty to promote
better understanding and to develop greater confidence between
the Chinese people and Government and the peoples and
governments of all friendly powers. We are particularly conscious
of our duty in [collaboration?] with all neighboring and friendly
powers to carry out the provisions of the Washington Conference
and thus to ensure durable peace on the Pacific. For the
attainment of that end, we the people of China, must first stand on
our own feet. In the name of my fellow countrymen I [fervently?]
invoke the assistance of and cooperation of all friends during the
hour of our need.”
2. Preceding portion of statement contained justification of coup d’état of
October 23rd and caustic criticism of previous administration of
Government.
3. Quoted statement would seem necessarily to imply that Dr. Wang intends
shortly to take up question of treaty revision.

Mhaver

[Document 358]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State

2. On November 5, following received from U. S. S. Pope:
“Action contemplated by naval forces at Tsingtau if Wu enters
harbor. Naval forces consist of Japanese and American. Wang
Hun-chung, an Anfu sympathizer, will not allow Wu’s troops to
land without disarmament. The consular body in which the
Japanese and American Navies concur consider only way to
protect the foreigners is to prevent landing. To this end should he
enter he will be required to anchor in the outer harbor and
negotiate with Wang on a Japanese cruiser in the presence of
commanding officer U. S. S. Pope. Wang stated that he would
allow them all provisions and coal they may desire.”
3. Upon receipt of which I sent following to American consul Tsingtau:
“November 5, 4 p.m. Wireless message from U. S. S. Pope
outlines certain plans initiated by consular body for protection of
foreigners Tsingtau in connection with possible landing Wu’s
troops. Having in mind American policy noninterference in
Chinese internal affairs I desire you should telegraph at once full
particulars and reasons prompting your action.”
4. Admiral Washington informed me last night that consular body Chefoo
was informed by Chinese authorities that Wu with three Chinese war

vessels under Rear Admiral Wen and five transports carrying 10,000 troops
en route Chefoo to force landing and that he was withdrawing U. S. S.
Stewart and U. S. S. Pillsbury from Tientsin for service Chefoo.
5. I telegraphed American consul Chefoo as follows:
“November 6, 11 p.m. Following is substance of telegram from
Department for instruction American consul Tsingtau repeated for
your guidance:
‘When Department informed American consul Tsingtau
had agreed with Japanese and British colleagues to
advise Wu not to land in the event of his arrival at
Tsingtau, Department instructed me to advise consul
there immediately that Department could not approve
such intervention in Chinese internal affairs.’”
Following received from American consul Tsingtau:
7 p.m., both received tonight. Plans discussed and adopted in
conference with American and Japanese naval authorities. There
is no foreign settlement at Tsingtau. Foreigners are scattered
throughout entire city. Tsingtau is in possession of a force hostile
to Wu. Wu’s landing force at Tsingtau would mean street fighting
under existing circumstances seriously jeopardizing American
lives and rendering the naval forces available almost meaningless.
Under the circumstances it was decided the only effective
measure of insuring protection was to advise Wu not to land in
the city and to go as far as firing across bows to prevent it,
pending negotiations between the Chinese aboard Japanese
cruiser. Naval authorities are being advised of State Department’s
attitude.”
and
“November 7, 11 a.m. [sic] referring to your telegram of
November 7, 6 p.m. [sic], I have notified consuls and naval

[Document 359]
The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary
of State
Following telegram has been received from Nanking:
“November 11, 5 p.m. Please send following telegram to the
Department for me: ‘I have seen Marshal Chi today. He and
Admiral Tu have sent vessel to meet Wu who is expected to arrive
about the 13th for a conference. Chi has sent circular telegram
supporting Tuan. Will accept Tuan’s leadership but not that of
Feng or Chang. Invasion by the last two would be forcibly
resisted.

Representatives of the governors of eight provinces now are
assembling here to decide upon course of action. Davis.’”
CUNNINGHAM

[Document 360]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
442. Following on general situation:
1. Chang Tso-lin and Feng Yu-hsiang in Tientsin and reported to be
conferring with Tuan Chi-jui and others. About 40,000 Fengtien troops in
vicinity Tientsin and more antagonistic [sic], who have taken over military
control of Tientsin and adjacent railways from Feng’s troops. Included in
first elements Fengtien troops to arrive Tientsin was battalion of Russians
now Machang. Chang believed to be in a position to enforce his will. Chang
is stationing his troops beyond Tientsin on Tientsin-Pukow and across
Peking-Mukden lines extending his control of railroad to southward.
Reported Wu Pei-fu has sailed from Chefoo with three transports with from
5 to 10 thousand troops, destination unknown. Regarding attitude of
provincial leaders see American consul Nanking’s telegram November 11, 5
p.m. In announcement of preceding day Hsiao Yaonan indicates support
of Wu Pei-fu. Sun Yat-sen has apparently decided to leave for north
November 13th. Rail transport situation between Peking, Tientsin,
Shanhaikwan still very unsatisfactory, international trains being run
between Tientsin-Peking and return every few days. Great activity of
Fengtien troop trains at Tientsin, withdrawal of Feng’s forces from that
point and general disorganization resulting from military control of
railways, chiefly failure to restore normal train service. Doubtful if any
substantial betterment will take place until after political situation
somewhat more settled by anticipated conference at Tientsin since Chang
will doubtless wish to keep trains there for possible troop movement. No
disturbance Peking-Tientsin or other places. Machang is reported to be
principal destination of Fengtien troop train and no Fengtien troops reported
north of Yangtsun.

[Document 361]
The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary
of State
Yesterday afternoon one Chinese man-of-war and four Chinese transports
heavily loaded with troops arrived Woosung via north channel and were
joined by Admiral Fu’s flagship, three other men-of-war and a transport.
While no confirmation is possible it is believed that Wu Pei-fu is in one of
the vessels. Gunboat Chutai with Admiral Fu aboard, two cruisers and four
transports, proceeded up Yangtze 7 o’clock this morning.
CUNNINGHAM

[Document 362]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. Political situation still obscure. Unofficial reports that Chang,
Feng and followers have appealed by circular telegram to
provinces to support Tuan Chi-jui as “Provisional Chief
Executive of the Chinese Republic”, a new Chinese term which
suggests dictatorship. They apparently await replies before
announcing Tuan Chi-jui’s assumption of power under this title.
2. Following just received from American consul general
Hankow:
“General Wu arrived [garbled groups] this afternoon in
advancing [in advance of?] his troops numbering 6,000
who will reach here tomorrow. General Hsiao called on
Wu today. The Commissioner of Foreign Affairs handed
me a pronouncement furnished him by Wu and signed
by the high military authorities of the Yangtze-Kiang
River and Yellow River provinces announcing the
formation of a military government as an emergency
measure to uphold the constitution. The agreement
contains 10 articles summarized as follows:
(1) A military government for the protection of the
constitution is formed; (2) the seat of the government is
Wuchang; (3) the military government shall represent
China in domestic and foreign affairs; (4) the military
government shall be administered by the high

commanders of the provincial armies and navies; (5) all
state affairs shall be administered by a council presided
over by a president and a vice president to be elected by
the high commanders from among themselves; (6) high
commanders unable to attend the council meeting may
appoint representatives; (7) the military government
shall consist of five ministries, namely: foreign affairs,
finance, home affairs, war and communication; (8) the
military government shall be dissolved when the
constitution becomes operative again; (9) necessary
alterations in the articles may be made by the council;
(10) the above articles shall become operative upon the
day of promulgation.

The above was signed, sealed and presented to the
president on the 17th instant by 20 high military
officials
of
the
provinces
concerned.

The
commissioners inform me that Tuan was invited to
come to Wuchang to head the military government.
Though the commissioner is a strong partisan of Wu, I
believe this information is reliable.”
3. As yet impossible to estimate effect of the announcement. Tuan
Chi-jui has consistently said he would not assume leadership
without complete approval of provincial leaders. Therefore this
action by Yangtze tuchuns may prevent assumption of power by
Tuan leaving situation at Tientsin in the air with a choice by
Chang between returning to Manchuria or taking control himself
at Peking. Reports from well-informed sources have indicated a
certain impatience on Chang’s part because of Tuan’s hesitation in
coming to Peking and taking charge of affairs.
4. Under date of November 15th American consul general
Tientsin reports conversation with Marshal Chang and one of his
close advisers of which following is brief summary of
impressions gained by Gauss from conversations: Tuan and
Chang dissatisfied with attitude C. T. Wang and Huang Fu and

with their Soviet-Japanese exchanges. Their early eliminations
from political scene probable. Chang intends more or less to
disregard Sun Yat-sen as well as Feng Yu-hsiang. Chang believes
there must be a rectification of Yangtze Valley situation by force,
if necessary, in order to eliminate Marshal Ch’i, Sun Chuan-fang
and Hsiao Yao-nan. Tuan Chi-jui would lend his influence toward
peaceful handling of Yangtze situation, avoiding further resort to
arms, if possible. Gauss further states Marshal Chang remarked
he would come to Peking in few days; that Chang extremely
cordial and invited Gauss to accompany him Peking. This Gauss
declined with proper expressions of regret, in which decision I, of
course, concurred.
5. Sun Yat-sen arrived Shanghai November 17th but not known if
and when he will come north. On landing, Sun is reported by
American consul general Shanghai to have made following
typical statement:
“Understand my arrival causing some agitation. Would
like to say to the foreigners Shanghai is China and the
Chinese are the hosts, the foreigners guests. We shall
have to take drastic measures if this is not realized. The
Chinese are determined that the concessions must be
returned.”
6. Repeated to Tokyo.

MAYER

[Document 363]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
consul general Hankow:
yesterday for Chengchow to be followed immediately by his
troops who arrived here today.

No steps are being taken to carry out the plan of the proposed
military government. Intention to form this government is not
definite, the proposal being a temporary emergency measure
designed primarily for defensive purposes against the North and
also for threatening the North and restoring Chihli Party to power.
Wu though anxious to carry out the project may be unable to
retain support. Hsiao is opposed to the telegram out of a desire to
see Wu leave Hupeh.”
Morning press carries the announcement substantially as reported in my
announcement on Tientsin conferences.

MAYER

[Document 364]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. Pursuant to instructions from Minister for Foreign Affairs a
secretary from Wai Chiao Pu has just called to inform me that
Marshal Tuan Chi-jui is expected to come Peking at least within
five days and that upon his arrival here Cabinet will hand over to
Marshal Tuan the powers of Premier and President under which
Cabinet has been functioning.
2. From my conversation with secretary from Foreign Office and
conversation Chinese secretary has just had with apparently well-
informed politicians, Marshal Tuan and associates have not yet
determined definitely form his anticipated administration will
take.
shall not enter into formal relations with Marshal Tuan or any
authorities acting under him should he take charge of affairs at
Peking as anticipated, until I receive the Department’s
instructions in the matter. Should Marshal Tuan cause the
question of recognition to be broached I shall be noncommittal.
4. Repeated to Tokyo.

MAYER

[Document 365]
The Consul General at Shanghai (Cunningham) to the Secretary
of State
SHANGHAI, November 22, 1924.

Following from Nanking:
“November 22, 11 a.m. Please send following telegram to the
Department: ‘Marshal Chi embarrassed by Wu’s unauthorized use
of his name in manifesto proclaiming Yangtze military
government, and has repeated circular telegram endorsing Tuan.
He will assist Wu defensively but considers aggression
impracticable.

Situation delicate and uncertain. Davis.’ ”
CUNNINGHAM

[Document 366]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. According to telephone message from Foreign Office Tuan
Chi-jui assumed office this morning as “Chief Executive of the
Republic of China”. Message also stated that official notification
of this act would be conveyed to me late tonight or tomorrow.
2. American foreign adviser to Government states Cabinet has not
turned over its power to Tuan and that not yet decided whether
Cabinet will continue to function, tender its resignation to Tuan or
surrender its power to new Cabinet. I shall report further as soon
as definite information available regarding exact status of
Government.
3. Chang Tso-lin arrived Peking today with some thousand troops.
Peking is quiet.
4. Repeated to Tokyo.

MAYER

[Document 367]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. I have received formal note dated November 24th from Minister for
Foreign Affairs [C. T. Wang?] as follows:
“I have the honor to state that on November 24th, 1924, I
received a mandate from the Chief Executive of the Republic of
China Tuan Chi-jui stating as follows:
‘On November 24th, 1924, I, Tuan Chi-jui, assumed
office as Chief Executive of the Republic of China. At
the time of assuming office I formally announced as
follows: I, Tuan Chi-jui, although without ability and
undeserving assume office as Chief Executive of the
Republic of China, I swear that I will endeavor to
consolidate the republican government, respect public
opinion and strive to bring about reform within the
country and raise the nation’s standing abroad. I
[apparent omission] the foregoing reverently.’
I have the honor Mr. Chargé to transmit the foregoing for your
information.”
2. Following mandates gazetted November 24th:
“The system of the Provisional Government of the Republic of
China is hereby promulgated. Seal of the Chief Executive of the
Republic of China.

ARTICLE 1. The Provisional Government of the Republic of
China shall have a Chief Executive who shall have
supreme control of civil and military affairs and shall be
commander in chief of the Army and Navy.

ARTICLE 2. The Chief Executive shall act as the
representative of the Republic of China in international
affairs.

ARTICLE 3. The Provisional Government shall have
Ministers of State to assist the Chief Executive in
attending to [apparent omission] of the President state
[sic]. All mandates of the Provisional Government as
well as documents relating to state matters shall be
countersigned by the Ministers of State.

ARTICLE 4. The Chief Executive shall empower Ministers
of State to control the following Ministries: Foreign
Affairs,
Interior,
Finance,
War,
Navy,
Justice,
Education,
Commerce
and
Agriculture
and
Communications.

ARTICLE 5. The Chief Executive shall summon the
Ministers of State to hold Cabinet meetings.
ARTICLE 6. This system of government shall go into effect
from the date of promulgation but will be declared null
and void when the formal government is established.
The Institution of the Provisional Government of the Republic of
China at this time has for its object the reorganization of
government on new lines and the initiation of a general change
with the cooperation of the people. The task is of great magnitude
and questions of every [omission] are awaiting joint solution by
all concerned. All former Executive and judicial laws and orders
shall continue in effect except insofar as they may be
incompatible
with
the
organization
of
the
Provisional
Government or may have been canceled by official orders.

The Government has now been established and I, the Chief
Executive, have entered upon the performance of my weighty
duty to the full extent of my ability. All the multifarious functions
of the Government await attention and all civil and military
officials in Peking and the provinces shall continue to administer
their posts as in the past, lending their united assistance in
meeting the difficulties of the times.”
Mandate November 24th appoints following Cabinet: Foreign Affairs, Tang
Shao-yi; Interior, Kung Hsin-chan; Finance, Li Shihhao; War, Wu Kuang-
hsin; Navy, Lin Chien-chang; Justice, Chang Shih-chao; Education, Wang
Chiu-lihg; Agriculture and Commerce, Yang Shu-chan; Communications,
Yeh Kung-cho.
3. Referring to third paragraph my 452, at meeting of heads of Legations
this afternoon senior minister stated Tuan Chi-jui had approached him to
ask if foreign representatives would be willing to call upon him in day or
two to pay personal respects individually and without ceremony.
4. It was unanimous opinion of chiefs of mission that Tuan Chijui is the de
facto government and for this reason the senior minister was authorized to
reply to Tuan Chi-jui that the heads of Legations would call individually on
him in day or two to pay him personal respects as head of the provisional de
facto government, and that the senior minister should make it entirely clear
that such action would in no way imply formal de jure recognition.
5. I made reservation that, while I personally agreed with proposed
procedure, I could not associate myself therewith until I had received
instructions to that effect from my Government.
6. It was the sense of the meeting that question of de jure recognition was
not pending at this time owing to the fact that the present de facto
authorities in their mandates and in conversation with senior minister
stressed the provisional character of the present regime and since the
question of de jure recognition if and when it arose was a matter for the
respective Governments to decide.

7. Tuan Chi-jui is in my opinion and generally so considered I believe the
one man in China in whom there is any hope at present of uniting the
different factions and leaders in an effort to bring order and stable
government out of the present situation. For this reason I believe that the
Provisional Government he has set up should be given some measure of
support by the foreign powers and that the procedure proposed in today’s
meeting of heads of Legations as outlined above is well suited to this
purpose. It commits us to nothing but a recognition of the fact that there is a
de facto government under the leadership of Tuan Chi-jui. I strongly
recommend that I be instructed immediately by telegraph to associate
myself with other heads of Legations and to pay my respects to Tuan as set
forth above.
8. It was likewise the sense of today’s meeting that the recognition of Tuan
Chi-jui as the de facto authority would permit the respective Legations to
reply in the usual form to the anticipated note from new Minister for
Foreign Affairs announcing his assumption of office. He would be merely
an officer in the de facto government. I shall also adopt this procedure
unless otherwise directed by the Department.

MAYER

[Document 368]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
yourself with the other heads of missions in taking the action outlined in
paragraphs 3 and 4 making it entirely clear that your action is in no sense to
be interpreted as implying a formal recognition.

The Department concurs in the view generally taken at the meeting of the
heads of missions with respect to the provisional character of the present
regime and the question of recognition, as reported by you, in paragraph 6.
HUGHES

[Document 369]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
459. Following on general situation.
1. On November 27th Chang Tso-lin accompanied by the chiefs
of his civil and military foreign departments and other officers
called at the Legation in the diplomatic quarter. My conversation
with him was of general nature. Incidentally Chang’s relations
with the Central Government may be considered rectified by
mandate issued by the Cabinet November 6th as follows:
“All mandates cashiering and ordering the arrest of
officials for political actions as issued from July 29,
2. I returned Chang’s call this afternoon and had a long and
extremely interesting conversation with him which I will report
fully by telegraph tomorrow. The principal burden of his remarks
expressed with evident seriousness was the concern with which
he viewed Bolshevik activities in China.
diplomatic representatives yesterday called individually on Tuan.
He expressed himself to me optimistically regarding unification
and said he had just received a telegram from Wu Pei-fu stating
that if those officials who formerly supported Presidents Yuan and
Tsao and now announced their support of Tuan were sincere, he,
Wu, would likewise support Tuan. I inferred the reference was to
Chang Tsolin concerning whose genuine loyalty to Tuan there
seems to be some doubt in Chinese public opinion. Tuan

explained his present position as merely a temporary means of
bridging over an interval and stated that while not desirous of
returning to political life after his withdrawal therefrom in 1920
he had thought it his duty to sacrifice himself in order to unify the
country. I took care to make it clear to an officer of the Wai Chiao
Pu that my action in calling upon Marshal Tuan was in no sense
to be interpreted as implying de jure recognition. I was informed
that this was well understood. Admiral Tsai Ting-kan informed
me most emphatically and in a manner which compels my belief
in the sincerity of his statement that Marshal Tuan was much
opposed to Soviet activities.
4. I submit following comment on the Cabinet supplementing
China Tear Book: An official of the Foreign Office informed me
that it is practically certain Tang Shao-yi will not take up post of
Minister for Foreign Affairs and that W. W. Yen is probable next
appointee. Following Ministers are of Anfu Party: Finance,
Interior, War. Minister of the Navy has been associated with Lu
Yunghsiang and has Anfu affiliations. Appointment of Minister of
Education seems designed to please Tang Chi-yao, Military
Governor of Yunnan. Minister of Justice is reported to have been
closely associated with Tuan lately and to have assisted in
drafting his political announcements. Minister of Agriculture
represents Kuomintang and Minister of Communications old
Communications
clique.

Latter
is
privately
considered
representative of Chang Tso-lin but Chang denied any desire for
representation in the Cabinet. Ministers Interior, War, Justice and
Communications have assumed office.
5. Feng Yu-hsiang has for the past few days apparently been
trying to resign from the command of his troops and his other
official duties. Mandate issued by Tuan November 27th while
announcing this desire on Feng’s part, urges him in laudatory
terms to retain his various posts. Difficult to know whether this is
a question of face and whether Tuan and Chang Tso-lin really
desire Feng to resign or whether Tuan and Chang are somewhat
apprehensive of situation which would be created by resignation

and Feng’s consequent release from his responsibilities as
commander of his troops. …
6. Repeated to Tokyo.

MAYER

[Document 370]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[Received 10: p.m.]
1. During call on Chang on November 29th he spoke without
formality with surprising directness and apparently with frankness
as well as cordiality and at length regarding Bolshevik activities
in China.
2. After exchange of usual greetings Marshal Chang asked me
what I thought of the Bolsheviks. I replied that the fact that our
Government had not yet recognized the Soviets should adequately
answer his question. He then observed that during recent
interview with Karakhan latter had indicated a special animosity
against United States. Karakhan’s remarks were not of a nature
Chang considered polite to repeat to me. Karakhan had dwelt
mostly on capitalistic imperialism of the United States; that it was
seeking to acquire all the wealth of the world and that it was
imperatively necessary to accomplish the overthrow of the United
States.

[Paraphrase.] Chang then said that in his opinion the most serious
menace at present was the “Bolshevik question” and that Soviet
activities in China greatly imperiled the lives and property of
foreigners in China. He considered most dangerous Sun Yatsen’s
close association with the Soviets. Chang said that he would not
himself remain in Peking if Sun was coming to Peking to carry
out the same program as he had at Canton. Chang expressed the
opinion that the diplomatic representatives in Peking of the
foreign powers should take some decided stand respecting the

question of Bolshevism. If this were not done he did not know
what his own policy would be, but he would take a definite stand
if the foreign representatives did. He said that under no
circumstances could he associate himself with Sun and his
Bolshevik policy. [End paraphrase.]
3. In order to feel Chang out I observed that the problem of
dangerous Bolshevik activities in China appeared to me one of
Chinese internal administration and to be dealt with by the
Chinese Government. Chang replied that he did not consider it
such since the danger was an international one and of world-wide
extent. I inquired whether Chang thought that there would be any
immediate dangerous developments. He expressed belief that
coming of Doctor Sun would make question one of immediate
urgency; that necessary to wait and see position Tuan would take
in the matter but primarily necessary that foreign Ministers should
adopt definite policy. American policy of nonintervention in
Chinese affairs appreciated but Bolshevik question one with
which foreign nations should concern themselves.
4. Chang then discussed Sun Yat-sen’s announcements in regard
to “unjust treaties” and observed that he thought western nations
on considerations of justice would soon modify treaties when
proper time came; that however a proper course must be followed
in securing revision and inadmissible [inadvisable?] to make
demand for abrogation “unjust treaties” in sudden manner.
Agitation fomented by Doctor Sun was dangerous.
5. Chang spoke in similar vein regarding Bolshevik menace to the
Netherlands Minister and I believe likewise to the British
Minister and possibly others of the diplomatic body.
6. Although difficult to know reason or reasons why Chang
should have spoken so openly, extensively, and hostilely
respecting Bolshevik activities in China, following seems a
reasonable deduction. As intimated in paragraph 3 of my 442

the Bolsheviks through the radical wing of the Kuomintang Party
headed by Sun Yat-sen, C. T. Wang, Huang Fu and the like might
make demand for immediate revision or cancelation a popular
rallying cry; that Chang realizes that he, Tuan and other
conservative leaders in China would not be able to oppose such a
popular movement and might even have to join with it; that the
Soviets through their local followers and sympathizers might thus
control Chinese Government isolating Chang in Manchuria and
seriously jeopardizing his position there. That Chang desires the
foreign powers to take some action which will permit
conservative Chinese leaders to work with them and prevent
Bolshevik influence from predominating in China. Repeated to
Tokyo.

MAYER

[Document 371]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 2, 1924—noon.
left Peking December 2, 4 a.m., I am informed, for Tientsin taking
headquarters staff and bodyguard. Sun Fo and other Kuomintang leaders in
Peking.

MAYER

[Document 372]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. Chang’s sudden departure from Peking has further complicated
situation which is very obscure. Numerous rumors, very few
facts. Chang has returned to old headquarters at Tientsin. Military
attaché reports all Fengtien troops at Peking moving toward
Tientsin. Feng Yu-hsiang remains in vicinity of Peking and from
all accounts refuses to grant interviews or discuss politics and
insists on resigning despite efforts by Government to dissuade
him from; such action. Ex-Emperor took refuge 29th in Japanese
Legation where apparently still remains. I have it from best
authority that ex-Emperor originally desired take refuge in British
Legation but was dissuaded therefrom. His action a complete
surprise.
2. Judging from statements made to me by Chang Tso-lin, as
generally that Feng Yu-hsiang is subject to Kuomintang and
Soviet influence as reported in fifth paragraph my 459, November
29, 6 p.m., and persistent statements that Feng Yu-hsiang, Hu
Ching-yi and Sun Yao still continue to recruit and have all told
about 100,000 men in immediate vicinity of Peking, it seems
rather logical to conclude that principal reason for Chang’s
sudden departure from Peking was his realization that his position
here was untenable if not dangerous to his life. He either had to
bring to Peking all his troops from the vicinity of Tientsin, judged
some 40,000 in number, or retire to vicinity which strategically is
far better for him than Peking. Chang possibly may have suddenly

decided to be in Tientsin to meet Sun Yat-sen to see if he could
associate himself with Sun. This is not likely.
3. Out of all the welter of rumors and the few facts, straws in the
wind, such as Chang Tso-lin’s sudden departure, the ex-
Emperor’s unexpectedly seeking refuge in Diplomatic Quarter,
Feng Yu-hsiang’s continuing to remain at or near Peking,
although having stated he wishes to go abroad, and Sun Yat-sen’s
imminent arrival, a grave apprehension arises that extreme
Kuomintang and Soviet influence may dominate Peking. Except
by good fortune and unless the foreign powers are able to devise
some defensive action in the circumstances, the chances seem to
be that the radical wing of the Kuomintang Party and the Soviets
are to have their day in Peking. Tuan Chi-jui’s continuance in
power seems dependent upon his ability to control allegiance of
the various discordant factions. The mere fact, of course, of
Chang’s withdrawal to Tientsin does not necessarily spell his
abandonment of Tuan, since if Chang desires to oppose Sun Yat-
sen and the Red element in China he can do so very effectively
from Tientsin as a base. However, as I observed, the outlook is far
from bright.
4. Feeling, I believe, even more pessimistic than I do in the above
regard, the British Minister called upon me yesterday to suggest
an informal meeting of the representatives of the Washington
Conference powers for the purpose of discussing and exploring
into the question of the advisability of recommending to our
respective Governments the immediate joint issuance of a
statement. This statement would inform the Chinese authorities
and people of the continued desire of these powers, as evidenced
at Washington Conference, to make [take?] up with China, at the
very earliest moment that she puts her house in order, the question
of treaty revision, and that these powers to this [end?] would
support in every proper way any government in China which
would show a capacity for undertaking the task of restoring law
and order in the country. At the same time the statement should
definitely disclose the decision of the powers concerned not to

recognize or have truck with any administration which might be
set up in Peking by those Peking leaders in China who in the
present as in the past have been and are seeking to incite the
Chinese people against the friendly attitude [of the] powers.
5. I readily agreed to attend any such informal conference of
representatives of Washington Conference powers which is
scheduled for morning of 4th. Some such action as suggested by
the British Minister might be effective in opposition to extreme
nationalist and Bolshevik trend of events in China, although a
double-edged weapon with both good and bad potentialities.
6. After my conversation with Chang Tso-lin, reported in my 465,
December 1, 4 p.m., Chinese secretary had a long conversation
with General Wang, chief of the Manchurian military foreign,
affairs department, who appears very close to Chang and who was
present both when Chang called on me and my return visit to him.
To Peck’s inquiry regarding exactly what assistance Chang
considered foreign powers could be to the conservative element in
China at the present time to help them oppose the Soviets, Wang
stated that Marshal Chang had in mind an announcement by the
foreign powers of their sympathetic willingness to discuss treaty
revision just as soon as a government was established in China
capable of giving effect to any international arrangements which
would result from such a discussion. Marshal Chang feared that
Sun and his Red adherents prompted by Karakhan would raise
louder and louder the rallying cry of “down with the unjust
treaties” which being a national issue the conservative leaders in
China would not be able to oppose. An announcement by the
powers as suggested above by Marshal Chang would [,he]
believed, cut under this Bolshevik propaganda and enable him
and other conservatives to make common cause with the foreign
powers against Soviet influence in China. I venture to invite
p.m., expressing the possibility that some such idea as there
described was in Chang’s mind during his conversation with me
on November 29th. Repeated to Tokyo.

Mhaver

[Document 373]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[Paraphrase]
that the question of dangerous Bolshevist activities in China primarily is
one of domestic Chinese administration has my complete approval. I would
point out with respect to Marshal Chang’s contention that it is world-wide
and international, that the American Government cannot concern itself with
the matter except in case American interests are directly involved. The
serious aspect of propaganda directed from Moscow is, however, fully
appreciated by this Government.

HUGHES

[Document 374]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
been received from consul general at Hankow:
“December 4, 5 p.m. Due to the threatened attack by Shensi and
Shansi troops on Loyang, Wu fled from there on the evening of
the 2nd. Wu’s troops refused to support at Chengchow. He
conferred with Chang Fu-lai25 and Li Chi-chen26 when it was
decided that being entirely without troops Wu should continue to
Hankow. He is now at Sinyang, Hsiao urges him to retire. Local
railway office is informed Yellow River Bridge blown up by the
24th Division to prevent troops under Hu Ching-yi from coming
south.

General unrest increasing in Honan besides renewed brigandage
due to the withdrawal of troops from bandit-infested areas there
are reported. Troop disorders at various points on Peking-Hankow
and Lund-Hai Railways and popular feeling against Wu will
prevent him from recovering control of troops and recruiting new
army”.

MAYER

[Document 375]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 13, 1924—noon.
480. Mandates issued December 11th dismissed from office Chi Hsieh-
yuan, Military Governor of Kiangsu, and appointed Civil Governor Han
Acting Director General. Military rules same Province and is under Lu
Yung-hsiang, Pacification Commissioner Kiangsu [and] Anhui.
Whether Chi will vacate post or make armed resistance still uncertain.
Credibly reported Chang Tso-lin will give Lu Yunghsiang effective military
assistance in removing Chi and securing military control of two Provinces if
necessary as Chang is thought to be determined uproot Chihli Party in spite
of Tuan’s professed policy peaceful unification.

MAYER
reported that Chi had retired to private life in the International Settlement of

[Document 376]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
chief today:
“Legation’s November 30, 1 p.m. Referring to our recent
conversations I perceive no objection to your withdrawing
destroyers from North China waters.”
SCHURMAN
Maintenance of a united front by the
powers in opposition to the threatened
seizure of customs at Canton by Sun
Yat-sen

[Document 377]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, March 26, 1924.

No. 280
SIR: With reference to previous correspondence regarding the joint naval
demonstration at Canton in consequence of Sun YatSen’s threat to seize the
Customs at that port, I have the honour to inform you, under instructions
from His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, that His
Majesty’s Government no longer consider it necessary to maintain the
demonstration in question provided that arrangements can be made for its
renewal in case of necessity.

In acquainting you with my Government’s views on this matter, I am
instructed to enquire whether the Government of the United States are in
agreement therewith, and in that event I should be most grateful if you
would inform me at your earliest convenience whether, in case of necessity,
the United States Government would be prepared to co-operate in arranging
for a renewal of the naval demonstration referred to above.
A similar enquiry is being addressed to the Governments to which they are
accredited by His Majesty’s Representatives at Paris, Rome, Tokio and
Lisbon.

I have [etc.]

ESME HOWARD

[Document 378]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, March 31, 1924.

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your Note No. 280
of March 26, 1924, stating that the British Government no longer considers
it necessary to maintain the naval demonstration in force at Canton in
consequence of Sun Yat-sen’s threat to seize the Customs at that port,
provided that arrangements can be made for its renewal in case of necessity,
and inquiring whether this Government is in agreement with this view and
would be prepared to cooperate in arranging for a renewal of the naval
demonstration in case of necessity.

Although this Government has received no definite recommendation from
its Minister in Peking that the demonstration is no longer necessary, it
nevertheless understands that there no longer exists any urgent need for the
continuance thereof beyond the usual detail of naval forces which it has
been customary to maintain at and in the vicinity of Canton.
Without committing itself to any definite engagement such as appears to be
suggested in your Note, with respect to any eventual action in regard to the
situation at Canton, it is aware of no circumstances which would cause it to
alter its previous attitude of cooperation in the event of a similar emergency
occurring in the future.

Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 379]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, April 12, 1924.
concerning the naval demonstration at Canton, and supplementing my reply
thereto of March 31, 1924, I have the honor to inform you that the

[Document 380]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State

[Document 381]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
[Received 10: p.m.]

Jenkins:
noon. It is rumored persistently Sun will attempt to seize customs
tomorrow. No Japanese warship in port at present and neither I
nor commander of South China Patrol believe we should consent
to cooperate in use of force to prevent seizure unless British,
French and Japanese warships are to actually take part.
As this situation will probably be identical with that of last
December I assume we should be warranted in opposing seizure
by force but I would appreciate instructions in connection with
Legation’s April 2, 3 p.m., quoting Department’s attitude towards
question. Please answer as soon as possible.

British landing detachment marines Shameen today. If clash with
Sun develops, situation with respect to the safety of foreigners
will be more serious in my opinion than last December because of
local Russian Soviet influence.

French consul just informed me French warships in port will
probably not act without definite instructions from the French
Minister.”
2. The Department’s telegram referred to by Jenkins is number 62, March
emphasizes Soviet influence there I desire the Department’s instructions

before authorizing participation in another joint action in protection of the
Canton customs.
3. Jenkins’ recent reports would indicate that the Sun government is
completely under domination of Soviet agents. If this is so an initial success
at Canton in defying the treaty powers’ contention regarding the customs
would dangerously assist Soviet agents in their endeavor to incite Chinese
to repudiation of all treaties. I assume that seizure of customs at Canton
would leave Chang Tsolin to seize Majichurian customs which he has
Manchuria also has become important sphere of Soviet activity. From this
standpoint additional weight seems given to the Department’s views
respecting insuring of Maritime Customs as essential to whole system of
4. There is reason to fear that the apparent efforts of the Soviet Government
to achieve the disintegration of China as a national entity are regarded with
favor by the Japanese Government at least as concerns Manchuria. I
therefore apprehend Japanese reluctance to cooperate again in protection of
the Canton customs lest precedent be set requiring Japanese participation
later in international support of the Central Government against Chang Tso-
lin. Japanese cooperation at Canton therefore seems essential.
5. Although total American portion 1900 indemnity has now been remitted I
assume the American Government still asserts former interest in the
integrity of the customs based not only on general grounds but also on
actual claim to revenues as secondary security for unpaid obligations owed
to American citizens.
6. In view of these various considerations and in spite of Jenkins’ report of
imminent action by Sun I have telegraphed him and the commander in chief
of the Asiatic Fleet as follows:
vessels should not take forcible measures to prevent seizure
customs until further instructed and unless British, French and

[Document 382]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Bell)
Paris, and reference thereto being made to Tokyo (on the assumption that
Tokyo has received a copy) with instructions, without disclosing the text,
promptly to discuss the substance thereof with the Foreign Offices
concerned with a view to ascertaining, as fully as possible, the views of the
respective governments with regard to the maintenance of the integrity of
the Canton Customs. The Department’s instruction is in part as follows:
“It is the Department’s view that the situation at Canton, which
again appears to threaten the integrity of the Chinese Customs, is
one which does not permit of isolated action but requires, if any
action is to be taken, close cooperation on the part of the Powers
principally interested. … You may state that this Government is
prepared to cooperate … in the same manner as it did in
December, 1923, provided that like cooperation is assured by the
British, French, and Japanese Governments.”
The Department approves of the telegrams despatched by you to Jenkins
and to the Commander in Chief of the Asiatic Fleet as quoted in paragraph
HUGHES

[Document 383]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
[Extracts]
Canton:
two French river gunboats now in port, also United States ship
Helena and Pampanga. United States ship Sacramento at
Hongkong. Understand that Russian cruiser Vorowsky still at
Whampoa. Japanese consul tells me he will not ask for naval
vessel until necessity evident.

Understand that everything essential in customhouse has already
been transferred to Shameen and that commissioner could carry
on from concession even if Sun seized customs building. Such
course might be preferable to forcible measures by the powers.”
BELL

[Document 384]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, October 25, 1924.

No. 1006
SIR: I have the honour to inform you that His Majesty’s Government have
learnt that the Canton Government are again threatening to seize the
Customs House and to declare Canton a free port.
I am directed by my Government to express the earnest hope that you will
authorize the United States Representative at Peking to concert with His
Majesty’s Representative in arranging for a renewal of the naval
demonstration.

I have [etc.]

ESME HOWARD

[Document 385]
The Chargé in Japan (Caffery) to the Secretary of State
Foreign Affairs informs me that the Japanese Government attaches very
much importance to the maintenance of the integrity of the Canton customs;
but that the [apparent omission] believes that the consular corps at Canton
should address another vigorous protest on the subject of [to?] the Canton
Government and only in case it becomes apparent that they intend to
disregard that protest should the powers take positive measures; that as a
last resort the Japanese Government would be inclined to join in a naval
demonstration in cooperation with the other interested powers; that however
he is inclined to believe that on account of the changed situation at Peking
Sun Yat-sen will probably not go ahead with his threat and seize customs.
Peking informed.

CAFFERY

[Document 386]
The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State
me last evening by order of Laroche37 that the French attitude regarding the
maintenance of the integrity of the Canton customs had in no way been
modified. French Government was quite prepared to oppose seizure and
considered that the instructions given the French admiral for last December
were continuing and would apply automatically at any recurrence of the
same situation. Léger was very definite on this question for naval
instructions although I had not mentioned either warships or instructions in
my conversation with Laroche.

WHITEHOUSE

[Document 387]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, November 8, 1924.

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your Note No. 1006
of October 25, 1924, stating that the British Government has learned that
the Canton Government is again threatening to seize the Canton Customs
and expressing the hope of the British Government that the American
representative in Peking may be authorized to concert with the British
representative in arranging for a renewal of the naval demonstration at
Canton.

Being likewise informed of the apparent seriousness of the situation at
Canton, this Government had already on the 22d instant transmitted a report
thereon to its representatives at London, Paris and Tokyo, stating its view
that the situation was one which did not permit of isolated action, but
required, if any action were to be taken, the close cooperation of the Powers
principally interested. The representatives were at the same time instructed
to discuss the matter with the respective Foreign Offices concerned and
authorized to state that this Government was prepared to cooperate, for the
purpose of maintaining the integrity of the Canton Customs, in the same
manner as it did in December, 1923.

While exchanges of views on this subject were proceeding, this
Government was informed by its representative in London that the British
Foreign Office had learned that Sun Yat-sen was threatening the seizure
only of the “native” Canton Customs and that accordingly the British
Minister at Peking and the naval authorities considered there was no need
for naval action at the present time.

Accept [etc.]

Cuartes E. Hucues

[Document 388]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, November 12, 1924.

No. 1092
SIR: I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of the note which you
were so good as to address to me on the 8th instant and in reply to state that
His Majesty’s Representatives at Paris, Rome, Tokio and Lisbon have been
instructed to inform the Governments to which they are accredited that as
the Canton Government apparently intend to seize, not the Maritime
Customs, but the Native Customs in the area under their control, it is
considered that in this case joint naval action would have no value.
I have been instructed by my Government to add that His Majesty’s
Minister at Peking is of the opinion, which is understood to be shared by the
Japanese
Government,
that
the
Canton
Government
will
await
developments in the civil war in North China before interfering with either
the Maritime or the Native Customs, and that therefore naval action is
unnecessary at present. This information has also been brought to the notice
of the French, Italian, Japanese and Portuguese Governments.
I have [etc.]

ESME HOWARD

[Document 389]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
272. A Secretary of the French Embassy today read to the Division of Far
Eastern Affairs a telegram from his Government to the following general
effect:— For 7 or 8 years the interested Powers have been according
unconditionally and practically as a matter of routine their recognition of
the successive Governments that have followed each other in Peking: these
recent Governments have not lived up to their responsibilities or respected
the rights of the foreign Powers; it therefore appears to the French
Government that the recent coup d’état affords occasion for the Powers to
withhold recognition to the new Government with a view to forcing it to
give satisfactory assurances of its readiness to fulfil its obligations to the
Powers. The telegram added that the French Government was approaching
in this sense the other Governments principally interested, among them the

[Document 390]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[Received 9: a.m.]

November 5th French in concert Belgian Chargé d’Affaires proposed that,
first, all Chiefs of Mission should at their initial call upon new Minister for
Foreign Affairs make reserves in respect of new regime, bringing to Dr.
Wang’s notice that despite solemn promises the recent administrations in
China had not kept faith or carried out treaties, agreements, etc.; and that,
secondly, the powers concerned should obtain some form of guarantee that
China would observe her treaties and agreements before recognizing the
new President when elected.
2. Italian Minister concurred but several others dissented especially
regarding any making of reserves at first call on Dr. Wang. I stated I would
not feel authorized to do so without instructions from my Government and
British Minister spoke to same effect. Matter of reserves dropped but agreed
that representatives should communicate with respective Governments in
regard to advisability of demanding guarantees in the event of election of
new President. Several ministers stated that they considered present
situation merely as a Cabinet change and not therefore raising the question
of recognition, etc. This has been exactly my opinion. I have not believed
that entering into relations with Dr. Wang amounted to anything more than
carrying on with a new Minister for Foreign Affairs. I felt that this demand
by French and Belgian Chargés in which Italian Minister concurred was
possibly primarily a bid for the diplomatic body’s support in gold franc
case. I have reason to believe several other ministers of same opinion.
3. The present administration is of course not strictly constitutional since it
fails to fulfill the requirements that a new Premier be nominated by
President and approved by Parliament. The appointment of an Acting

[Document 391]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
from your telegram that you and the representatives of the other Powers in
Peking have not thus far entered into formal relations with the Chinese
authorities now functioning there. In view of the indeterminate situation
now existing, the Department desires to avoid any commitment as to the
status of the new regime; and while awaiting the evolution of the situation
would prefer that the Legation’s de facto relations with the regime now in
control at Peking should be as informal and infrequent as may be
compatible with the protection of American interests and the maintenance
of good will conducive to that end.

HUGHES

[Document 392]
The Chargé in Japan (Caffery) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
[Received November 11—11 a.m.]
291. French Ambassador here informed me that he had handed a note to
Shidehara containing suggestions indicated in the Department’s 183.
Upon reading this communication Shidehara said to him that it was his
opinion that due legal forms under the constitution had been carried out in
connection with the resignation of the President and the assumption of his
duties by the Cabinet and therefore the question of recognition would not
necessarily arise; on the other hand he said that of course recognition might
be withdrawn by any of the interested powers.

CAFFERY

[Document 393]
The French Embassy to the Department of State
undated
[Translation ]
MEMORANDUM
The French Government is now concerning itself with the gravity of the
situation in China. It may be presumed that on account of the great division
of the parties a rather long time will elapse before there can be established
in Peking a central power that would be recognized by the provinces and
would be in position and inclination to see of its own motion that the
international obligations of China are met. The fact that the latest Chinese
Governments have been recognized by the foreign governments imparted
some authority to them and the Peking Cabinet was thus placed in position
to take advantage of the foreign diplomatic missions accredited to it
without, however, caring to entertain the claims of the powers.
The Government of the Republic believes that to maintain longer this
diplomatic situation without imposing certain precise conditions, would
tend to work injury to all the Governments concerned: the said
Governments on the one hand would assume a serious responsibility to their
nationals and, on the other hand, would encourage the objectionable
inclinations of the Government which is evading its international
obligations and would readily sacrifice the rights of foreigners. This might
in the future bring about a condition of affairs likely to be attended with
grave consequences.

For that reason the French Government believes that it would be to the
interest of the Governments concerned to make even now a survey of the
situation hereinbefore referred to and agree that they will notify, when the
time comes, the next Peking Government that it cannot be recognized by

[Document 394]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
November 8 the French Ambassador confirmed the suggestion of the
p.m. The following is the substance of my reply:
“The Secretary said that he appreciated the force of the
Ambassador’s observations; that it was highly desirable that there
should be a stable government in China and that the rights which
foreigners had should be properly recognized. He called attention
to the existing situation. The President had left, attempting to give
his authority to a new cabinet. It was difficult to see how this
could be called a government entitled to recognition; it was an
anomalous condition. However, the future was uncertain. It did
not seem to the Secretary wise to lay down a program to cover
eventualities which could not now be denned. He had no
difference so far as the principle suggested by the Ambassador
was concerned, for, of course, when a government was
recognized it was either explicit or implicit that international
obligations should be performed. A government seeking
recognition would be supposed to be willing to give assurances to
that effect. The question was whether there was a solid basis for
confidence that such assurances would be made good. In China
we had a peculiar situation because of the extreme difficulty in
establishing a strong central government. It was necessary to
encourage a hopeful effort in that direction and on the other hand
to have it clearly understood that the rights of other powers could
not be trifled with. It seemed to the Secretary necessary to await
developments.”

The Italian Ambassador on the same date stated that his Government,
before replying to the French note, would like to know the views of the
American Government on the French suggestion. The reply made to him
was of the same tenor as that to the French Ambassador.

GREW

[Document 395]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. Dr. Wang’s note informing me of his assumption of duties as
Minister for Foreign Affairs replied to in usual course employed
when new Foreign Minister appointed. British, Japanese, French,
Belgian, Italian and Netherlands Legations acted likewise as I
understand did the other Legations.
2. I returned Dr. Wang’s call but have refrained from calling at
Foreign Office on regular diplomatic day and have sent my card
to Acting Premier in return for his. I understand other chiefs of
mission acted similarly. Diplomatic body generally considered
situation merely as a Cabinet change, an opinion which I shared
as expressed in my telegram aforementioned.
3. However, at the diplomatic body meeting of November 10th it
was decided that we would not attend Acting Premier’s afternoon
reception this week (all had been invited) in order to show Huang
Fu, C. T. Wang, and those now in authority that although we had
not made any formal reserves yet we had not accepted Cabinet
change without a mental reservation of waiting to see how the
situation would develop [before?] according it our entire
approval. We have apparently achieved our purpose, since day
following most of diplomatic body were visited by emissaries
from the Foreign Office who informed us on Huang Fu’s behalf
that he had issued the invitation to afternoon reception in his
private capacity. I referred Foreign Office secretary who called on
me to senior minister who had informally conveyed our position

to the Wai Chiao Pu. I assured secretary that no personal affront
was intended the Acting Premier and that the United States had no
feeling of special affinity or antipathy to any political faction in
China, being entirely neutral. The reception, I understand, has
been canceled.
4. I have only visited the Minister for Foreign Affairs the one time
and intended to have as little to do with the present administration
as possible compatible with the protection of our interests. I note
Department’s instructions in the above regard and will carry them
out.

MAYER
includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390].

[Document 396]
The Chargé in Japan (Caffery) to the Secretary of State
[Received November 15—1 p.m.]

Foreign Affairs handed to French Ambassador this morning the following
aide-mémoire:
“The Japanese entirely share with the French Government the
opinion that a new government which may be established in
China is entitled to recognition by foreign powers only when it is
capable of fulfilling China’s international engagement[s]. The
Japanese Government further realize the importance of obtaining
from a new government in China satisfactory assurance
respecting such international obligations in case it becomes
opportune to consider the question of recognition to be extended
to include government.

Instructions will be given to the Japanese Minister at Peking to
cooperate with his colleagues of the principal powers interested in
China in examining at an opportune moment all questions relating
to recognition subject to the approval of their respective
governments.”
Peking informed.

CAFFERY

[Document 397]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Kellogg) to the Secretary of
State
[Extract]
6 p.m., to Peking was read to Foreign Office today which stated that the
reply of the British Government to the French representations made here
was in substance identical with the reply of Secretary Hughes. Foreign
Office added you may sum up our position in the words, “We agree with the

[Document 398]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Kellogg)
[Paraphrase]
434. 1. At an early occasion you may tell the Foreign Minister that I
appreciate his expression of a particular desire to cooperate with the United
States regarding Chinese affairs. In that connection inform him of my views
on the present Chinese crisis as set forth in the Department’s memorandum
to the French Embassy. The substance of this memorandum will be cabled
to you through the Paris Embassy.
2. You may further explain my views by saying that the fundamental
necessities of the situation in my judgment are as follows:
(a) No foreign intervention on the side of any faction or group in
the present civil conflict;
(b) All appropriate encouragement and countenance to any
governing body which may emerge independently with a
reasonable likelihood of stability;
(c) The exercise upon such a new regime of what influence may
be practicable with the object of assuring that it will more
faithfully observe the treaty obligations which more and more the
recent Chinese administrations have been seeking to evade.

3. With respect to points (a) and (b), it is my belief that the Chinese
Government is now passing through a phase which is abnormal and

temporary. I hope that a more substantial regime will soon be established. I
think it is vital until then that the powers do not interfere, actually or
apparently, with the working out of the internal forces of China, either by
assisting any group or by efforts for mediation which would tend to give an
appearance of stability before the situation has actually reached an
equilibrium. However, as soon as a central governing body giving a
reasonable hope of permanent authority shall have been produced, I think it
would be the part of wisdom for the powers to formally recognize it and
encourage it with the hope of helping it as far as may be possible to
reestablish unity of political control throughout China.
4. With respect to point (c), the growing disposition of the Chinese to evade
their treaty responsibilities causes me deep concern—in recent reports from
our Legation in China there is the intimation of the possibility that this
tendency may soon become manifest in more active opposition to the
special rights now held by foreigners. When Minister Schurman was here
recently for consultation he confirmed the apprehension that there is the
likelihood that in the relatively near future the Chinese will demand that
what they call the “unequal treaties” shall be revised, insisting upon control
of their tariff, freedom to tax foreigners, and the abolition of
extraterritoriality. If such a policy were enunciated it would without doubt
bring forth a degree of enthusiasm and popular approval such as no recent
Chinese regime has been able to win. Should the powers unite in opposition
to such a policy, it seems likely that the Chinese would be able to render of
no worth foreign treaty rights by mere passive resistance if not by the use of
more aggressive means such as a boycott.
5. Of course the proposal that the powers withhold recognition until a new
Chinese administration has given assurances that it will carry out its treaty
obligations, is intended to meet this situation. However, even though such
foreign pressure might indeed be the means of causing the Chinese officials
to yield upon any particular case in controversy, I am unable to make
myself believe that it would bring about any general or permanent
improvement in the attitude of the Chinese toward the treaty rights of
foreigners. I fear on the contrary that if such pressure were used it would
result either in a deadlock between the powers and the Chinese regime
seeking recognition, or else cause that regime to lose support and therefore

weaken its chances of becoming established as the actual government of the
country in proportion to the degree to which it agreed to the conditions
demanded by the powers. In either case the particular tangible advantages
that might be secured would be obtained at too great a price.
6. It is my firm conviction that, without resorting to force such as for
present purposes is out of the question, the peril to foreign interests in
China cannot be met by merely exercising pressure without regard to the
temper which underlies the Chinese attitude on this subject. Unquestionably
the Chinese have a strong feeling that the powers have not played fairly
with them with respect to the Washington Conference treaties, and this
feeling has influenced their temper with regard to foreign rights. It may be
admitted that this feeling is without justification because in any case the
political chaos in China would have frustrated our desire for the realization
of the concrete plans which the Conference accepted. It is a psychological
fact, nevertheless, that it is generally believed by the Chinese that the
failure to go ahead with the extraterritoriality conference and the customs
conference justifies them in disregarding their own responsibilities.
However unjustifiable this feeling may be, it is too firmly fixed and
widespread to be left out of consideration as a factor in the situation. I think
it is essential therefore that the powers should prove their integrity by
showing that they are willing, as soon as circumstances allow, to take up the
promised consideration of matters which the Chinese consider fundamental.
The decision as regards the extraterritoriality conference rests entirely with
the foreign offices of the powers concerned.
7. As I understand the situation, France is withholding action both upon the
extraterritoriality conference and upon the acceptance of the two
Washington Conference treaties regarding China, and the consequent
holding of the conference on customs, in accordance with a definite policy
of taking no action favorable to the Chinese until France receives
satisfaction with respect to the payment in gold of its share of the Boxer
Indemnity. The fact that France has apparently a good case at least prima
facie in the matter makes the situation harder to handle. In fact there is
some reason to think that if it could be done without “loss of face” in view
of the strong national sentiment aroused on this subject in China, the
Chinese would now gladly yield. The reference of the issue to the World

Court might bring about a settlement practicable for the Chinese. It is,
however, understood that France is so sure of its position that it is inclined
to consider only a direct settlement with China.
8. Apparently this attitude on the part of France not only delays a possible
satisfactory settlement of this case but it directly strengthens and makes
more bitter a tendency increasingly endangering all foreign rights in China
by preventing any progress in making effective the decisions concerning
China taken at the Washington Conference. The French, therefore, have in
their hands the only key to the situation. I hope that the British Foreign
Minister may understand the situation as I see it and may be disposed to
cooperate with me, if opportunity is presented, to endeavor to influence the
Government of France to take action in such a way as to resolve the present
deadlock.
9. It is understood that the French Ambassador at London, who until a short
while ago was Minister at Peking, is fully informed on the gold franc
question. You might take occasion to discuss the matter with him, saying
that the American Government is apprehensive that unless the existing
deadlock is broken a settlement will be unduly delayed, and that it hopes
that some method by which a settlement could be assisted by other
governments might be disclosed by a frank and informal discussion of the
subject. The British Foreign Minister may of course be informed of this.
10. I have given you the above full explanation of my views so that you will
be in a position to discuss the matter with the Foreign Minister
confidentially and informally. Considering that there might be possible
misunderstandings in other quarters I do not wish you to put these views
into any memorandum or note.
11. Please repeat for information to Embassy in France as Department’s no.
412.

HUGHES

[Document 399]
The Department of State to the French Embassy
MEMORANDUM
The Department of State has carefully considered the memorandum left
with it on November 11, 1924, in which were set forth the views of the
French Government on the subject of the situation now existing in China, as
previously explained by the French Ambassador in a conversation with the
Secretary of State on November 8.

The Government of the United States fully shares the concern of the French
Government as to the gravity of the situation of China, and would therefore
be disposed to associate itself with other treaty Powers in adopting an
attitude of reserve until there shall have developed a regime warranting a
hope of its stability and giving satisfactory evidence of its intention to carry
out in good faith the obligations which China has assumed towards those
Powers.

But while recognizing the fact that the Chinese Government has of late
manifested an increasing tendency to ignore the rights of the foreign
Powers, this Government cannot blind itself to the fact that this tendency
has found an excuse and an encouragement in the minds of the Chinese by
reason of the fact that they conceive the foreign Powers to have abandoned
the policy of cooperation and mutual accommodation embodied in the
decisions with respect to Chinese affairs adopted by the Washington
Conference on the Limitation of Armament. Not only do they observe the
fact that the two treaties, with respect to Principles and Policies concerning
China, and with respect to the Chinese Customs Tariff, remain unratified,
with the result that certain concrete advantages provided by the Conference
in favor of China remain unrealized; but they are able to point out that the
Resolution regarding Extraterritoriality in China—although an agreement
ostensibly binding without any necessity for ratifications or other
formalities—has not yet resulted in any action by the signatory Powers with

a view to the promised inquiry into the present practice of extraterritoriality
and into the laws and the judicial system and the methods of judicial
administration in China.

While by no means disposed to extenuate any tendency of the Chinese
Government to repudiate or evade its international responsibilities, the
American Government feels that it would be ignoring the realities of the
situation to overlook the effect produced upon the minds of the Chinese by
their conviction that the Powers have on their part failed to give effect to
measures adopted by them for the purpose of furthering the aspirations of
the Chinese people for the development of their political life. The Powers
are thus prejudiced and weakened in their insistence that China should
observe their treaty rights in full, unless and until those rights may be
modified by mutual consent; and in the opinion of the American
Government there is grave danger of the inculcation of a spirit of distrust
which might even more seriously attenuate the sense of responsibility of the
Chinese with respect to their obligations.

It is therefore the opinion of the Government of the United States that, in
order to deal with the grave situation to which the French Embassy’s
memorandum refers, it is essential that the Powers should make evident
their own good faith and their intention to afford China the opportunity to
obtain relief from what her people regard as oppressive restrictions upon
their national freedom of action, to the extent that its Government may
prove itself willing and able to exercise the normal functions of a
Government in its treatment of those foreign interests for which the treaty
restrictions were designed to afford a protection not yet available from the
Chinese governing authorities.

To that end, the Government of the United States considers it indispensable
that the interested Powers, in the course of makingclear their view that any
new regime could expect to enjoy their confidence and cooperation only
upon the condition that it gives satisfactory evidence of a willingness to
observe existing treaty rights, should be prepared to offer reciprocal
assurances of their own intentions towards China, and should in particular
be in a position to promise that they will at the earliest practicable date

undertake the investigation for which provision is made by the Washington
Conference Resolution on Extraterritoriality. While making this suggestion
with regard to the particular matter of the Conference on Extraterritoriality,
the American Government takes occasion to express its earnest hope that
means may be found by which the Government of France may be enabled
to contribute towards the amelioration of the present difficult situation in
China by according the ratifications which would bring into force the two
treaties concerning China concluded at Washington on February 6, 1922.
WASHINGTON , November 25, 1924.

[Document 400]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Kellogg) to the Secretary of
State
Mr. Chamberlain’s49 attention through the Foreign Office and Waterlow
advises today as follows: Mr. Chamberlain very much appreciates the
Secretary’s frank statement of his views on, the Chinese situation with
which he is in absolute accord and has instructed the Foreign Office to
continue informal discussions of views and information with the Embassy.
Foreign Office states it will in the near future take occasion to express to the
French similar views to those in the last paragraph of Department’s 439 of
Tuan an early compromise with French toward gold payments of Boxer
Indemnity.

KELLOGG

[Document 401]
The Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) to the Secretary of State
TOKYO, December 4, 1924—noon.

[Received 3: p.m.]
314. Shidehara handed me today following statement on Japan’s attitude in
China situation which he said had already been prepared at the request of
the British Ambassador here:
“It is believed to be generally conceded that no useful purpose
can be served by any intervention in the domestic affairs of
China. With a long historical background and amidst the
surroundings peculiar to the country the Chinese people must be
left free to order their own national life in their own way. Such
plans as have often been discussed in unofficial quarters aiming at
an international control of certain branches of Chinese
administration would, in the opinion of the Japanese Government,
prove disastrous to the independent existence of China and
productive of international complications.

At this time the foreign powers cannot with fairness be called
upon to suffer any infringement upon their legitimate rights and
interests in China. They are entitled to expect from any
government which may be established at Peking both the ability
and the readiness to fulfill all the conventional obligations of
China and in particular to afford due protection to the persons and
property of their nationals. Such aims can hardly be realized
however unless the military leaders now maintaining themselves
quasi independently in various provinces be brought effectively
under the direction the Central Government, at least in matters
involving the rights and interests of foreign nations.

It is now known that on November 24th General Tuan Chi-jui
provisionally assumed the functions of the Chief Executive of the
Chinese Republic in response to the call of a fair majority of the
practically autonomous province[s] in China and with the
approval of the then existing Government under Mr. Huang Fu.
On the same day he announced the formation of a new Cabinet
composed of men who have long figured prominently in various
factions and provinces. It appears that all these arrangements are
intended to be only provisional and that a more lasting regime is
reserved for discussion and settlement at a national assembly
shortly to be convoked.

The Japanese are not directly concerned in the question who will
assume the reins of government in China or what form of political
institution the proposed national assembly will adopt. Their chief
preoccupation[s] have been in the question whether or not China
will soon be provided with a sufficiently strong government to
maintain law and order within her borders and to discharge her
international obligations.

But it is evident that whatever government may be established in
China cannot possibly endure if it fails to find a way out of its
pressing financial difficulties. Without funds to meet the
expenditure it will be impossible for any government at Peking to
organize an effective administration and to carry out the
disbandment of troops and other measures of readjustment now
urgently needed. Nor in the opinion of the Japanese Government
can the destitution of China’s public treasury be remedied without
the cooperation of foreign powers. In order to secure stabilization
of China it will be necessary for the powers when they [the time?]
becomes opportune to take up the question of financial assistance
to be rendered to the Chinese Government. Such assistance is to
be extended only upon full communication and understanding
among the powers and in case it takes the form of a loan it should
be undertaken in accordance with the principles that govern the
existing consortium.

In all cases the fullest opportunity should be afforded to the
Chinese people to work out a practical system of government and
to restore peace and unity in the country. It is reported that the
Provisional Government just inaugurated at Peking and its
supporters are now seriously striving to attain these objects. The
powers should watch their efforts with sympathy, toleration and
hope”.

Peking informed.

BANCROFT

[Document 402]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Japan (Caffery)
1. You are authorized to communicate orally and informally to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs the substance of the memorandum to the French
Government53 contained in the telegram repeated to you by Peking as the
Department’s number 195.
2. In your informal discussions with the Minister for Foreign Affairs
concerning the situation in China, you will be guided in general by the
views contained in the telegram repeated to you by Peking as the
Department’s number 194, and you may intimate to him that the
American Ambassador at London has been authorized to discuss the matter
in a similar manner with the Foreign Office.
3. In connection with the telegram referred to in paragraph 2, the following
telegram from London is repeated for your information: [Here follows
portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400].]
4. Repeat to Peking as Department’s number 301.

HUGHES
398].

[Document 403]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[Received 6: p.m.]

Informal meeting this morning of British, Japanese, French, Italian,
Belgian, Netherlands representatives and myself decided to recommend our
Governments to authorize us at earliest possible moment to despatch
following note to Chinese Government and to give same widest publicity.
“The representatives at Peking of the United States of America,
Belgium, Great Britain, France, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands and
Portugal declare in the names of their Governments that, taking
note of the communication addressed to them on November 24th
by the Wai Chiao Pu announcing the assumption of office by the
Provisional Chief Executive and of the mandates issued by the
new Chief Executive on the same date, they will lend their full
support to the Provisional Government in Peking under the
present Provisional Chief Executive and that they have entered
into de facto relations with the same on the understanding that
this Provisional Government has been constituted with the
concurrence of the nation for the purpose of taking charge of the
affairs of the Chinese Republic pending the establishment of a
formal government representing all the provinces and parties in
the Republic and on the understanding that it is the intention of
the Provisional Government and of any formal government that
may hereafter be established to respect all treaties, conventions,
and other engagements entered into by the former Manchu and
Republican governments and all rights, privileges, and
immunities enjoyed by foreigners in China by virtue of such
international engagements until such time as these international
engagements shall be modified by mutual consent of the

contracting parties. They further declare that on the above
understanding their Governments are willing and anxious to
proceed as soon as possible with the carrying out of the measures
contemplated in the Washington treaties and resolutions.”
2. I make this recommendation for following reasons: First, I have believed
for some time that we should combat Bolshevik attack in China in
particular reference to so-called “unjust treaties” by an announcement that
we were ready and willing to discuss treaty revision at earliest moment
practicable. Second, I have considered that we have been and are severely
handicapped by inability to initiate action under Washington Conference
agreements and resolutions owing to French attitude. I believe that if
nothing more eventuates from the effort to have the powers concerned agree
upon proposed statement, such effort will at least bring pressure upon
French Government toward ratification of Washington treaties. I deem this
is in line with Department’s attitude and desire as expressed in its 294,
statement similar to above may be of great assistance to conservative
element in China. As couched I do not believe it can do harm. Should Sun
in cooperation with Feng overthrow Tuan administration after proposed
statement is made we would at least be on record as continuing to entertain
toward a government in China, to whom we could at least accord de facto
recognition, the same policy of cooperation and mutual accommodation as
embodied in the decisions with respect to Chinese affairs adopted by
Washington Conference. We would have a base from which to project
further efforts to defend ourselves against Bolshevik propaganda. If and
when Tuan or some other conservative government would replace Sun
regime we would be in the greatly [sic] superior position than if proposed
statement had not been made.
3. Both British Minister and myself after careful consideration believed it
wise not to include any direct statement to the effect that powers concerned
would not recognize or have truck with any administration which might be
set up in Peking by political leaders hostile to us. This would be two-edged
weapon. Point impliedly covered in proposed statement.

4. I would have preferred to have strengthened statement by definitely
stating in so many words that the powers concerned would take up with a
formally established Chinese Government the subject of treaty revision at
the earliest moment practicable, thus turning this phase against those who
now using it to our disadvantage. Statement as adopted this morning’s
meeting by implication puts us on record as desirous to this effect.
5. Both British Minister and myself fearful that further strengthening our
proposed statement might prevent French and Italian Governments from
associating themselves therewith, the chances being that these two
Governments would even oppose statement as now drafted.
6. Japanese Minister stated he had reason to believe Feng and Sun Yat-sen
contemplate another coup in the very near future. Impossible to know
Feng’s attitude as Tuan may be simply playing him off against foreigners
demanding immediate treaty revision or cancellation. It would be difficult
for us to issue proposed statement which Sun could then make to appear as
result of his threats.

7. For above reasons I most earnestly recommend that if Department
approves proposed statement I be instructed to this end at very earliest
possible moment.
8. I venture to add that I consider the making of a statement similar to that
proposed of so great importance at this time that I would favor its being
made to present Chinese Government even if only by Great Britain and the
United States; with Japan, the Netherlands and Belgium if possible. If
necessary, however, I believe Japanese Government would be willing to
join in such a statement even if all powers concerned would [not?] agree
thereto. Possibly more danger of playing into Japanese hands by proposed
statement is less than that of ill-advised agitation for treaty revision in my
opinion. Of the two it goes without saying I greatly prefer to assist the
Japanese. I would much appreciate simultaneous instructions on this point
should the Department approve proposed statement in principle. British
Minister of same opinion and is requesting similar instructions.

[Document 404]
The Netherland Minister (De Graeff) to the Secretary of State
The Netherland Minister presents his compliments to the Honorable, the
Secretary of State, and has the honor to inform him that the Minister of
Foreign Affairs at The Hague has learned from Her Royal Majesty’s
Minister at Peking that the diplomatic representatives there of the nine
Powers signatory to the Treaty of Washington being afraid for another coup
d’état with the purpose of establishing a soviet government in China are of
the opinion that it would be serviceable to lend their moral support to the
actual provisional Government of China by declaring that their respective
Governments for that reason desire to carry out the measures stipulated in
the said treaty and in the resolutions which with regard to China have been
agreed upon at the time of the Washington Conference.

Jonkheer van Karnebeek has instructed me to point out to the Secretary of
State that the Royal Government at no time has opposed against the
carrying out of the said measures but that it seems to him that at the present
time a declaration as has been planned will be considered as a proof of
weakness and not only will not lead to any desirable result but will be even
hurtful to the preparations of the Powers.

The Minister of Foreign Affairs at The Hague being very anxious to learn
the opinion of the American Government in this matter, Jonkheer de Graeff
would highly appreciate if Mr. Hughes would be kind enough to give him
the desired information at his earliest convenience.

WASHINGTON , December 5, 1924.

[Document 405]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
The Department approves proposed statement and you may sign if all your
colleagues named in the statement also sign.

Your paragraph 8.

You will of course notify the Department immediately, with a view to its
taking up the question with the appropriate Governments, in the event that
any of the representatives of Powers signatory to the Washington
Conference Treaties fail to receive authorization to join in the statement.
HUGHES

[Document 406]
The Secretary of State to the Netherland Minister (De Graeff)
The Secretary of State presents his compliments to the Netherlands Minister
and has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of his memorandum of
December 5, 1924, concerning the political situation in China.
The Government of the United States fully realizes the gravity of the
situation in China and is disposed to associate itself with other treaty
Powers in adopting an attitude of reserve until there shall have developed a
régime warranting a hope of its stability and giving satisfactory evidence of
its intention to carry out in good faith the obligations which China has
assumed towards those Powers.

But while recognizing the fact that the Chinese Government has of late
manifested an increasing tendency to ignore the rights of the foreign
Powers, this Government cannot blind itself to the fact that this tendency
has found an excuse and an encouragement in the minds of the Chinese by
reason of the fact that they conceive the foreign Powers to have abandoned
the policy of cooperation and mutual accommodation embodied in the
decisions with respect to Chinese affairs adopted by the Washington
Conference on the Limitation of Armament. Not only do they observe the
fact that the two treaties, with respect to Principles and Policies concerning
China, and with respect to the Chinese Customs Tariff, remain unratified,
with the result that certain concrete advantages provided by the Conference
in favor of China remain unrealized; but they are able to point out that the
Resolution regarding Extraterritoriality in China—although an agreement
ostensibly binding without any necessity for ratifications or other
formalities—has not yet resulted in any action by the signatory Powers with
a view to the promised inquiry into the present practice of extraterritoriality
and into the laws and the judicial system and the methods of judicial
administration in China.

While by no means disposed to extenuate any tendency of the Chinese
Government to repudiate or evade its international responsibilities, the
American Government feels that it would be ignoring the realities of the
situation to overlook the effect produced upon the minds of the Chinese by
their conviction that the Powers have on their part failed to give effect to
measures adopted by them for the purpose of furthering the aspirations of
the Chinese people for the development of their political life. The Powers
are thus prejudiced and weakened in their insistence that China should
observe their treaty rights in full, unless and until those rights may be
modified by mutual consent; and in the opinion of the American
Government there is grave danger of the inculcation of a spirit of distrust
which might even more seriously attenuate the sense of responsibility of the
Chinese with respect to their obligations.

It is therefore the opinion of the Government of the United States that, in
order to deal with the grave situation to which the Netherlands Minister’s
memorandum refers, it is essential that the Powers should make evident
their own good faith and their intention to afford China the opportunity to
obtain relief from what her people regard as oppressive restrictions upon
their national freedom of action, to the extent that its Government may
prove itself willing and able to exercise the normal functions of a
Government in its treatment of those foreign interests for which the treaty
restrictions were designed to afford a protection not yet available from the
Chinese governing authorities.

To that end, the Government of the United States considers it indispensable
that the interested Powers, in the course of making clear their view that any
régime could expect to enjoy their confidence and cooperation only upon
the condition that it gives satisfactory evidence of a willingness to observe
existing treaty rights, should be prepared to offer reciprocal assurances of
their own intentions towards China, and should in particular be in a position
to promise that they will, as soon as possible, proceed with the carrying out
of the measures contemplated in the Washington Conference treaties and
resolutions. With a view to contributing something towards the amelioration
of the present difficult situation in China the representatives at Peking of the
United States, Belgium, Great-Britain, France, Italy, Japan, The Netherlands
and Portugal have proposed to despatch to the present Government at

Peking the following note: [Here follows text of proposed note reported in
telegram no. 472, December 4, from the Chargé in China, printed on page
The Secretary of State ventures to hope that The Netherlands Government
will instruct its representative at Peking to join his colleagues in signing the
proposed note.

WASHINGTON , December 6, 1924.

[Document 407]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. British Minister has likewise received authority to sign
proposed statement. His Government has informed him that they
are urging French Government to join in proposed action. He is
further authorized to sign even without French concurrence if I
agree.
2. While I consider far preferable that all Powers concerned
should join in proposed action, I respectfully request authority to
sign without French concurrence if representative here not
instructed to sign by the time Department’s reply to this telegram
received.
3. Effectiveness of the proposed action would be greatly impaired
if not destroyed, it is submitted, should statement not be
transmitted to Chinese Government and published prior to any
hostile declaration by Dr. Sun Yat-sen advocating immediate
cancelation or revision of so-called “unjust treaties”. See last
sentence paragraph 6 my 472 mentioned above.

MAYER

[Document 408]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
Department’s reply to that telegram, have been repeated through Paris to
Brussels, The Hague, Rome and Lisbon with instructions to take occasion
to discuss, informally and orally, with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the countries concerned the situation in China, using as the basis of such
discussion the abovementioned telegrams and the memorandum to the
p.m., quoting the telegram to London. The Department has also
expressed the hope that the several Governments approached would
promptly instruct their representatives at Peking to sign the note quoted in
your No. 472.

HUGHES
399].

[Document 409]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
440. Assuming that you have sent to Brussels, The Hague, Lisbon and
Rome the memorandum addressed to the French Embassy here on
p.m., you will now supplement that memorandum by repeating to the
which was repeated to you from London, and request the Missions
concerned to take occasion to discuss, informally and orally, the situation in
China with the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the countries concerned, and
in so doing to be guided in general by the views contained in the
memorandum to the French Government and the telegram to London above
mentioned. The draft note to the Chinese Government64 and the
Department’s reply to the telegram from Peking58 containing it are being
repeated to you in the Department’s No. 439, and should also be repeated
to Brussels, The Hague, Rome and Lisbon for their further information and
guidance in the discussions above mentioned. It is hoped that the Powers
concerned will authorize their respective representatives at Peking to join
with their colleagues in signing the proposed note.

HUGHES

[Document 410]
The Netherland Minister (De Graeff) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, December 8, 1924.

SIR: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the sixth instant and to
offer you my most sincere thanks for your early and circumstantial reply to
my memorandum of the 5th instant concerning the political situation in
China.

It gives me great pleasure to inform you that I received yesterday a
cablegram from the Foreign Minister at The Hague to whom I had
transmitted by cable your views on the question as explained to me verbally
Friday last, stating that he has authorized the Netherland Minister at Peking
to join his colleagues in signing the note quoted in your letter.
Please accept [etc.]

DE GRAEFF

[Document 411]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[Paraphrase]
In case British and Japanese representatives are both authorized to take like
action, Department authorizes you to join with them and representatives of
any other powers which signed the Washington Conference treaties who
may be able to do so, in sending to the Chinese Government the proposed
joint statement. This action, may be taken at your discretion any time after
December 11, noon, or before that, should the French representative
indicate that his Government had decided not to join in sending the
statement-Repeat as Department’s no. 205 to Embassy at Tokyo.
HUGHES

[Document 412]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
1. With certain minor changes as set forth below, proposed
statement signed this noon by representatives of the United
States, Belgium, Great Britain, France, Italy, Japan and the
Netherlands. It will be delivered this afternoon by senior Minister
to Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs and be given to press
tomorrow, Wednesday noon.
2. Following are amendments:
(a) “And Portugal” omitted as British Minister not yet
authorized by Portugal to sign. Its adherence will be
later communicated to Wai Chiao Pu.

(b) “And duly fulfill” inserted between “respect” and
“all treaties, conventions and other engagements, et
cetera” in first sentence.

(c) “Which according to international usage can only”
substituted for “until such time as these international
engagements shall” toward end of first sentence.
(d) “Practicable” substituted for “possible” middle of
last sentence.
3. Following brief explanation of amendments. In accord with
instructions from home government, French representative sought

to have statement inserted in last sentence of draft to effect that
failure to carry out Washington Conference agreements not
through fault of powers concerned. I strongly opposed this. To my
mind very inadvisable to insert such controversial observation.
Less said the better concerning failure execution Washington
Conference agreements. I stood alone at first but finally, after
much discussion, British Minister joined me. Latter suggested
amendment (a) and I amendment (d) which together satisfied
French Chargé.
4. Japanese Government had authorized its representative to sign
draft with omission of “until such time as these international
engagements shall be modified by the mutual consent of the
contracting parties” at end of first sentence. Japanese argument in
favor of this omission was that clause might incite Chinese
Government to bring up treaty revision at once. British Minister
and self opposed elimination of this clause. I regretted omission
since I felt it advantageous to have mild intimation in our
statement to effect that question of treaty revision not entirely
remote from minds of powers concerned. Amendment (c) agreed
to in view of great importance of immediate despatch and
publication of statement and in view of delay which would ensue
from resubmission of matter to Japanese Government. Clause
substituted merely a truism.
5. I did my best to maintain statement as originally drafted and
rather deplore the whittling away of some of its strength by
amendments as made. However time element first importance and
as all other representatives seemed satisfied I assented and signed.
MAYER

[Document 413]
The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Secretary of State
[Translation ]
WASHINGTON, December 10, 1924.

MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: In a memorandum of November 25 last, the Department of
State was pleased to inform this Embassy that the Government of the
United States was inclined to take towards China an attitude of reserve until
there should be constituted a regime holding out prospects of stability and
showing in a positive manner its intention to fulfill in good faith the
obligations taken by China towards the powers.

In addition, the memorandum mentioned the regret felt by the American
Government that certain powers, France among them, had not yet ratified
the treaties concerning China signed at the close of the Washington
Conference, and especially that the said powers have not given attention to
the putting into effect of the resolution adopted with regard to
extraterritoriality. In the opinion of the Government of the United States the
delay in ratifying those instruments was not of a nature to encourage China
to carry out her obligations.

My Government, which I did not fail to keep advised of the American
Government’s viewpoint, has just instructed me to inform Your Excellency
that it repeatedly gave official notice to the Chinese Government that it
would not be in a position to lay before the French Parliament, for its
approval, the two treaties concerning China signed in Washington or to join
in carrying out the resolution relative to extraterritoriality as long as China
should not discharge her obligations to France with respect to the
resumption of the service of the Boxer Indemnity in gold. The justice of the
French claim, appears both from the general provisions of the protocol of
1901, which has been likewise invoked by Belgium, Spain, and Italy, and
also the special provisions of the Franco-Chinese agreement of 1922,

relative to the application of the French share of the indemnity under
consideration.

In this connection I wish to take the liberty of reminding Your Excellency
that the Government of the United States was pleased to recognize that my
Government’s attitude was justified and that it has for two years officially
associated itself with the collective action of the signatories of the protocol
of 1901 to remind China that one of the most important provisions of that
international instrument must be respected.

In the opinion of my Government the fact that the payment in gold of the
Boxer Indemnity is one of the foremost obligations of the Chinese
Government should not be overlooked; and it believes that to grant to China
the benefit of the treaties of Washington as long as she continues to evade
the treaties validly concluded with the powers, would be an injustice to
these powers and would lead China into a path full of dangers to herself.
That opinion, moreover, seems to be shared by the majority of the powers
signatory to the Washington agreements, since their representatives in
Peking believe that the present situation of China does not permit of
assembling the Commission on Extraterritoriality.

The very sincere wish of the Government of the Republic is that the new
Chinese Cabinet will gain sufficient authority and form a sufficiently
accurate idea of its own interests to cast into oblivion the bad faith of the
governments that have succeeded each other for the last two years in
Peking. It has, therefore, just instructed me to remind Your Excellency that
in its opinion the result could be better achieved if the Government of the
United States would bring its influence to bear upon the Chinese
Government, and give it to understand that the removal of the last obstacle
which still stands in the way of the putting into effect of the treaties of
Washington depends upon its good will and that the best way to bring to its
country the benefits of the advantages flowing from the said treaties would
be to meet the engagements heretofore signed by China.

Be pleased [etc.]

JUSSERAND

[Document 414]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
I am much gratified by this result, and approve your action with regard to
modifications of draft which seem entirely satisfactory.
Repeat the above to Tokyo as the Department’s number 207, together with
HUGHES

[Document 415]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, January 5, 1925.

[Received February 3.]

No. 2696
SIR: I have the honor to refer to Mr. Mayer’s telegrams Nos. 472 and 478 of
to the Chinese Government on December 9th by the representatives of the
United States, Belgium, Great Britain, France, Italy, Japan, and The
Netherlands, in which it was declared in the names of their Governments
that they would lend their full support to the Provisional Government in
Peking under the present Provisional Chief Executive, upon certain
understandings.
the Wai Chiao Pu’s reply of December 23rd. I now have the honor to
transmit herewith enclosed, for the Department’s information, a copy of a
translation of the last mentioned note.

I have [etc.]

JACOB GOULD SCHURMAN
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Chinese Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs (Shen Jui-lin) to the American Minister
(Schurman)
In acknowledging the receipt of the joint Communication of the Heads of
Missions at Peking of the United States of America, Belgium, Great Britain,
France, Italy, Japan and The Netherlands under date of December 9, 1924,

which has been acceded to by Portugal in a Note dated December 18th,
1924, from the British Minister on behalf of the Portuguese Government,
the Chinese Government desire to express their gratification at the
declaration made by them in the names of their Governments, that they will
lend their full support to the Provisional Government in Peking under the
present Chief Executive which, they are correct in understanding, has been
constituted with the concurrence of the Nation and will lead to the
establishment of a formal Government truly representative of the Republic.
The Chinese Government desire to assure them that the Chinese
Government will continue to respect, as they have always respected, all the
Treaties, Conventions, and other engagements duly entered into by China,
and even in exceptional cases where a divergence of interpretation has
arisen the Chinese Government have always endeavored to seek an
equitable solution with the Power or Powers concerned in accordance with
international usage.

The Chinese Government are gratified to be apprised that the Governments
signatory to the Washington Treaties are willing and anxious to proceed as
soon as practicable with the carrying out of the measures contemplated in
the Washington Treaties and Resolutions. These measures, which are
purposely restricted to those which were immediately practicable, were
unconditionally agreed upon to be forthwith carried out. The Chinese
Government regret the delay which has unexpectedly occurred and
sincerely hope that, with the assurance of friendly assistance now given by
the Governments concerned, these measures could soon be put into
execution, in accordance with the intentions and agreements of the
Washington Conference. They wish to add, furthermore, that in view of the
desire of the Chinese Government to consolidate the friendship between
China and the friendly Powers on a permanent and sound basis, they hope
that the Powers concerned will also at an early date give sympathetic
consideration to the other well-known national aspirations of the Chinese
people, submitted in recent years to different international conferences by
the Chinese Government, so that their relations may be further improved to
their mutual benefit.

PEKING, December 23, 1924.

[Document 416]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
[Received 3: p.m.]

Netherlands Minister, acting dean of diplomatic corps:
“With reference to the premises of the former Russian Legation in
Peking, Your Excellency will recall that according to the note of
Monsieur Pastor, the former doyen of the diplomatic corps,
received by this Ministry October 4, 1920, the members of the
diplomatic corps had agreed to entrust at first temporarily the said
premises to the custody of Prince Koudacheff. According to
doyen’s note of January 11, 1921, the premises in question were
entrusted, in view of Prince Koudacheff’s departure from Peking,
to the custody of His Excellency Monsieur Oudendijk as
representative of the diplomatic corps until the arrival [at] Peking
of a representative of a recognized Russian government. These
notes were duly acknowledged by this Ministry.

As the Chinese Government has recognized the Soviet
Government upon the conclusion of the Sino-Russian agreements
and restored its normal diplomatic and consular relations with the
latter, all the premises of the former Russian Legation as well as
articles appurtenant thereto should of course be returned to the
representative of the Soviet Government to China, in accordance
with the original arrangement. I have the honor therefore to
request that Your Excellency will be so kind as to bring this
matter to the attention of the interested resident ministers at
Peking and to favor me with a reply at your convenience.”

[Paraphrase]
2. Koo’s note leaves out of consideration the statement in the dean’s note of
October 3, 1920, to the effect that the Russian Legation would be taken in
charge by the representatives of the protocol powers until Russian
representation recognized by the powers should be again established. See
3. An informal meeting of the representatives of the protocol powers
yesterday considered the Chinese note. Several days previously this
meeting had been called to discuss Russian problems affecting these
representatives.
4. The meeting decided unanimously that the Dutch Minister should reply
on behalf of the protocol powers to Koo. The reply should state that if and
when a duly accredited diplomatic representative of Russia wished to gain
possession of the Russian Legation he should apply to the Dutch Minister
who represented the group.

SCHURMAN
74a Not printed.

[Document 417]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 3: p.m.]
209. On June 27 the Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs answered the note
of June 11 from the Dutch Minister regarding the transfer of the premises of
the Russian Legation to the Government of the Soviet Union. An informal
conference of the representatives of the protocol powers will consider the
reply tomorrow. The crucial points of the Chinese note follow:76
“1. In reply I have the honor to observe that the
assumption by the foreign representatives of the
signatories of the protocol of 1901 of the responsibility
of guarding the buildings and premises of the former
Russian Legation in Peking was an act undertaken by
the said representatives without the consent of the
Chinese Government, although it was occasioned by the
recognition
[termination]
of
the
then,
Russian
diplomatic representative [representation] in Peking
decreed by a Presidential mandate of the Republic
under the date of September 23rd, 1920.
2. How long such custody on the part of the said
diplomatic representatives should last is a question
which in its origin does not fall within the discretion of
the said representatives but must rather depend upon the
decision of China to decree [restore] such relations with
the new Russian Government.

3. Your Excellency’s suggestion to consider the
question of handing over the former Russian Legation
only
on
a
request
addressed
to
the
foreign
representatives by a Russian representative duly
accredited to the Chinese Government appears to
overlook the special interest of the Chinese Government
to see the premises of the former Russian Legation
promptly handed back to an authorized representative
of the Russian Government. It will be recalled that the
Diplomatic Quarter, though under the control of the
foreign legations by the protocol of 1901, remains part
of Chinese territory and that the premises of the Russian
Legation, though situated in the said quarter, are
themselves not subject to the control of the
representatives of other powers. Indeed they cannot be
subject to such control, as they are the property of a
foreign power with which China has reestablished
diplomatic relations and which Is anxious to take
possession of the Legation through its authorized
representative for use as its Legation. In asking for the
delivery of the said premises to an authorized
representative of the Soviet Government, the Chinese
Government sought only to extend to a foreign
government that act of friendly assistance which
international courtesy expected of China to do in order
to facilitate the establishment of [a] diplomatic
representative [representation] which it has agreed to
receive. They feel the more concerned because, as I
may add for your information, it is their desire to
discharge an obligation which they have undertaken vis-
à-vis the Soviet Government in the Sino-Russian
agreement of May 31, 1924.
4. They are further inclined to the view that the
conventional status of the Diplomatic Quarter should
not make it difficult for the foreign representatives to
comply with the request of the Chinese Government,

since they have not asked to take control themselves of
the said premises but have requested only to have them
delivered to an authorized representative of the Soviet
Government.
5. I hope the more sincerely that Your Excellency will
see your way to arrange for compliance with this
request, as any other course of action in the present case
would not only embarrass the Chinese Government in
their desire to extend every courtesy and facility
prescribed by international usage to the representatives
of
foreign
government[s]
maintaining
amicable
relations with China, but would also appear to prejudice
the right of foreign powers to establish their Legations
on Chinese territory free from any condition other than
the consent of the Chinese Government.”
SCHURMAN

[Document 418]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China
(Schurman)
p.m., will have indicated to you the Department’s feeling that the property
of the former Russian Legation should be turned over to the Russian
representative upon his request for possession.

The Department however approves the stand taken by the Diplomatic Body
in refusing to transfer the property at the request of the Chinese authorities.
In view of the abnormal situation arising out of the fact that the Legation
Quarter has been set aside by the Boxer Protocol for the joint use and
control of the Legations in such manner as to insure its defensibility, the
Chinese Government can claim no voice in the disposition of the property
beyond determining who is to be recognized as the representative of Russia
in China. The Chinese Foreign Office may be informed accordingly.
GREW

[Document 419]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Received 8: p.m.]
features of considerately and moderately phrased note sent today by dean to
Chinese Government replying to its note of June 27.
2. Representatives of powers signatory to protocol of 1901 affirm their
fixed desire not to concern themselves with relations between Chinese and
foreign governments but must clearly indicate that agreements between
Chinese and Soviet Governments must not weaken or infringe upon
undertakings entered into with them individually or collectively by Chinese
Government.
3. Special regime of Diplomatic Quarter and international servitudes laid
upon Chinese Government and upon representatives of foreign powers
resident within the quarter are discussed. Freedom of action of Chinese
Government and signatory powers restricted by above, and action can be
taken only within the limits imposed thereby and the detailed arrangements
which have arisen within past 24 years.
4. This complicated situation which compelled request from the powers in
1920 to assume responsibility for safeguarding real property of Russian
Government now obliges them not to hand back this property except to
representative of Russian Government by whom they may be preliminarily
assured of maintenance of arrangements constituting conventional statute of
diplomatic quarter. This should be simple of attainment. These pourparlers
not within province of Chinese Government but instrumentality of Minister
for Foreign Affairs will gladly be sought in initiating them.

5. The eight Ministers must be notified of name of diplomatic representative
officially accredited to Chinese Government by Russian Government, and
Minister for Foreign Affairs is requested to ask this representative to put
himself directly in touch with them to discuss and determine the matter.
6. This note was drafted at meeting of eight Ministers July 1st but despatch
delayed because of absence from Peking of some of them.
neither Karakhan nor anyone else has yet presented credentials to President
of China as Ambassador or Minister since Karakhan’s credentials were for
the special purpose of concluding an agreement.
8. Foreign powers recognize they cannot permanently exclude duly
accredited Russian representative from Russian Legation which was
Russian Government property long before Legation Quarter was created but
feel they are entitled in the interest of good neighborhood and order that the
Russian representative when accredited to China shall undertake to abide by
the rules and regulations for the Government upkeep and defense of the
quarter as the German Minister did when he took back the German
Legation in 1921.

For the Minister:
BELL
includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417].

[Document 420]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 25, 1924—noon.

[Received 10: p.m.]
1. In compliance with note of July 12th from the Netherlands
Minister, who has gone to Japan on a visit, Chinese Minister for
Foreign Affairs yesterday invited me as senior representative of
protocol powers present in Peking to his residence to meet
Karakhan. He there informed me that Karakhan had been
appointed Ambassador to China by the Soviet Government and
introduced me to Karakhan as dean. After drinking tea together,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs excused himself from attendance
and I held a conversation; of over two hours with Karakhan
regarding transfer of Russian Legation to him.
2. Karakhan remarked that he could not understand on what
ground the protocol powers prescribed conditions which they
asked him to accept before turning over to him premises of the
Russian Legation. I replied that Legation Quarter had been
granted to the signatory powers for their joint use and control and
as [it] was understood that Russia had renounced her interest
under the protocol, my colleagues desired an assurance that he
would accept the arrangements of the conventional regime to
which they continued to adhere with particular reference to
defense, taxation, municipal regulations. He categorically and
emphatically [stated] that the Soviet Government had not
abandoned their rights and interests under the protocol and that
their status was still that of a cosignatory. In response to my
inquiry he admitted that they contemplated such abandonment in

the future, and I pointed out that the position of my colleagues
was intended for that contingency whenever it might occur. He
declared that the other signatories of the protocol had no right to
lay down conditions for him and that he would not accept them
either now or at any other time.
3. I went on to say that my colleagues were, in view of his
published utterances, apprehensive as to his attitude with respect
to their rights and prerogatives under the protocol. He admitted
that he had expressed disapproval of the protocol provisions but
assured me that he desired on entering the quarter to maintain
good neighborly relations and observe municipal regulations. He
added that if his Government should renounce its rights under the
protocol they would notify the other powers in accordance with
international usage. He also made and reiterated the statement
that his Government would not bring any Red troops into the
Legation Quarter.
4. I inquired whether I might communicate to my colleagues the
statements he had just made. He consented on the express
understanding however that they were not to be regarded as the
fulfillment of preliminary conditions laid down by others but the
voluntary expression of his own sentiments. He agreed to send me
a written record of these observations. He will also make a formal
demand of the powers for the transfer of the Legation premises.
5. Karakhan will never assent to conditions to get back the
property. On the other hand most if not all of my colleagues insist
on some stipulations. My hope is that Karakhan’s voluntary
statement, unless he minimizes it in the note he is to send me, can
be used to satisfy my colleagues. It is on this I base my hope of an
early settlement of the difficulty.
6. I had a conference this morning with my British colleague who
has just returned to Peking for a few days and informed him of
my instructions on the subject and reported to him fully my
conversation with Karakhan. He expressed much gratification at

the prospect of a settlement. No other minister of the protocol
powers is in Peking.
7. As soon as I receive Karakhan’s written statement I will call a
meeting of the representatives of the protocol powers.
SCHURMAN

[Document 421]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China
(Schurman)
prospect of settlement which the Department would consider satisfactory. In
the light of the Department’s views (as expressed in its telegram No. 144,
denying or conditioning the transfer of the Russian Legation property to a
recognized Soviet representative, this Government would not feel justified
in authorizing you to associate yourself with any effort to stipulate
conditions precedent to the transfer to Karakhan. The necessities of the case
would appear to be satisfactorily met by his communicating as a voluntary
expression of his intentions a written statement of the assurances offered in
conversation with you, provided that such assurances are (as your telegram
leads the Department to hope) sufficiently definite to cover questions of
defence, taxation and municipal regulations of the Legation Quarter, not
only under present circumstances but also in the event that the Soviet
regime abandons Russian rights and interests under the Boxer Protocol as it
contemplates doing.

GREW

[Document 422]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
2. The diplomatic representatives of the eight protocol powers met here
today and I presented to them Karakhan’s formal note requesting that the
Russian Legation property and keys be handed over to him, as well as his
unsigned typewritten report of the substance of his conversation with me.
3. Nothing was said by Karakhan about the defense of the Diplomatic
Quarter.

The meeting lasted nearly three hours and the subject was considered from
every point of view. The result was embodied in the draft of a reply to be
made by me as dean to Karakhan which the diplomatic representatives were
first to telegraph to their Governments for approval. That draft is as follows:
“I have the honor to inform you that I have this day laid the
communication you addressed to me as dean on July 26, 1924,
before my colleagues, the diplomatic representatives of the
powers signatory to the protocol of 1901, and also informed them
that in the conversation of July 24 to which you refer you
informed me that the Soviet Government considered itself
actually to be a cosignatory of the aforesaid protocol.
In view of this circumstance and the consequence thereof,
namely, that the Soviet Government enjoys all the rights and is

[Document 423]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China
(Schurman)
principle, with the amendment suggested below, and you may so inform
your colleagues, it would, in view of the fact that this Government has not
recognized the Soviet regime, prefer that it should be signed by some other
representative of the Protocol Powers. Would it not therefore be practicable
for the note, mutatis mutandis, to be signed after your departure from
Peking by some other diplomatic representative of the Protocol Powers,
preferably the ranking diplomatic representative of a power which has
recognized the Soviet regime, and to be then despatched to Karakhan. The
Department is not informed of the exact date of your departure from Peking
but it assumes that you will be leaving within a day or two in order that you
may spend a few days in Shanghai before sailing.

You will readily appreciate that your action in signing a formal note of this
character addressed to the duly accredited Soviet Russian representative,
even though you do so in your capacity as dean of the Protocol Powers, and
not as the American Minister, might be construed as an act of recognition
and that those who would benefit from such an erroneous impression would
make no effort to discourage it. It is essential to avoid any such
contingency. As a further precaution, the Department suggests that the
following paragraph be added to the note and trusts that the representatives
of the Protocol Powers will acquiesce:
“It is, of course, understood that nothing in this note shall be
construed as constituting recognition of the regime known as the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics by any Protocol Power which
has not recognized that regime.”

Grew

[Document 424]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
approved the note as it stands. Objections are not anticipated from England
and Italy which have recognized the Soviet regime, nor from Spain which
generally follows others. Therefore, while sharing the Department’s feeling
as to the need of special precaution I respectfully recommend that the
Legation be authorized to omit the presentation to the representatives of the
protocol powers of the Department’s suggestion in the last paragraph of the
above-mentioned telegram, provided the question of such reservation is not
raised by any representative of the other five powers who have not
recognized the Soviet regime. The suggestion would involve delay and
presumably another reference to the home governments. I deem it desirable
from every point of view that the matter of the transfer of the Russian
Legation be disposed of as soon as practicable.

At conference of diplomatic representatives of protocol powers August 1st I
stated I was leaving Peking morning 13th and asked what should be done in
case note to Karakhan had not been sent before that date. It was agreed that
the note mutatis mutandis should be sent by the Italian Minister who in
absence of French Minister on leave follows me in order of seniority. This
arrangement accords completely with the views expressed by the
Department. And it will make my observance of the Department’s
instructions seem merely a natural outcome of the events themselves. It is
scarcely necessary to say that even if in the three days remaining before I
leave Peking I should be notified of the replies of England, Italy, and Spain
I will take no further action in the matter.

SCHURMAN

[Document 425]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China
(Schurman)
You are authorized to omit the suggested reservation contained in the
reservation is not raised by any representative of the other powers
concerned who have, or who have not, recognized the Soviet regime. If you
have reason to believe, however, that the suggested reservation would be
accepted by your interested colleagues without the delay incident to a
reference to their respective governments the Department considers that it
would still be advisable to propose the reservation. If this is not deemed
expedient you will endeavor to have the note amended so as to include the
following paragraph:
“I am to add on behalf of my American colleague, that his action
in acquiescing in the understanding embodied in this note in
nowise constitutes or implies recognition on the part of the
Government of the United States of the regime known as the
Union of Socialist Soviet Republics.”
In view of the fact that the note to Karakhan will be signed by the Italian
Minister instead of by yourself as Dean, and that certain changes in the text
must necessarily be made in consequence thereof, it is suggested that such
changes, in so far as they refer to your conversation of July 24 with
Karakhan and to the note received by you from him, should avoid, as far as
possible, the use of your name or title of American Minister, merely making
reference to such negotiations and correspondence taking place between
Karakhan and the “Dean of the Protocol Powers”.

Grew

[Document 426]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
1. Italy, Spain, and Great Britain having also agreed to draft note,
it was today decided at a meeting of representatives of protocol
powers to despatch it in original form with such verbal changes
[as] were made necessary by Dr. Schurman’s departure and
signature of note by Japanese Minister (not Italian Minister as
previously reported).
2. Alterations suggested in your 191, paragraph three, were also
made.
3. I sounded colleagues on suggestion made in your 183, August
6, 2 p.m.; found them all opposed and therefore dropped it.
omission] that other representatives were unwilling to accept it
without telegraphing to their governments to inquire whether the
latter also wished similar reservation made on their behalf. Other
representatives felt also that as far as they were concerned such
reservation was of doubtful value. I therefore agreed in order to
avoid delay and meet Department’s wishes, [apparent omission]
this statement in separate note referring to the other note and send
them both to Karakhan at the same time. Notes will be delivered
to Karakhan this afternoon and copies given to the press and to
the Chinese Foreign Office for information.

5. Persistent reports which I cannot yet confirm are reaching me
from reliable sources that prior to Karakhan’s conference with
Schurman he had exchanged notes with Koo definitely giving up
Russia’s extraterritorial rights, which of course would mean that
Russia could no longer consider herself a protocol power.
BELL

[Document 427]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
[Received 10: p.m.]

Japanese Minister to Karakhan, August 18. This morning’s newspapers
contain text of note which Karakhan is reported to have sent yesterday to
Japanese Minister.

“Mr. Minister: I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that I
do not consider possible to accept the note under date of August
18, 1924, which you presented me at the request of the American
Minister.

I really regret very much that you could not decline this American
commission at a time when Japan is herself engaged in
negotiations whose very object is to restore normal relations
between the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the Government of Japan. I hope however that if
and when the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics recognizes the
Government of Japan while Japan recognizes Government of the
Union, this will not be interpreted in the sense that the
Government of the Union will have recognized the bourgeois
capitalist [ic] regime of Japan, nor will [it] be taken to mean the
recognition by Japan of the socialistic regime of the dictatorship
of the proletariat. I may likewise express the hope that you have
no doubt as to the fact that the negotiations we are carrying on
with you at present are being conducted not between two regimes
but between the Government[s] of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and of Japan. This understanding may make it easier
for Your Excellency as it seems to me to explain to your

American colleague the limits of courtesy beyond [which] his fear
might lead him.

It should also be added for the information of Your Excellency’s
American colleague and for that matter of your other colleagues
who may have not had time yet, like the American Minister, to
formulate their anxiety that there does not exist in international
law and practice a method of restoration of diplomatic prerogative
[relations] between two governments by way of returning to one
of them a legation belonging to the latter government and situated
in the capital of a third power by the other of those two
governments which, but accidentally and without the consent of
the real owner, has in its [hands] the keys from the buildings of
such a legation.

Herewith I beg to return the above-mentioned note of August 18,
1924.

I avail myself of this opportunity to renew to you, Mr. Minister,
the assurance of my highest consideration. Signed L. Karakhan.”
The Bolshevik Rosta News Agency has also issued the following statement.
“In a conversation he had with a representative of the Soviet
Embassy the correspondent of the Rosta News Agency had the
following statement made to him.

The note which was returned to Mr. Yoshizawa by Mr. Karakhan
was written by the former at the request of the American Minister.
Mr. Karakhan has ho doubt that if Mr. Yoshizawa, who is now
engaged in negotiations with the Government of the Union, had
the right to refuse he would have declined to undertake the
ungrateful task of representing American interests before [in
regard to] the Soviet Government. The idiosyncrasy of the
American diplomacy has up till now been forcing and still forces
it today to act foolishly and [incorrectly] vis-à-vis the
Government of the Union. In this respect American diplomacy
differs widely from the American people which is endowed with

common sense, favorably distinguishing them even from other
nations. As for American diplomacy it is so afraid and has such a
hatred of the Soviet Union that in an official document presented
to the Soviet representative it cannot refrain from discourteous
formula[e].

It would be an ungrateful task to teach good manners and
politeness to the representatives of the present American
Government, it being, however, not so much a question of
politeness or courtesy as one of bitter hatred which some of the
elements now ruling in America feel towards the Soviet
Government. No wonder that in China the American diplomacy is
particularly sensitive with regard to the Soviet Union, for it is
here in China that America has more strongly and acutely than
other powers felt the blow which was dealt to her policy by the
sincere and straightforward policy of the Soviet Government.
Indeed the hypocrisy and Christian bigotry in which the
Americans enveloped their policy in China have now been fully
exposed in the eyes of the Chinese people. Much lustre has been
taken off from good words about the respect for and the rights of
the Chinese people since the Lincheng note, the threatening
speeches of the American Minister at Harbin and the appearance
and arbitrary actions of American warships in Chinese home
waters.

Of course the Americans who have made Mr. Yoshizawa write the
note which was returned today could be told: You do not wish to
recognize the regime existing in the Soviet Union? Well you
know that at any future time the Soviet Government does not at
all intend compelling you to do it. And they could also be told
that the American people will force them to recognize the
Government of the Union without any reservations. Then the
present rulers of America could also be told that the day relations
will be restored between America and the Union it will not in any
way mean that the Government of the Union will have to
recognize the regime which presently [at present] holds sway in
America—if of course this regime will still be existing at the

time. The regime of violence in China, the infringement of the
sovereignty of the Chinese people; the regime of the troops of the
Philippines; the regime of the most unashamed interference with
the affairs of the American Republics; the regime which has made
of a negro a dog whom anyone may [with impunity] kill; the
regime lastly which but quite recently has revealed itself in an
unutterably monstrous form of corruption, decay, pillaging of
state property—in which all take part whether senators, ministers
or judges; a regime under which the President has had to use
many an effort and much time to find an honest judge to
investigate the oil scandal, for every judge on whom his choice
fell happened himself to be involved in the scandal and the
robbing of state property.

It is to be hoped at least that the American Minister does not mean
to say that the powers which recognize the Washington
Government have also recognized all the above-enumerated
brilliant aspects of the American regime. And we certainly hope
that when we are going to resume relations with the American
Government the latter is not going to insist upon the recognition
of this regime on our part too. We have no doubt as to the fact that
the best part of the American people, that is its huge majority, are
against the policy of the present American Government with
regard to the Soviet Union; nor do we have any doubts that
today’s rulers of America know that their days are numbered and
that those who will come after [in] their place will—whoever they
may be—either by compulsion or their own free will, correct the
mistake[s] made with regard to the Soviet Union and would, we
[express the hope,] not only in regard to the Soviet Union but
[also] to other peoples and in particular the Chinese nation.”
I have just received call from Japanese Minister who incidentally ceased to
be dean last night on return to Peking of British Minister. He is deeply
offended at tone and substance of Karakhan’s note, particularly reference to
Government of Japan being in the midst of negotiations with Karakhan
regarding resumption of relations between two countries; feels this is an
uncalled-for affront to him and has telegraphed home for instructions as to

[Document 428]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
importance since the foregoing was sent.

Neither Japanese nor British Minister has returned Karakhan’s note of
August 19 while Karakhan has not replied to note of August 18 offering to
return Legation nor has he asked for keys. It is reported that he is
dissatisfied with reservations in third paragraph of latter note and has
telegraphed Moscow for instructions.

Russo-Japanese negotiations have made no advance and merely [nearly?]
broke down last week on the question of Saghalien.
BELL

[Document 429]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
instructions from Tokyo he is negotiating with Karakhan for the withdrawal
of the latter’s note of August 19th and the substitution of another the same
date which will be regarded as the original and which will omit the
statements objectionable to the Japanese Government. Note will, however,
undoubtedly return Japanese Minister’s note of August 18th containing our
reservation and will probably hold the same or other offensive language
concerning our Government as did the original.

If this takes place I think I should ask Japanese Minister not to address me
formally sending me copy of such a communication, as I do not think I
should receive such a note at the hands of the representative of any
government with which we maintain diplomatic relations. Otherwise I think
it best to let the matter drop, as Karakhan’s note will be addressed to
Japanese Minister and not to me.

Please instruct.

BELL

[Document 430]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
1. British representative as senior protocol representative has
received note dated yesterday from Karakhan which, after
acknowledging receipt of note of August 18th offering to return
Russian Legation (but without alluding to reasons given therein
for doing so) and after naming representatives to take over
Legation, continues:
2.

“At the same time I beg to inform Your Excellency that
I consider that this handing over is being effected in
view of the fact that the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics is the owner of the buildings of the former
Russian Legation. As regards the other considerations
laid down in the note of His Excellency the Japanese
Minister, under date of 18th instant, I feel it is my duty
to state that I cannot fully endorse all the said
considerations but that inasmuch as a coordination of
viewpoints preliminary to the handing over of the
Embassy would be in contradiction with the position of
the Soviet Government which I had the opportunity to
expound exhaustively in my conversation with the
American Minister, Mr. Schurman, on July 24 of this
year, I may however express my firm belief that the
existing differences will not prevent to establish a

[Document 431]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Bell)
Karakhan’s attitude towards the arrangements set forth in the note of August
18, the Department considers that the modus vivendi mentioned by him may
afford the means of arriving at a more definite understanding, and since it
appears from your telegram that it is the best that might well be hoped for
from Karakhan at the present moment you are advised that the Department
perceives no objection to the note as the basis of concluding such a modus
vivendi.

Department believes it unwise to engage in further negotiations on the
subject and that it is best to concur in opinion expressed by British Minister
as stated in paragraph 3 your 306.

HUGHES

[Document 432]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Bell)
transmitting the American declaration to Karakhan, was acting in his
capacity as Dean of the Protocol Powers, and not as Japanese Minister,
Department doubts the advisability of your formally requesting or pressing
him not to transmit to you a copy of Karakhan’s note of August 19 if he
desires to do so. While the Department hopes that Yoshizawa will not
transmit a copy of the note to you in its present form, it nevertheless feels
that if he should do so you would have no other recourse than to receive it.
Should the note be formally transmitted to you either by Yoshizawa or by
the British Minister as Dean, is the Department correct in assuming that
copies will also be sent to other representatives of the Protocol Powers?
While the Department trusts that the tone of the note, which was obviously
designed for propaganda purposes, may yet be modified in such a way as to
remove its offensiveness, it is anxious not to add to Yoshizawa’s
discomfiture or to embarrass the British Minister should this particular
phase of the matter be intrusted to him as Dean.

If note is transmitted to you simply file it as unworthy of further notice.
HUGHES

[Document 433]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
316. Your 205. Negotiations looking to withdrawal by Karakhan of his note
to Yoshizawa of August 19th having [failed?], Yoshizawa has addressed
Karakhan following note of which he has given me a copy. Note is dated
August 20th, and I understand it was only sent within last 48 hours.
“I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the
19th instant wherewith Your Excellency sent back the note which
I addressed you on the day [sic] at the request of the American
Chargé d’Affaires.

I regret to find your note under acknowledgment contains terms
which apparently are not calculated to conduce to the promotion
of international good understanding. It however seems neither
necessary nor useful to enter into discussion on these points. I
only desire to point out that my communication of August 18th
embodying the remarks of the American Chargé d’Affaires was
no more than in fulfillment of what I conceived and still conceive
to be my obligation and duty as senior representative of the
protocol powers and that it was in no way to be construed as
containing any insinuation against your Government or
institutions.

In these circumstances I feel constrained to decline to receive
back the note in question which as stated before was addressed to
Your Excellency in my capacity of senior representative of the
protocol powers at the specific request of the American Chargé
d’Affaires.”

Beu

[Document 434]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
following note August 30th:
“I have the honor to acknowledge that on the 29th instant Your
Excellency handed me your note with the note of August 18th
embodying the statement of the American Government, and
which I have already received once before, opposed [apposed?]
to it.

I take note with satisfaction of the statement made by Your
Excellency to the effect that it was only your obligation and duty
as senior representative [of] eight protocol powers, as to which
moreover I never had any doubts, [that made] Your Excellency
undertake the task of conveying to me such a statement of the
American Government.

However, I feel constrained to state that I cannot accept the
explanation of Your Excellency to the effect that the note in
question ‘was in no way to be construed as containing any
insignia [insinuation] against my Government or institution,’ and
that I still hold my view that the form of the statement made by
Your Excellency’s American colleague is neither proper nor
courteous for relations between two governments.
I may be allowed together with Your Excellency to express the
hope that the American Government will make no further
attempts at presenting me with a communication which I cannot

accept and which, as I already had the honor to remark, [is not]
supported by international law and practice.

Herewith I beg to enclose the note of August 18, 1924, which
Your Excellency Sent me a second time on the 29th instant.”
Yoshizawa, after consulting Netherlands Minister who has returned to
Peking and resumed duties as dean of the diplomatic corps, sent the
following reply to Karakhan yesterday:
“In acknowledging the receipt of your note of the 30th August I
have the honor to inform Your Excellency that your note under
acknowledgment together with its enclosure has been transmitted
to [His Excellency] the Netherlands Minister, the senior
representative of the protocol ministers.”
On learning today of this last exchange of notes I told the Japanese Minister
I considered he had done all that could be asked as a colleague and as senior
protocol minister and I begged that as far as I was concerned he would now
let the matter drop as I thought nothing was to be gained by his continuing
this controversy with Karakhan. He agreed and will take no further action.
BELL

[Document 435]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
that omission in his note of August 26th [25th] and [of] reference to
Russia’s being a protocol power was inadvertence and offered for [to] write
a supplementary note to be dated August 26th tacitly confirming his
statement to Dr. Schurman of July 24th, namely, “that the Government of
the [Union] of Soviet Socialist Republics considers itself as a circulatory
signatory [as a cosignatory] power to the final protocol of 1901.”
At the meeting on 5th all representatives were willing to answer this with a
simple acknowledgment except French Chargé d’Affaires who submitted
long draft reply restating our position that no future renunciation by Soviets
of their rights under the protocol could affect ours. Italian Minister
submitted this to Karakhan who was willing to accept it with slight
modifications. At the meeting today French Chargé d’Affaires said he
would have to telegraph Paris for permission to accept modifications, so
matter will drag on for several days longer.

BELL

[Document 436]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
accepted Karakhan’s note of August 26th, sent him our acknowledgment,
and he entered into possession of former Russian Legation noon today. He
will not occupy it for two or three weeks as it needs cleaning.
BELL

[Document 437]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Kellogg)
[Paraphrase]
163. 1. I have been informed today by the Chinese Minister that his
Government has instructed him to inquire regarding the intentions of the
American Government concerning the raising of its Peking Legation to the
rank of an Embassy, considering the probability of such action being taken
by other principal powers. Minister Sze added his private conjecture that
this inquiry is based on the expectation that the Soviet Union, which
recently has resumed diplomatic relations with the Chinese Government,
will appoint an Ambassador.
2. Please make a discreet effort to learn from the Foreign Office of the
Government to which you are accredited its intentions in this matter.
the Department was informed by the British Embassy86 that the British
Ambassador to Japan had obtained an assurance from the Japanese
Government that it would take no action of that nature without consulting
with the British Government. The British Embassy asked that the American
Government give a statement of its intentions. On May 11, 1921, the
Department answered86 that it did not feel that it was warranted in giving
any promise as to the attitude which might be taken by the President should
Congress indicate a desire to raise the rank of our Legation in China but
that the Executive did not intend to take or to recommend such action.
4. Repeat this telegram to Embassy in Paris as our no. 184. Indicate that the
third paragraph is only for confidential information.

[Document 438]
The Chargé in Japan (Caffery) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
during an informal conversation whether he had received any information
from Peking with respect to the possibility that any of the principal powers
would change the Legations in China to Embassies.

In reply Shidehara said that he had not received any information on the
subject from the Japanese Legation and that for this reason he had not given
any thought to the matter. Shidehara added that from the standpoint of his
Government there would be, in any event, obvious difficulties involved, as,
in the first place, the question would have to be presented to the Diet, and,
secondly, next year’s budget had been voted already. He told me, however,
that he would look into the matter and that if any change in the status of the
Legation was contemplated by his Government, he would inform me.
CAFFERY

[Document 439]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
[Received June 19—2 p.m.]

Foreign Office by the Chief of the Asiatic Bureau that the French
Government would definitely be opposed to changing its Legation in China
to an Embassy. …
HERRICK

[Document 440]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Kellogg) to the Secretary of
State
that it has been formally approached by the Chinese Chargé d’Affaires in
the matter of raising the Legation at Peking to the rank of an Embassy and
that it would be glad to deal with this question harmoniously with the views
of the United States. I am now in receipt of an informal note from
Waterlow90 enclosing a draft of a communication which the Foreign Office
proposes to send to the Chinese Chargé d’Affaires but stating that he prefers
not to send it without first communicating its actual terms to me. He asks
that it be cabled to Washington with the object of obtaining your views as
soon as possible. Waterlow further states that he proposes to instruct the
British representatives at Paris, Rome and Tokyo to inform the
Governments to which they are accredited of the British Government’s
views and to urge them to reply on the lines of the draft which reads as
follows:
“Chinese Chargé d’Affaires. Sir: With reference to the
communication which you made at this Department on the 18th
ultimo, I have the honor to inform you that His Majesty’s
Government see no reason why the appointment at Peking of a
diplomatic representative of the Soviet Union with the rank of
Ambassador which is understood to be impending should be
made the occasion of their considering any proposal to change the
status of belligerents [sic] either of His Majesty’s representative at
Peking or of the representative of the Chinese Government in
London.”

[Document 441]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Kellogg)
Office my appreciation of its action in consulting with us as to the position
to be taken in reference to the suggested raising to ambassadorial grade of
the Legations at Peking, and say that I share the views of the British
Government and propose to communicate to the Chinese Chargé d’Affaires,
in the same informal way in which the Minister presented the question to
me, my feeling that there is no occasion for any alteration in the status of
diplomatic representation between the United States and China.
Repeat to Paris for information as Department’s 219.

HUGHES

[Document 442]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Kellogg)
your communication to the Foreign Office as to my concurrence in its views
on the question of raising the rank of the Legations at Peking it seems
desirable that you should take occasion to discuss very frankly with the
appropriate officer the situation created by China’s receiving an
Ambassador from the Soviets.
the Foreign Office that it might be possible by agreement among the
principal Powers to ignore the Soviet Ambassador as ex-officio Dean of the
Diplomatic Body. It seems doubtful whether, in view of his appointment by
a Government recognized by China itself and by several of the principal
Powers concerned, his status as the ranking member of the Diplomatic
Body could be disputed or ignored.

The Diplomatic Body in Peking has of course built up for itself a wholly
unique character in the nature of a continuing Conference of the Treaty
Powers, representing their collective rights and interests, and exercising the
functions of an organized cooperation for the purposes of those foreign
rights and interests which the Powers have heretofore shared.
It is understood that by its recent Treaty arrangements with China the Soviet
régime has renounced such rights and concessions as the Powers have
heretofore enjoyed in common; and that its representatives have moreover
openly avowed their antagonism towards the whole system of foreign rights
established in favor of the Treaty Powers. If this be the case, a
representative of the Soviet, whether as Dean or otherwise, could not be

expected to cooperate with his colleagues for those purposes for which the
Diplomatic Body exists. On the other hand, his exclusion from that body
would appear inevitably to force him into the position of encouraging and
cooperating with the Chinese Government in opposition to what would be
termed the “pretensions” of the Treaty Powers—an alternative which would
be particularly dangerous to the just rights of the Powers at this time when
the disintegration of governmental authority in China has already resulted
in so greatly impairing the sense of obligation and of responsibility.

It would seem that the inevitable recognition of a Soviet Ambassador as a
member of the Diplomatic Body must tend to paralyse the activity of that
organization as an instrumentality for the expression of the collective
interests of the Powers, and it is to be anticipated that the Diplomatic Body,
in so far as concerns its present peculiar character and functions, will fall
into desuetude. It will be unfortunate to lose the benefit of the system of
cooperation embodied in that organization; but at a time when cooperation
among the Powers is more than ever necessary, it is to be hoped that this
loss will be compensated by a cooperation suited to the exigency among the
particular nations interested in such cases as from time to time may arise.
A related question concerns the transfer to the Soviet Ambassador of the
property of the Russian Legation in the Legation Quarter. It would seem an
untenable position for the other Legations which have had this property in
custody to claim a right to deny or to condition its transfer, upon his
demand, to the person recognized by China as the duly accredited
diplomatic representative of Russia. On this point, however, I should be
happy to learn the views of the British Government, particularly in
reference to the possibility that the occupation of the Russian Legation by
the representatives of the Soviet might have the result of impairing the
defensibility of the Legation Quarter for which provision is made by the
Boxer Protocol.

You will of course bear in mind that this Government, while not itself
considering it advisable or feasible to enter into diplomatic relations with

the Soviet regime, desires to stand aloof from any question of the
relationships of other Governments with the Soviets.
Repeat to Paris for information as Department’s 220.
HUGHES

220.

[Document 443]
Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Grew) of a
Conversation with the Chinese Chargé (Yung Kwai)
[WASHINGTON,] July 10, 1924.

I asked Mr. Yung Kwai to call and with reference to the Minister’s talk with
the Secretary on June 14, in which the Minister informally inquired whether
this government would be willing to raise its representation at Peking to the
rank of an Embassy, I told the Chargé, informally, that this government did
not feel that there was occasion for any alteration in the status of our
diplomatic representation in Peking.

[Document 444]
The Chargé in Japan (Caffery) to the Secretary of State
following written statement this afternoon:
“The Japanese Government attaching great importance to their
relations with China have the intention of agreement by [to?] the
exchange of Ambassadors between Japan and China. Having
regard, however, to practical considerations, more particularly in
relation to budget, they are not yet in a position finally to
determine the date for effecting such exchange.

Should other powers interested in China be disposed to agree to
the course indicated the Japanese Government propose that the
powers so disposed will jointly inform the Chinese Government
of that decision in principle, with necessary reserves respecting
the date for the actual exchange of Ambassadors.

It is hoped that such date will be fixed by the powers upon
previous communication with one another and that the powers
may find it possible to raise simultaneously their respective
Legations at Peking to Embassies. So far as the Japanese
Government are concerned it is their present intention to proceed
to the establishment of an Embassy at Peking on or about April
1st, 1925, provided that the necessary requirements under
Japanese laws be completed in that time”.

Baron Shidehara stated British, French, Italian Governments also being
informed but their [this?] information not being transmitted to China until

reply of four other interested Governments to this communication received
here.

He added that Japanese Government felt that there was strong sentiment in
the Diet calling for this gesture on the part of Japan.
Peking informed.

CAFFERY

[Document 445]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Kellogg) to the Secretary of
State
248. I am informed by a note from the Foreign Office that the Government
has replied to the Chinese Government in accordance with the proposed
The note to me adds:
“His Majesty’s Government regard it as a matter of the utmost
importance in the interest of international solidarity in China that
the powers should act in concert and I trust therefore that Your
Excellency’s Government will concur in the view of His
Majesty’s Government in this matter and that they will reply to
the suggestion of the Chinese Government in a similar sense.
I am addressing a similar communication to the Japanese, French
and Italian Ambassadors at once.”
Copy to European Information Center.

KELLOGG

[Document 446]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Japan (Caffery)
Shidehara that this Government has indicated to China that it sees no
occasion for any change in the status of its diplomatic representation to

[Document 447]
The Chargé in Japan (Caffery) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
communicated orally the Department’s message to Baron Shidehara and he
was plainly much concerned over it. He stated that Japan had not the least
desire “to steal a march on the other powers” but that on the contrary she
was only desirous of acting in harmony with them in this matter; that it
seemed that the other powers had acted without waiting to hear Japan’s
opinion on the subject; that he understood that the British reply, of the same
tenor as ours, had been sent to Peking on the 11th instant. He asked me if I
knew when our reply had been sent and I said that I did not, whereupon he
remarked that if not considered indiscreet he would be interested in
knowing. He then proceeded at length to recount the reasons why the
Japanese Government felt it should raise the rank of its mission at Peking:
that public opinion calls for it; that there had already been various
interpellations in that connection in the Diet and there had been a good deal
of criticism in the House of Peers against the Government for not acting
sooner; that the vernacular press had been calling upon the Cabinet to
demonstrate in some concrete way their friendship for China; that he could
not now say to the Diet that the Government was unable to act, as the other
great powers did not wish it; he emphasized the point that the Japanese
Government had as yet made no reply to the Chinese Government in spite
of the latter’s reiterated representations and had no intention of acting
before receiving the replies of powers to his communication of Friday last.
He asked me repeatedly, “Will Americans’ interests be injured if Japan
pilots move? How would your Government construe it?”

I replied that I had no information as to the official attitude of the
Department of State other than that in the Department’s telegram of July
12th; however that I personally believed any action of any power at Peking
tending to break up the international solidarity there was to be deplored;
that I believed that isolated action in this case on the part of the Japanese
would tend in that direction.

During the past few weeks the British and French Ambassadors here both
have had several conversations with Baron Shidehara on this subject and I
understand that yesterday the British Ambassador took occasion to make
some remarks to him in that connection similar to my own mentioned
above.

CAFFERY

[Document 448]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Japan (Caffery)
somewhat disturbed by the apparent feeling on the part of Baron Shidehara
that this Government has ignored his views in the matter of raising the
status of Legations in China. There was certainly no such intention,
however, and I cannot but feel that that impression on his part and the
somewhat difficult situation out of which it arises result from causes over
which this Government had no control.

From the time when it was first suggested, over a month ago, this
Government has considered that the Chinese proposal was particularly
inopportune at a time when the authority of the Peking Government and its
ability to live up to its responsibilities to foreign interests have so far
diminished. Before rejecting the Chinese proposal, however, the
Department took occasion to ascertain whether the Governments of Japan,
France and Great Britain entertained contrary views. The inquiries then
made indicated that France and Great Britain were actively opposed to the
p.m.) had no predilection for the Chinese proposal (which would in fact
involve practical difficulties), although the Foreign Office was prepared to
advise you in the event of any alteration in what appeared to be a negative
attitude on its part. The Department therefore had no anticipation of the
9 p.m.), and had in the meanwhile felt that it was acting with due
consideration for the views of other interested Powers when, on July 10, it
had advised the Chinese Chargé d’Affaires, in the same informal manner in
which the proposal had been suggested four weeks earlier by the Chinese
Minister, that it saw no occasion for any change in the status of its
diplomatic representation in China.

It is very much to be regretted if the Department’s refusal of the Chinese
proposal occurred so shortly before the Japanese Government’s suggestion
of a contrary course of action as to give rise to a question of the possibility
of our having acted in disregard of Japan’s suggestion.

You may explain the matter fully and frankly to Baron Shidehara.
GREW

[Document 449]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 22, 1924—noon.
house with Koo yesterday he told me that Japanese Government regarded
favorably the idea of raising Peking Legation to Embassy and that Italian
Government had replied they would give the matter careful consideration.
In reply to my inquiry Koo stated that Karakhan had been appointed
Ambassador and would be received by the President in a few days.
SCHURMAN

[Document 450]
The Chargé in Japan (Caffery) to the Secretary of State
situation to Baron Shidehara who said that he appreciated the Department’s
attitude. He asked me if I thought that the powers who had already notified
China of their decision in the premises would be disposed to say further to
the Chinese authorities that they did not believe that the question of raising
the rank of the diplomatic missions at Peking should be taken up so long as
the present unsatisfactory conditions prevailing in China continued, and he
asked me if I would transmit his informal suggestion to the Department. I
replied that I could not answer his question but was disposed to transmit his
question.

He said that the Chinese Chargé d’Affaires here had told him that the
Chinese Government was very much disappointed with the reply of the
other powers and was pressing him for the Japanese answer which had not
yet been given. He said that he would now send him a written reply which
Would refer to the opening paragraph of the original Chinese memorandum
which had called attention to the recent decision for an exchange of
Ambassadors between China and Soviet Russia; in this connection he
would state that Japan could not allow her action in the premises to be
influenced by that of Russia, that the Japanese Government was still
studying the matter and would let China have a reply in due course.
However I am still of the opinion that the Japanese Government for reasons
hitherto given has not yet changed its decision to send an Ambassador to
China some time next year.

CAFFERY

[Document 451]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Japan (Caffery)
130. Embassy at London is being instructed96 to discuss with Foreign
whether Shidehara’s suggestion of July 22 has also been conveyed to the

[Document 452]
Memorandum by the Acting Chief of the Division of Far Eastern
Affairs, Department of State (Lockhart)
[WASHINGTON,] July 31, 1924.

Mr. Butler Wright telephoned me today stating that Signor Rosso of the
Italian Embassy had today informed him that the Embassy had received
information from Rome to the effect that the Italian Government had
decided not to raise its Legation at Peking to the rank of an Embassy, and
that the decision had been arrived at for reasons of economy. Mr. Wright
suggested that this information be made of record in order that it might be
considered in connection with the general question of raising the American
Legation at Peking to an Embassy.

F. P. L[OCKHART]

[Document 453]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Kellogg) to the Secretary of
State
[Paraphrase]
302. I have had a conversation at the Foreign Office based on Department’s
Foreign Office is telegraphing the British Ambassador in Japan to suggest
to the Japanese Government that it would be well for the great powers to
inform the Chinese Government that while there is disorder and disunion in
China and while adequate protection is not given to the rights of foreign
nationals they are not willing to change the rank of their missions in China.
The Foreign Office is authorizing the British Ambassador in Japan to say
that instructions will be sent to the British Minister in China to act with the
Japanese Minister there if the Japanese will instruct their Minister in this
sense. It is the hope of the Foreign Office that similar action at Tokyo will
be taken by the Department of State.

Copy of this telegram has been sent to European Information Center.
KELLOGG

[Document 454]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Japan (Caffery)
If you have not already done so on the basis of the Department’s telegram
would not be adverse from acting concurrently with the British, French and
Japanese Governments in communicating to the Chinese Foreign Office an
unreadiness to make the proposed change in the missions at Peking while
disunion and disorder prevail in China and while the rights of foreign
nationals continue to be so inadequately safeguarded as at present.
Nevertheless if you are convinced, after talking with Shidehara, that he will
not reconsider his unwillingness to accept the foregoing formula definitely
suggested to him by the British Ambassador, the Department is disposed not
to press further consideration of that specific suggestion, and you may so
advise your British colleague. You may also say to him that you are
informing Baron Shidehara that this Government is prepared, however, to
instruct its representative at Peking to inform the Chinese Government in
the sense informally suggested by Baron Shidehara as reported in your
taking like action.

The Department appreciates the somewhat difficult situation in which
Baron Shidehara apparently finds himself, and it would wish to adjust itself
to his convenience, but the British, French and Italian Governments, as well
as this Government, having definitely decided not to raise the status of their
missions at Peking, the Department is strongly of the opinion that there
should be unity of action in this matter and that the Japanese Minister for
Foreign Affairs, if he is not disposed to follow the suggestion of the British

[Document 455]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Kellogg)
p.m.

Tokyo:
“This morning I discussed informally with Baron Shidehara along
the matter of the status of diplomatic mission at Peking and he
told me that after full consideration the Japanese Government had
decided that instead of making a communication to the Chinese
Government as had been suggested to postpone making a definite
reply to the Chinese proposal until the beginning of next year
1925; that in the meantime he would let his note to the Chinese
Chargé dAffaires of July 25th stand (see my telegram 200 July
he will send reply that the matter was still under consideration;
that during the month of December next he would probably
propose to the powers involved a reconsideration of the question;
that however for domestic reasons it is necessary for the Japanese
Government to include in the budget estimate for the fiscal year
beginning April 1st 1925 an item for an Embassy at Peking
although this would not necessarily mean that the government had
decided to change the status of the mission.

My opinion is that Baron Shidehara means during December next
to suggest to the powers that the status of their diplomatic

[Document 456]
The British Embassy to the Department of State
AIDE MÉMOIRE
His Majesty’s Government have had under careful consideration the
question of taking some action in regard to the decision of the Japanese
Government to raise their Legation at Peking to the status of an Embassy.
It appears to His Majesty’s Government that some attempt is now being
made by the various conflicting groups in China to arrive at some form of
cooperation which may emerge into an effective Government and His
Majesty’s Government feel that any action which might discourage such
efforts would be unfortunate. Inasmuch, however, as the present Provisional
Government in China includes a strong element favourable to Japan, it is
thought that the present moment is unfavourable for asking the Japanese
Government to cancel their decision regarding a Japanese Embassy at
Peking. On the other hand, it is thought that if the situation in China does in
fact show definite improvement the Powers might, in due time and acting in
concert, use the proposal to raise the status of their Missions in China to
Embassies as an inducement to persuade the Chinese Government to press
on with the re-organization of the Administration and to afford effective
protection to foreign interests in China. To take such joint action might
more easily enable the Powers to exercise their influence in China for the
general benefit in the future. For these reasons His Majesty’s Government
would welcome the postponement of the actual execution of the decision of
the Japanese Government to raise their Legation at Peking to an Embassy.
In making this suggestion His Majesty’s Government are not in any way
binding themselves to appoint an Ambassador at Peking under any
circumstances, but their idea is that it would be unfortunate not to take
advantage of any means of joint influence such as the execution of the
above suggestion would offer.

If the United States Govermnent agree and will send instructions to the
United States Ambassador at Tokio to approach the Japanese Government
unofficially in the above sense, with a view to the postponement of the
execution of their decision in this matter, His Majesty’s Government will be
happy to instruct their Representative at Tokio to support the action of his
United States Colleague.

[ WASHINGTON ,] December 3, 1924.

[Document 457]
The Department of State to the British Embassy
AIDE-MÉMOIRE
With reference to the Aide-Mémoire which was left with the Secretary of
State on December 3, 1924, stating that the British Government would
welcome the postponement of the actual execution of the decision of the
Japanese Government to raise its Legation at Peking to the status of an
Embassy, and suggesting that, if the situation in China shows a definite
improvement, the Powers might, in due time and acting in concert, use the
proposal to raise the status of their Missions in China to Embassies as an
inducement to the Chinese Government to press on with the reorganization
of the Administration and to afford effective protection to foreign interests,
the British Embassy is informed that the Department of State at once caused
inquiry to be made by the American Ambassador in Tokyo concerning the
present status of this matter. He has now informed the Department that,
although the Japanese Government, for domestic reasons, found it
necessary to include in the budget for the fiscal year beginning April 1,
1925, an item for an Embassy at Peking, this does not necessarily mean that
the Government has decided to change the status of the Mission; and that,
although there has been considerable speculation on the subject, both in the
vernacular press and among the public in general, the Foreign Office has as
yet made no public declaration in the premises. The Ambassador is of the
opinion that the action thus far taken may be construed to indicate not a
present intention on the part of the Japanese Government to raise the status
of its Mission in Peking, but a desire to be in a position to make such a
change during the next Japanese fiscal year in case it should then deem it
expedient to do so.

In view of the present indeterminate status of the matter, and of the
unlikelihood of the Japanese Government proceeding further in it without
consultation with the governments of the other Powers principally
interested, it would appear that the present moment is somewhat premature

to approach the Japanese Government in regard to it. Should the British
Government, however, in the light of the situation as known to it, feel that
there is occasion for urgency in dealing with the question, the Department
of State would be glad to give further consideration to the matter upon
being so informed.

[ WASHINGTON ,] December 17, 1924.

[Document 458]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, February 28, 1924—noon.
66. Karakhan seriously intended to go to Canton but the trip was suddenly
canceled, probably because the Chinese Government used its influence
against his going. The two parties have since been conducting negotiations
with more hope. The Chinese wanted settlement of outstanding questions to
precede recognition, while Karakhan demanded just the opposite. They are
proceeding now on the basis of a new formula, which is that the
establishment of principles for the settlement of their national differences
shall come first, then China shall recognize the Soviet Union, and after that
the difficulties between the two countries will be actually adjusted.
The problem of the Chinese Eastern Railway is the one fundamental
obstacle. China wishes to gain ownership by purchase before the date fixed
in the original agreement. The Chinese are prepared to accept in the
meantime cooperative management on a 50–50 plan. The Soviet Union is
holding out for Russian rights in accordance with the provisions of the
agreement.

Karakhan and the Japanese Minister here are also holding conversations.
SCHURMAN

[Document 459]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
76. My telegram February 28, noon. C. T. Wang, Director of the
Commission on Sino-Russian Affairs, presented to the Cabinet on March 8
a long report regarding his negotiations with Karakhan. This report has been
discussed since by the Cabinet in long sessions. I had an intimate after-
dinner talk with Yen on March 10 and a similar conversation with Koo on
March 11. I have also talked with others who are close to Karakhan. The
following is the situation:
1. China has been affected to a marked degree by British
recognition of the Soviet Union.
2. Public opinion, so far as it exists in China, has not been hostile
at any time to recognition. Forty-seven professors in the National
University of Peking quite recently petitioned the Cabinet in favor
of immediate recognition. This has stimulated and encouraged the
Cabinet members to go ahead with recognition, for this is a
country where scholars always have exerted a great influence on
the Government and continue to do so, though to a lessened
degree.
3. The Chinese do not want to be among the last to recognize the
Soviet Union and specifically they do not want to be behind the
Japanese.
4. Karakhan has been exceedingly conciliatory according to all
the information I have received.

5. The Cabinet approved in substance Wang’s report which is now
before the President. The Cabinet will probably consider it again
this week.
6. The present agreement is preliminary and only lays down the
general lines for the final settlement. After recognition detailed
agreements are to be signed.
7. Apparently agreement has been reached on the following
points: reestablishment of full diplomatic relations between China
and Russia; formal cancellation by Russia of extraterritoriality;
abrogation of old treaties; return of Boxer Indemnity; Russian
[recognition] that Mongolia is part of China; withdrawal of all
Russian influence from Mongolia, determination of frontiers;
drafting of new commercial agreement; drafting of new rules for
the navigation of the Sungari and Amur Rivers.
8. The chief difficulty has always been the Chinese Eastern
Railway. Apparently, however, the general lines of a settlement
have been agreed upon. Russia declares that the title to the
Chinese Eastern belongs to China and gives up all claims to
sovereignty in the Railway Zone. The Chinese may take over the
Chinese Eastern by paying for it earlier than the time fixed in the
1896 agreement, which was to be 40 years from that date. Russia
is to share equally in the management in the meantime. Probably
this will be accomplished by Russia’s merely replacing the Russo-
Asiatic Bank in its relation to the railway.
9. The purchase price for the Chinese Eastern is to be fixed later.
Russia wants China to pay the original cost. Yen told me that
Karakhan put this at 1,100,000,000 gold rubles. This figure
includes the cost of building the South Manchuria Railway, said
to be 400,000,000 rubles. This would make 700,000,000 rubles
for the Chinese Eastern alone. Yen thought that the railway could
be reproduced today for not more than half that amount.
10. Karakhan probably foresees that it will be a generation or
more before the Chinese treasury bills to be given in payment for

the Chinese Eastern are redeemed and is willing to trust to
influence and time for [Russia?] to gain dominant control in effect
through China’s [Russians?] 50-percent share in the management,
or it may be that the Soviet Union already cherishes an alliance or
entente with China. I do not see in any case how Russia can get
along without the Chinese Eastern for transporting troops, etc.
11. It may be predicted that China will soon recognize the Soviet
Union unless some difficulty arises not anticipated at present by
either side. …
SCHURMAN

[Document 460]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
1. French Minister warned Minister for Foreign Affairs afternoon
12th against endangering French rights and interests of Russo-
Asiatic Bank in respect of Chinese Eastern Railway by
recognition of Soviet Russia for which, as he added, the liability
might prove embarrassing to Chinese finances.
2. I am reliably informed that Japanese are opposing recognition
not only in Peking but especially in Mukden. If the Peking and
Moscow governments get together, the position of Chang Tso-lin
who now practically controls the Chinese Eastern Railway would
be seriously [apparent omission].
3. Raindre of Russo-Asiatic Bank, who was already much
depressed by his Harbin experiences and especially by the
discovery that Ostroumoff had given in [sic] his adherence to
Soviet Russia and who is now greatly disturbed by the prospect of
the elimination of the bank through Chinese recognition of
Russia, intimated to me today that the French Minister would
come to me with the draft of a joint note to the Chinese
Government for the protection of the bank which Raindre hoped I
would be able to sign along with Japanese Minister, though in
view of British recognition of Russia it was not believed our
British colleague could also join. I read in reply Washington
resolution on the Chinese Eastern Railway9 and expressed the
opinion that it did not warrant me in taking such a step and that I
should have to consult my Government. I also had in mind

[Document 461]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
adopted Karakhan-Wang agreement. Cabinet intimates in [apparent
omission] that the hitch is over Mongolia but political and personal rivalries
in the Government probably more potent. From best available Soviet
sources it is learned Karakhan has placed time limit on negotiations which
is to expire March 19th. Koo confirms this confidentially to the extent of
saying there was a time limit.

SCHURMAN

[Document 462]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Received March 21—10 a.m.]
1p.m.
1. Koo told me 19th immediately after expiration of Karakhan’s
time limit that latter had wrong idea in regard to finality of
agreements between him and Wang, since these had to be
approved by the Government before ratification. Cabinet was
considering them when Karakhan fixed time limit. This has made
situation more difficult. But as Karakhan had declared his object
was to establish friendly relations with China, Koo could not see
that any other way than diplomacy was open to him.
2. Chinese Government’s self-respect compelled them to ignore
Karakhan’s time limit. Whether Karakhan imagined he could rush
Chinese diplomacy or foresaw some eventual advantage in
breaking off negotiations, is not clear. He professed to believe that
Wang fully represented Chinese Government and claimed that it
disavowed his official signature. Koo now explains that Wang has
no such authority—Wang himself maintains silence. Doubtless
Wang was ambitious to play the leading part in bringing about
recognition of Russia.
time limit and continue negotiations. Karakhan declined to do so
or to transmit such request to his Government.
4. This morning’s papers publish long letter from Karakhan to
Wang, dated 19th, justifying both of them and indicting the

Chinese Government especially for its subserviency to the
imperialistic powers (who hold it in servitude) in regard to
everything affecting Soviet Russia. Letter says:
5.

“Chinese Government was informed exactly of the
course of negotiations including all the details and the
Chinese delegate was acting with the full approval of
his Government. However, suddenly, on the eve of the
signing on March 12th an event took place which
turned upside down all the work done theretofore; on
the 12th instant France presented to the Chinese
Government a warning and threatening note. This is the
undeniable cause of the situation created. There are
some other powers that have also conveyed a warning
to China, but they did not do it in such an open way as
France which of all the powers of the world is the one
most hostile to us. … Agreement gives full satisfaction
to the national and state interests of China in a measure
which will never be filled voluntarily towards China by
any other power. Chinese Government would certainly
be most happy and thankful to any third power which
would accord but a tenth part of the respect for China’s
sovereignty [rights] and the national demands of the
Chinese people embodied in the agreements signed on
March 14th. … It suffices to point out our abandonment
of the right of consular jurisdiction, of special rights
and privileges relative to concessions, of the Boxer
Indemnity. In vain did China strive at Versailles and
Washington to get free of the humiliating fetters bound
[with these] privileges. China got a promise at
Washington that commission would be created to
discuss the question of extraterritorial rights. However,
until today this commission has not been created yet,
for France is against it. … At Washington it was
promised to China that the customs tariffs would be

raised, but up to the present time this pledge has not
been redeemed and yet in the agreements of March 14
we refuse to force upon China commercial and customs
agreements and we establish in this matter the principle
of equality and reciprocity. … With regard to the
Chinese Eastern Railway, we have given more to the
Chinese Government than it could in fairness demand.
The Chinese Government is satisfied with our fairness
and yet it passes over in silence its attainments in this
matter.”
6. In concluding, letter declares Russian Government will not
renew discussions and will not hold itself bound by the conditions
contained in the agreements signed on March 14, and will reserve
full liberty of action with regard to future agreements with China,
and “wishes to warn that henceforth the Chinese Government can
resume negotiations only after it will have unconditionally and
without any agreements established official normal relations with
the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.”
SCHURMAN

[Document 463]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
following Presidential mandate dated March 20 has just been received:
“Sino-Russian negotiations are very important. Since Dr. C. T.
Wang has been in charge, although his ideas and those of the
Russian representative have been gradually coming closer and
closer, the conditions of the agreement have not yet been
completely settled. It is necessary to charge the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs with responsibility for taking over this matter and
carrying on discussions as rapidly as possible with the Russian
representative in order that the responsibility be not divided.”
SCHURMAN

[Document 464]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 24, 1924—noon.
signed by Karakhan and Wang which provides in respect to Chinese Eastern
Railway the following:
1. Railway is a purely commercial enterprise and with the
exception of matters pertaining to its business operations “all
other matters affecting the rights of the national and the local
governments of the Republic of China … shall be administered
by the Chinese authorities.”
2. Russia “agrees to the redemption by the Chinese Government
with Chinese capital of the Chinese Eastern Railway.”
3. Russia “agrees to be responsible for the entire claims of the
shareholders, bondholders and creditors [of] the Chinese Eastern
Railway incurred prior to the revolution of March 9, 1917.”
4. Russia and China mutually agree that the future of the Chinese
Eastern Railway shall be determined by them “to the exclusion
[of] any third party or parties.”
5. Russia and China “agree to draw up an arrangement for the
provisional management of the Chinese Eastern Railway.”
6. Until the final settlement the rights of the two Governments
arising out of the contract of 1896 “which do not conflict with the
present agreement and with the agreement for the provisional

management of the said railway and which do not prejudice
China’s right of sovereignty, shall be maintained.”
According to circular telegram sent out by Cabinet only the following three
matters remain in dispute, namely, China’s demand for cancellation treaties
between Soviet and Outer Mongolia in which latter is considered as
independent country, China’s demand for immediate withdrawal of Russian
troops from Mongolia, Chinese refusal to grant Russian demand that
Russian properties such as churches and immovable property should be
handed over to the Russian Government.

SCHURMAN

[Document 465]
The French Embassy to the Department of State
undated
[Translation ]
By its charter, approved by the Russian Government in 1910, the Russo-
Asiatic Bank derives its legal status of successor to the Russo-Chinese
Bank.

By the provisions of paragraph one of this charter the Russo-Chinese Bank
with which the Banque du Nord combines assumes the new name Russo-
Asiatic Bank, the whole of the assets and liabilities of the Russo-Chinese
Bank and of the Banque du Nord being considered as transferred to the
Russo-Asiatic Bank from the date of the publication of the said charter in
the bulletin of laws.

The American Government acknowledged the Russo-Asiatic Bank to
possess the status of stockholder of the Chinese Eastern Railway by joining
in July and August, 1923, in the action taken by the British, Japanese, and
French Governments for the protection of the land department of the
railway from threatened seizure by the Chinese authorities of Manchuria.
It was in the capacity of representative of the stockholders of the railway
that the general manager of the Russo-Asiatic Bank induced the consuls at
Harbin to place their seals on the title deeds of the company. In the joint
note sent on August 11 to the Chinese Government by the Ministers of the
United States, Great Britain, Japan, and France, the same capacity is
officially acknowledged as being vested in the general manager of the
Russo-Asiatic Bank.

The question at this juncture is not to oppose the conclusion of a Sino-
Russian agreement but to bring the Chinese Government, which is

[Document 466]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
Washington presented April 2 an informal note to the Department stating
that the object of the French warning to China was not to oppose the
conclusion of a Sino-Russian agreement but to induce the Chinese
Government “to refuse to deal with [in] this matter with the Soviet
Government without having made a formal reservation of the rights of
foreign stockholders and creditors of the Railway Company. Resolution No.
XIII of the Washington Conference has for its very object the protection of
these rights.”
Resolution XIII clearly imposes upon China the responsibility for
“performance or non-performance of the obligations towards the
stockholders, bondholders and creditors of the Chinese Eastern Railway
Company which the Powers deem to result from the contracts under which
the railroad was built,” et cetera.

The Department considers that while that Resolution must be upheld, this
Government cannot intervene on that basis expressly in behalf of the
reorganized Russo-Asiatic Bank unless and until its legal identity with the
original Russo-Asiatic Bank shall have been established.

In order to avoid the possibility of any misunderstanding on the part of the
Chinese, you should not join with the representatives of France or other
countries in protests against China’s recent negotiations with Russia; but
you may send to the Chinese Foreign Office a separate note recalling that
China’s responsibility as trustee under the terms of Washington Conference
Resolution XIII (quoting the Resolution) is an obligation that is not to be
ignored or unilaterally invalidated by China in the course of any
negotiations with other parties regarding the railway. This note should avoid

[Document 467]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, May 5, 1924.

[Received June 10.]

No. 2242
SIR: I have the honor to transmit herewith enclosed a copy of a note which I
addressed to the Minister for Foreign Affairs on the 3rd instant regarding
the Chinese Eastern Railway pursuant to the instructions contained in your
I have sent copies of this note to the British, French and Japanese Ministers
for their information.

I have [etc.]

JACOB GOULD SCHURMAN
[Enclosure]
The American Minister (Schurman) to the Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs (Wellington Koo)
PEKING, May 3, 1924.

No. 810
YOUR EXCELLENCY: With regard to the negotiations which I understand are taking
place between the Government of the Republic of China and the Soviet
Government, I am directed by my Government to recall to Your
Excellency’s attention the Thirteenth Resolution adopted by the Conference
on the Limitation of Armament at Washington at its Sixth Plenary Session,
February 4, 1922, which reads as follows:

“The powers other than China, in agreeing to the Resolution
regarding the Chinese Eastern Railway, reserve the right to insist
hereafter upon the responsibility of China for performance or
non-performance of the obligations towards the foreign
stockholders, bondholders and creditors of the Chinese Eastern
Railway Company which the Powers deem to result from the
contracts under which the Railroad was built and the action of
China thereunder and the obligations which they deem to be in
the nature of a trust resulting from the exercise of power by the
Chinese Government over the possession and administration of
the Railroad.”
and to remind Your Excellency’s Government that China’s responsibility as
Trustee for the Chinese Eastern Railway is an obligation that is not to be
ignored or unilaterally invalidated by China in the course of any
negotiations with other parties regarding the Railway. The Government of
the United States of America stands for the protection of all interests in the
Railway, including Russian, and could not approve a change of any kind in
the status quo by whomsoever initiated unless the rights of all creditors and
other parties in interest were adequately protected.

I take the opportunity afforded by the communication of the foregoing
declaration and reminder to repeat to Your Excellency, what Your
Excellency already knows from my earlier oral assurances, that the
Government of the United States has no desire to prevent the conclusion of
a Sino-Russian Agreement. The object of my Government is to prevent
future embarrassments, specially for Your Excellency’s Government, by
calling timely attention to the rights and interests as well as to the
obligations which China is bound respectively to safeguard and to fulfill in
performance of the duties she has undertaken in respect of the Chinese
Eastern Railway, as set forth in the Resolution quoted above.
I avail myself [etc.]

JACOB GOULD SCHURMAN

[Document 468]
The Department of State to the French Embassy
Careful consideration has been given to the note handed to the Chief of the
Division of Far Eastern Affairs by the Counselor of the French Embassy, on
April 2, 1924, on the subject of the Chinese Eastern Railway and the status
of the Russo-Asiatic Bank.

It is the understanding of the United States Government that the institution
known as the Russo-Asiatic Bank, as established by the amalgamation of
the Russo-Chinese Bank and the Banque du Nord in 1910, was reorganized
about 1919. The circumstances attending its reorganization and the legality
of its present status in Russian law are not within the cognizance of this
Government.

The fact that the United States Government, in the protection of the
common interests of the Powers which had assumed responsibilities in
connection with the Chinese Eastern Railway, joined in a protest against the
aggressive measures of the Chinese authorities in connection with the Land
Department of the Railway, does not constitute a recognition on the part of
this Government of the legal status of the Russo-Asiatic Bank, although the
bank may have benefited by that protest.

The United States Government agrees with the French Government as to
the object of Resolution No. XIII of the Washington Conference, and has
accordingly, on April 26, 1924, instructed its Minister at Peking to present
to the Chinese Government a note pointing out its inability to accept any
settlement of the Chinese Eastern Railway question which does not afford
adequate protection to foreign creditors and all other interested parties, as
contemplated by Resolution No. XIII. In the absence of any showing as to
the legal identity of the reorganized Russo-Asiatic Bank with the original
bank of the same name, the Government of the United States has not felt
that it would be warranted in taking any action expressly on behalf of the
Russo-Asiatic Bank.

W asuincton ; May 6, 1924.

[Document 469]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
1. Note in accordance with your instructions delivered to Ministry
of Foreign Affairs May 3rd, copy enclosed in despatch no. 2242,
May 5, in today’s pouch. French Minister addressed note of
similar tenor May 7th. British Minister states he intends to
communicate orally with Koo and to say that British Government
indorses view expressed in my note. Japanese Minister, to whom I
also communicated copy of my note, has given no indications of
what action if any he intends taking.
2. Purport of my note and French Minister’s having duly leaked
out of Foreign Office and appeared in local press, Karakhan,
Bolshevik representative, has issued statement appearing today in
Chinese and English language papers of which following is
summary:
3. Chinese Government denies interference with Russo-Chinese
relations but Karakhan has brought forth evidence of French
interference, and America has now come into the open on the
same side. Chinese Eastern Railway question relates only to
China and Russia, and if other powers intervene, it is only to
hamper understanding between Russia and China. French and
American protests mean, they will not allow Russo-Chinese
Agreement without their participation. Powers refer to
Washington Conference resolutions as if they had acquiesced in
rights thereby, although resolutions were adopted without the
master Soviet Russia. Present case usual imperialistic action by

France, America and possibly other powers who believe world is
theirs. Soviet has taught all great powers not to meddle with
Russian affairs and now hopes to teach them not to interfere with
Russo-Chinese affairs. Difficulty is that China is weak, cannot
defend national dignity and sovereignty and takes more stock in
French and American threats than friendship with Soviet. France
and America are very strict about Washington resolutions when it
is question of hostility toward Chinese interests but resolutions
forgotten when same would benefit China. During several years
France and America have failed to carry out decisions regarding
extraterritoriality or customs tariff in disregard of China’s
requests and in manner humiliating to China. If powers ever begin
this work, it will only be to dupe China. Soviet alone could
voluntarily renounce treaties imposed by force on [China].

SCHURMAN

[Document 470]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, May 15, 1924—noon.
1. Yesterday Marshall, United Press correspondent here, received
following telegram his agency via London office:
2.

“Washington State Department, replying questions,
admits intervened recent Russo-Chinese negotiations
warning China recognition Soviet might [have]
unpleasant consequences. Intervention due desire
protect claims 6 to 8 million dollars American share
reorganization Chinese Eastern Railway during Siberian
expedition 1918.”
3. Subsequent to leakage of information that our note of May 3d
had been sent and prior to receipt of the above telegram, I had
shown Marshall our note for his guidance. Nevertheless, on
receipt of above message he distributed latter to Chinese and
foreign press without saying anything to me.
4. First sentence of message above quoted is misleading or
contrary to fact in two particulars and places Legation and the
Chinese Government in an embarrassing position.
5. Chinese Government has all along insisted contrary to Bolshe-
Tik allegations that interruption of negotiations 6 weeks ago was
not due to intervention of any foreign powers; while Legation has

categorically denied similar allegations that American Minister
endeavored
to
interrupt
negotiations.

Negotiations
were
suspended or dormant on May 3d when our note was sent but
above message makes it appear that we actively attempted to
arrest their progress. Moreover, the statement that we had warned
China that recognition of Soviet might have unpleasant
consequence is contrary to terms of note which was based on
“Government of the United States has no desire to prevent the
conclusion of a Sino-Russian Agreement.”
6. Legation and Foreign Office endeavoring to mitigate effect of
first sentence of message, but I fear that Karakhan and Chinese
opponents of Government will make capital of it.
7. Assuming that sentence in question is a misrepresentation of
Department’s remarks, I request authority so to state publicly and
also in my discretion, if Chinese Foreign Office agrees, to publish
note, text of which I shall telegraph you if desired.
8. Further, I venture to suggest that the United Press be
approached in regard to their handling of news. They are the only
American agency selling a news service in China and the fact that
they are able to do so is entirely due to the Department’s attitude
in refusing to permit distribution gratis of radio news service from
Cavite which if done would drive their service out of China. That
our Government in these circumstances should be made to suffer
by their errors or carelessness, is intolerable.
For the Minister:
BELL

[Document 471]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Bell)
public the text of Legation’s note, together with a statement referring to
reports in local press (without naming the United Press) which allege that
this Government had intervened in the negotiations, and stating the facts
that the Department of State has given out no comment whatsoever with
regard to the negotiations and that that note embodies the whole
relationship of this Government to the matter in question.

The matter will be taken up with the United Press as regards the action of
its correspondents both here and in Peking.
GREW

[Document 472]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
156. Italian Minister reminds me that he had formerly joined in note to the
Chinese Government regarding its responsibility for the Chinese Eastern
Railway under the terms of the Washington Conference resolution16 but
says that in view of the recognition of Soviet Russia by China he does not
know what stand he should now take and desires to be informed of the
policy and attitude of the American Government. I should greatly appreciate
a statement for my own guidance also.

SCHURMAN
the Chargé in Italy, ibid. , p. 929.

[Document 473]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
respect to Chinese Eastern Railway will occur until after the forthcoming
Sino-Russian Conference.

The attitude of this Government remains unchanged from that expressed in
the proposed Conference the Department believes that no further action is
advisable on your part unless changes in the situation of the Chinese
Eastern should necessitate further representations. Do you concur in this
opinion?

Forward texts of all Sino-Russian Agreements as soon as obtained and keep
Department informed of the negotiations at the Conference, especially those
regarding the Railway.

You may inform Italian Minister this Government’s position remains
unchanged pending results of the proposed Conference.

HUGHES

[Document 474]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
following communication to Chinese Government and also to Karakhan on
June 7th:
“The Japanese Government declares that the rights and interests
of Japan and her nationals in regard to the Chinese Eastern
Railway shall not in any way be affected by the agreement
recently concluded between the Governments of Soviet Russia
and the Republic of China or by any arrangements that may
hereafter be made between them in virtue of that agreement
concerning the said railway.”
SCHURMAN

[Document 475]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
following telegram from the consul at Harbin:
“June 12, 3 p.m. The Japanese consul general and the French,
American and British consuls have agreed that they, acting on
their own initiative, should jointly remove, in case no objection to
this course is made by one of their respective Legations
(Governments), their respective seals placed on July 31, 1923, on
two cabinets containing the more valuable documents of the land
department of the Chinese Eastern Railway, if and when the
present higher Russian officers of the board of directors and/or of
the administration of the railway are actually replaced by Russian
appointees of the Soviet Government, replaced until local
circumstances demand, in the judgment of the consular officers
concerned, that such action be taken. To remove the seals at
present would probably cause uneasiness and misunderstanding at
Harbin.

Has the Legation any objection to this plan of action?”
I will defer reply to Harbin until I have consulted my interested colleagues.

Apparently consuls at Harbin wish to anticipate removal of seals by the new
Soviet regime. I fear, however, that if removal is deferred until new regime
is established their action may then be construed as tacit recognition of the
new agreements and consider that it would be preferable to effect removal

at an earlier date if suitable pretext can be found. French Minister shares
this view.

British Minister does not appear to attach great importance to the issue and
seems indifferent to the possible interpretation referred to above. I infer he
has in mind British recognition of the Soviet Government. He, however,
reserves expression of opinion until consultation between four Ministers
which will take place June 16th.

I am of the opinion that no action other than above indicated called for at
present.

SCHURMAN
Relations, 1923, vol. I, p. 778.

[Document 476]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
Minister for Foreign Affairs dated June 16, which in translation reads as
follows:
“I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Your
Excellency’s note of May 3rd, 1924, in which Your Excellency
referring to the 13th resolution adopted by the Washington
Conference concerning the Chinese Eastern Railway requesting
[requested?] that China take note of its responsibility as trustee
thereunder. You also stated that the rights of all creditors should
be adequately protected.

The history and agreements relating to the Chinese Eastern
Railway all show that it consists of the two countries of China
and Russia. Prior to the conclusion of the Sino-Russian
Agreement the pronouncement of the Washington Conference
referred to China’s responsibility during the time of its
trusteeship. Now Sino-Russian relations have been established
and the state of affairs is entirely different from what it was
formerly. In future the two Governments of China and Russia will
deal with the question of the Chinese Eastern Railway in which
only the two countries of Russia and China are concerned. This is
a right which properly rests in the two Governments of China and
Russia.

As regards the temporary arrangement made between China and
Russia concerning the Chinese Eastern Railway, this, it may also

be stated, is not prejudicial to the rights of the various powers.
The Chinese Government considers that there is no need for
excessive anxiety in reference to the points raised by the
American Government.

I have the honor, Mr. Minister, to transmit the foregoing reply and
trust that you will appreciate the position.”

I understand similar replies have been sent to French and Japanese
Ministers.

SCHURMAN

[Document 477]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
it was decided to approve proposal of consuls at Harbin with the
understanding that should future developments appear to make it desirable
we would order them to remove seals at once.
SCHURMAN

[Document 478]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, June 18, 1924.

[Received July 15.]

No. 2324
previous
correspondence
regarding
the
Sino-Russian Agreements,
Declarations, and exchange of notes, signed May 31, 1924, I have the honor
to transmit herewith three copies of the pamphlet issued yesterday by the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs containing the above documents.
I have [etc.]

(For the Minister)
EDWARD BELL
[Enclosure]
Sino-Russian Agreements, Signed at Peking, May 31, 1924
AGREEMENT ON GENERAL PRINCIPLES FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF THE QUESTIONS BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF CHINA AND THE UNION
OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
The Republic of China and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
desiring to re-establish normal relations with each other, have agreed to
conclude an agreement on general principles for the settlement of the
questions between the two countries, and have to that end named as their
Plenipotentiaries, that is to say:

His Excellency the President of the Republic of China:
Vi Kyuin Wellington Koo
The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics:
Lev Mikhailovitch Karakhan
Who, having communicated to each other their respective full powers,
found to be in good and due form, have agreed upon the following Articles:
ARTICLE I. Immediately upon the signing of the present Agreement, the normal
diplomatic and consular relations between the two Contracting Parties shall
be re-established.

The Government of the Republic of China agrees to take the necessary
steps to transfer to the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics the Legation and Consular buildings formerly belonging to the
Tsarist Government.

ARTICLE II. The Governments of the two Contracting Parties agree to hold,
within one month after the signing of the present Agreement, a Conference
which shall conclude and carry out detailed arrangements relative to the
questions in accordance with the principles as provided in the following
Articles.

Such detailed arrangements shall be completed as soon as possible and, in
any case, not later than six months from the date of the opening of the
Conference as provided in the preceding paragraph.

ARTICLE III. The Governments of the two Contracting Parties agree to annul at
the Conference as provided in the preceding Article, all Conventions,
Treaties, Agreements, Protocols’, Contracts, etcetera, concluded between
the Government of China and the Tsarist Government and to replace them
with new treaties, agreements, etcetera, on the basis of equality, reciprocity
and justice, as well as the spirit of the Declarations of the Soviet
Government of the years of 1919 and 1920.

ARTICLE IV. The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, in
accordance with its policy and Declarations of 1919 and 1920, declares that
all Treaties, Agreements, etcetera, concluded between the former Tsarist

Government and any third party or parties affecting the sovereign rights or
interests of China, are null and void.

The Governments of both Contracting Parties declare that in future neither
Government will conclude any treaties or agreements which prejudice the
sovereign rights or interests of either Contracting Party.
ARTICLE V. The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
recognizes that Outer Mongolia is an integral part of the Republic of China
and respects China’s sovereignty therein.

The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics declares that as
soon as the questions for the withdrawal of all the troops of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics from Outer Mongolia—namely, as to the time-
limit of the withdrawal of such troops and the measures to be adopted in the
interests of the safety of the frontiers—are agreed upon at the Conference as
provided in Article II of the present Agreement, it will effect the complete
withdrawal of all the troops of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics from
Outer Mongolia.

ARTICLE VI. The Governments of the two Contracting Parties mutually pledge
themselves not to permit, within their respective territories the existence
and/or activities of any organisations or groups whose aim is to struggle by
acts of violence against the Governments of either Contracting Party.
The Governments of the two Contracting Parties further pledge themselves
not to engage in propaganda directed against the political and social
systems of either Contracting Party.

ARTICLE VII. The Governments of the two contracting Parties agree to
redemarcate their national boundaries at the Conference as provided in
Article II of the present Agreement, and pending such redemarcation, to
maintain the present boundaries.

ARTICLE VIII. The Governments of the two Contracting Parties agree to
regulate at the aforementioned Conference the questions relating to the

navigation of rivers, lakes and other bodies of water which are common to
their respective frontiers, on the basis of equality and reciprocity.
ARTICLE IX. The Governments of the two Contracting Parties agree to settle at
the aforementioned Conference the question of the Chinese Eastern
Railway in conformity with the principles as hereinafter provided:
(1) The Governments of the two Contracting Parties declare that
the Chinese Eastern Railway is a purely commercial enterprise.
The Governments of the two Contracting Parties mutually declare
that with the exception of matters pertaining to the business
operations which are under the direct control of the Chinese
Eastern Railway, all other matters affecting the rights of the
National and the Local Governments of the Republic of China—
such as judicial matters, matters relating to civil administration,
military administration, police, municipal government, taxation,
and landed property (with the exception of lands required by the
said Railway)—shall be administered by the Chinese Authorities.
(2) The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
agrees to the redemption by the Government of the Republic of
China, with Chinese capital, of the Chinese Eastern Railway, as
well as all appurtenant properties, and to the transfer to China of
all shares and bonds of the said Railway.

(3) The Governments of the two Contracting Parties shall settle at
the Conference as provided in Article II of the present Agreement,
the amount and conditions governing the redemption as well as
the procedure for the transfer of the Chinese Eastern Railway.
(4) The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
agrees to be responsible for the entire claims of the shareholders,
bondholders and creditors of the Chinese Eastern Railway
incurred prior to the Revolution of March 9th 1917.

(5) The Governments of the two Contracting Parties mutually
agree that the future of the Chinese Eastern Railway shall be

determined by the Republic of China and the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, to the exclusion of any third party or parties.
(6) The Governments of the two Contracting Parties agree to draw
up an arrangement for the provisional management of the Chinese
Eastern Railway pending the settlement of the questions as
provided under Section (3) of the present Article.

(7) Until the various questions relating to the Chinese Eastern
Railway are settled at the Conference as provided in Article II of
the present Agreement, the rights of the two Governments arising
Construction and Operation of the Chinese Eastern Railway,
which do not conflict with the present Agreement and the
Agreement for the Provisional Management of the said Railway
and which do not prejudice China’s rights of sovereignty, shall be
maintained.

ARTICLE X. The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics agrees
to renounce the special rights and privileges relating to all Concessions in
any part of China acquired by the Tsarist Government under various
Conventions, Treaties, Agreements, etcetera.

ARTICLE XI. The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
agrees to renounce the Russian portion of the Boxer Indemnity.
ARTICLE XII. The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
agrees to relinquish the rights of extraterritoriality and consular jurisdiction.
ARTICLE XIII. The Governments of the two Contracting Parties agree to draw
up simultaneously with the conclusion of a Commercial Treaty at the
Conference as provided in Article II of the present Agreement, a Customs
Tariff for the two Contracting Parties in accordance with the principles of
equality and reciprocity.

ARTICLE XIV. The Governments of the two Contracting Parties agree to discuss
at the aforementioned Conference the questions relating to the claims for
the compensation of losses.

ARTICLE XV. The present Agreement shall come into effect from the date of
signature.

In witness whereof, the respective plenipotentiaries have signed the present
Agreement in duplicate in the English language and have affixed thereto
their seals.

Done at the City of Peking this Thirty-First Day of the Fifth Month of the
Thirteenth Year of the Republic of China, which is, the Thirty-First Day of
May One Thousand Nine Hundred and Twenty-Four.

[SEAL] V. K. WELLINGTON KOO
[SEAL] L. M. KARAKHAN
AGREEMENT FOR THE PROVISIONAL MANAGEMENT OF THE CHINESE EASTERN RAILWAY
The Republic of China and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
mutually recognizing that, inasmuch as the Chinese Eastern Railway was
built with capital furnished by the Russian Government and constructed
entirely within Chinese territory, the said Railway is a purely commercial
enterprise and that, excepting for matters appertaining to its own business
operations, all other matters which affect the rights of the Chinese National
and Local Governments shall be administered by the Chinese Authorities,
have agreed to conclude an Agreement for the Provisional Management of
the Railway with a view to carrying on jointly the management of the said
Railway until its final settlement at the Conference as provided in Article II
of the Agreement on General Principles for the Settlement of the Questions
between the Republic of China and the Union of the Soviet Socialist
Republics of May 31, 1924, and have to that end named as their
Plenipotentiaries, that is to say:
His Excellency the President of the Republic of China:
Vi Kyuin Wellington Koo
The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics:
Lev Mikhailovitch Karakhan

Who, having communicated to each other their respective full powers,
found to be in good and due form, have agreed upon the following Articles:
ARTICLE I. The Railway shall establish, for discussion and decision of all
matters relative to the Chinese Eastern Railway, a Board of Directors to be
composed of ten persons, of whom five shall be appointed by the
Government of the Republic of China and five by the Government of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

The Government of the Republic of China shall appoint one of the Chinese
Directors as President of the Board of Directors, who shall also be the
Director-General.

The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics shall appoint
one of the Russian Directors as Vice-President of the Board of Directors,
who shall also be the Assistant Director-General.

Seven persons shall constitute a quorum, and all decisions of the Board of
Directors shall have the consent of not less than six persons before they can
be carried out.

The Director-General and Assistant Director-General shall jointly manage
the affairs of the Board of Directors and they shall both sign all the
documents of the Board.

In the absence of either the Director-General or the Assistant Director-
General, their respective Governments may appoint another Director to
officiate as the Director-General or the Assistant Director-General (in the
case of the Director-General, by one of the Chinese Directors, and in that of
the Assistant Director-General, by one of the Russian Directors).
ARTICLE II. The Railway shall establish a Board of Auditors to be composed of
five persons, namely two Chinese Auditors, who shall be appointed by the
Government of the Republic of China and 3 Russian Auditors who shall be
appointed by the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

The Chairman of the Board of Auditors shall be elected from among the
Chinese Auditors.

ARTICLE III. The Railway shall have a Manager, who shall be a national of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and two Assistant Managers, one to be
a national of the Republic of China and the other to be a national of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

The said officers shall be appointed by the Board of Directors and such
appointments shall be confirmed by their respective Governments.
The rights and duties of the Manager and the Assistant Managers shall be
defined by the Board of Directors.

ARTICLE IV. The Chiefs and Assistant Chiefs of the various Departments of the
Railway shall be appointed by the Board of Directors.

If the Chief of Department is a national of the Republic of China, the
Assistant Chief of Department shall be a national of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, and if the Chief of Department is a national of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the Assistant Chief of Department
shall be a national of the Republic of China.

ARTICLE V. The employment of persons in the various departments of the
Railway shall be in accordance with the principle of equal representation
between the nationals of the Republic of China and those of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics.

ARTICLE VI. With the exception of the estimates and budgets, as provided in
article VII of the present Agreement, all other matters on which the Board
of Directors cannot reach an agreement shall be referred for settlement to
the Governments of the Contracting Parties.

ARTICLE VII. The Board of Directors shall present the estimates and budgets of
the Railway to a joint meeting of the Board of Directors and the Board of
Auditors for consideration and approval.

ARTICLE VIII. All the net profits of the Railway shall be held by the Board of
Directors and shall not be used pending a final settlement of the question of
the present Railway.

ARTICLE IX. The Board of Directors shall revise as soon as possible the statutes
of the Chinese Eastern Railway Company, approved on December 4, 1896,
by the Tsarist Government, in accordance with the present Agreement and
the Agreement on General Principles for the Settlement of the Questions
between the Republic of China and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
of May 31, 1924, and in any case, not later than six months from the date of
the constitution of the Board of Directors.

Pending their revision, the aforesaid statutes, insofar as they do not conflict
with the present Agreement on General Principles for the Settlement of the
Questions between the Republic of China and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, and do not prejudice the rights of sovereignty of the Republic of
China, shall continue to be observed.

ARTICLE X. The present Agreement shall cease to have effect as soon as the
question of the Chinese Eastern Railway is finally settled at the Conference
as provided in Article II of the Agreement on General Principles for the
Settlement of the Questions between the Republic of China and the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics of May 31, 1924.

ARTICLE XI. The present Agreement shall come into effect from the date of
signature.

In witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present
Agreement in duplicate in the English language and have affixed thereto
their seals.

Done at the City of Peking this Thirty-First Day of the Fifth Month of the
Thirteenth Year of the Republic of China, which is, the Thirty-First Day of
May One Thousand Nine Hundred and Twenty-Four.

[SEAL] V. K. WELLINGTON KOO
[SEAL] L. M. KARAKHAN

[Document 479]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
d’Affaires has communicated to me following English translation of note
which he has addressed to Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs in reply to
latter’s note of June 16.

“I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the
16th instant in which Your Excellency states in reply to the
Japanese Minister’s note of June 7th that inasmuch as the
agreement between China and Russia in regard to the Chinese
Eastern Railway deals only with problems that concern the two
parties alone and which it is indisputably within their rights to
settle between them, the Chinese Government cannot recognize
the reservation made by the Japanese Government in this matter.
The substance of your note having been communicated to my
Government, I am instructed further to state to Your Excellency
that although the reservation concerning the Japanese rights and
interests in regard to the Chinese Eastern Railway is a matter of
course hardly calling for a specific declaration on their part, the
Japanese Government deem it none the less advisable to invite the
attention of the Chinese Government to that phase of the matter in
order to avoid the possibility of any unnecessary difficulty arising
in future in this connection.”
SCHURMAN

[Document 480]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Received 5 p.m.]
204. Press today publishes an interview with Karakhan regarding Chinese
Eastern Railway of which following is summary:
“Reports from Washington show American Government is
dissatisfied with China’s last note regarding railway. Hughes has
evidently decided to punish China by opposing preliminary
conference and has advised France not to ratify Washington
treaties. At same stroke he wishes to chastise Soviet Government
and has decided not to recognize it because of its evil influence
on China. Soviet undisturbed well knowing there is not a single
honest and reasonable American who understands interests of his
country who supports short-sighted Russian policy of Hughes.
Soviet has outlived many governments and will certainly without
injury to itself outlive present rulers of America.
No countries but China and Soviet have anything to do with
Chinese Eastern Railway and all other powers must know that we
will not allow them to interfere with our own business. I do not
care even to know to what extent their references are correct with
regard to the Washington resolutions. The latter are nonexistent in
our eyes and they evidently do not exist either for the powers
which have signed them. At any rate as far as China is concerned
things do not go further than promises and blackmailing nor does
anyone seem to have any intention of carrying out these
decisions.

Indignation felt in Washington at China’s action unworthy of
notice. Hughes believes China owes him so much that she must

[Document 481]
The Chinese Legation to the Department of State
AIDE MEMOIRE
Recent press reports from Washington seem to indicate that there exists an
impression which does not fully reflect the true meaning and purport of the
the Chinese Eastern Railway. The position of the Chinese Government as
defined in the said reply, however, is a simple one. The agreements recently
concluded between China and Soviet Russia dealt with certain general
principles for the settlement of questions outstanding between China and
Soviet Russia including among the principal ones that of the Chinese
Eastern Railway, and do not, as indeed they are not intended to, prejudice
any claims which other Powers may wish to prefer against the Railway on
account of money advanced to it by them or their nationals at one time or
another. Such claims remain unaffected by the Sino-Russian agreements.
Under the agreement of October 2, 1920, signed with the Russo-Asiatic
Bank, the holder and owner of the entire stocks and shares of the Railway,
which provided among other things that the said agreement should
terminate whenever the Chinese Government had come to an agreement
with a Government} of Russia recognized by China, etc., the Chinese
Government in addition to its rights and interests in the Railway as the
territorial sovereign and as a co-partner of the commercial undertaking has
been acting also as trustee on behalf of Russia in so far as her rights and
obligations concerning the Railway were concerned. In making the
arrangement about them embodied in the recent Sino-Russian agreements
the Chinese Government therefore based its action on the agreement of
1920, which itself was based upon the original agreement of 1896,
concluded with the Russian Government. The fact that some of the Powers
having claims against the Railway have not yet entered into normal
relations with Soviet Russia and therefore are not in a position to prefer
those claims directly, in so far as Russia the principal beneficiary of the

Railway is concerned, cannot affect the existence or nature of such claims.
It is not contemplated by the Chinese Government in their recent
agreements with the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republic that any
legitimate claims of the other Powers or of their nationals should be
jeopardized. On the contrary, they will continue to be disposed to take steps
with a view to the protection of those claims if circumstances should be
such as to make friendly interposition on the part of the Chinese
Government desirable as well as useful.

WASHINGTON , June 30, 1924.
includes portions of Doc. 475 and Doc. 476].

[Document 482]
The Department of State to the Chinese Legation
AIDE-MÉMOIRE
The Department of State has been glad to receive the Aide-Mémoire under
date of June 30 in which the Chinese Legation communicated certain views
of its Government, in supplement to the note which the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of China had addressed on June 16 to the American Minister at
Peking in reply to the latter’s note of May 3, making reservation of this
Government’s rights in reference to the Chinese Eastern Railway. This
fuller and more friendly exposition of the views of the Chinese Government
appears to reveal a confusion which this Government had not anticipated
could exist in view of its well known attitude and activities with respect to
the Railway. The interest felt by this Government in the Railway has been
such as was prompted by a realization that the legal and economic status of
that line of communication must have a direct and important bearing upon
the administrative integrity of China and upon the principle of the equality
of opportunity in China; and the steps taken by this Government in that
regard—in refusing recognition to the political and administrative powers
asserted by the Railway; in taking an initiative in constituting the Inter-
Allied Technical Board (in which the Chinese Government participated) to
maintain and operate the Railway during the war; and in supporting the
Chinese claim, at the Washington Conference, to have the Chinese
Government recognized as trustee for those interested in the Railway—
were motivated by the policies above indicated, and taken with what
appeared to be the full and sympathetic approval of the Chinese
Government.

These steps are not and have not been made the basis of any claim by the
Government of the United States to any right of control or other interest
merely in its own behalf. This Government does, however, possess and
assert a direct right as a creditor of the Chinese Eastern Railway Company
for a principal amount of $4,177,820.06, which it advanced to the Inter-

Allied Technical Board for the purpose of saving the Railway from
breakdown and deterioration at a time when its operations were of necessity
conducted at a loss. That debt from the Railway Company to the American
Government was among the obligations which the Chinese Government, in
assuming the responsibilities of the trusteeship recognized by the
Conference upon the understanding set forth in Resolution No. XIII,
undertook to preserve and safeguard. The Government of the United States
does not consider that the Chinese Government, in devolving that
trusteeship upon another party, without consultation with others in interest
and without any reservation of their rights, can have divested itself of the
responsibilities incidental to that trust.

The American Government has therefore felt it necessary, in order to
safeguard its position in any eventual adjustment of the affairs of the
Chinese Eastern Railway, to renew the reservation made in the American
Minister’s note of May 3 last to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.
WASHINGTON , July 11, 1924.

[Document 483]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
[Extract]
p.m., you will please address the Minister for Foreign Affairs as follows:
“Having referred to my Government your note of June 16, I am
now instructed to advise you that the Government of the United
States renews the reservation of rights made in its behalf by the
Legation’s note of May 3, with respect to the responsibility of the

[Document 484]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China
(Schurman)
your colleagues whose Consuls at Harbin participated in sealing the
archives of the Chinese Eastern Railway you should agree upon an early
date when the Consuls will remove the seals. It is suggested that at the time
when the seals are removed, which should be as soon as possible, the
Legations make public announcement to the general effect the [that?] while
maintaining such reservations as they have had occasion to make
concerning the recent Sino-Russian agreement regarding the Chinese
Eastern Railway as affecting their respective claims upon the Railway
Company, the interested Powers consider that the conclusion of that
agreement has resulted in a situation which no longer calls for such
measures as were taken by the Consuls at Harbin for the protection of the
archives of the Company.

GREW

[Document 485]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
French, Japanese and American Legations July 18 it was decided to send
following telegrams mutatis mutandis to four consuls at Harbin subject to
approval of Japanese Government which has now been obtained. Telegrams
are accordingly being sent today.
your British, French and Japanese colleagues perceive no reason
to the contrary, you, in concert with your colleagues, should at
once remove your seals from cabinets containing documents of
land department of the Chinese Eastern Railway.”
SCHURMAN

[Document 486]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China
(Schurman)
d’Affaires informs the Department the British Government has suggested
that French Minister in Peking should arrange for a conference of the
representatives of Powers participating in Washington Conference
Resolution No. XIII with a view to examining and recommending to their
Governments what steps may be practicable for the purpose of protecting
foreign rights in the Chinese Eastern Railway. French Chargé added his
Government would be glad if you could be authorized to take part in such a
discussion.

The Department has not hitherto understood that the British Government
had concerned itself in this matter, and feels doubtful whether the proposed
discussions can be expected to lead to any further result than has already
been arrived at in the informal conversations which would appear to have
taken place already among the Legations more particularly interested.
You may however take part in the proposed discussions, basing your
attitude upon the views communicated to you in the Department’s telegram
of July 11, 9 p.m., and submitting to the Department any proposals arising
out of the discussions.

GREW

[Document 487]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
to consul Harbin:
on following telegram to Harbin consuls.
‘While the Ministers accept the conclusion of the
consuls that the present time is not opportune for the
removal of the seals, they desire to impress the consuls
with their conviction that the seals should be removed
at the earliest practicable date. As to this date they
would desire to be advised by the consuls’.
For your knowledge and guidance I would say that I am very
desirous of the early removal of the seals which is the instruction
of the Department.”
SCHURMAN

[Document 488]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Received July 31—4 p.m.]
1. At a conference here today of the diplomatic representatives of
the United States, Great Britain, Japan and France, my French
colleague stated that his Government had consulted the other
three Governments on the unsatisfactory position taken by the
Chinese Government in reply to our notes on the Chinese Eastern
Railway question and that the British Government had suggested
referring the matter to their Ministers in Peking in order that they
might “devise effective measures” for dealing with the matter,
and his Government had instructed him accordingly. He
expressed the opinion from which there was no dissent that a joint
note to the Chinese Government would be the most effective
measure that could be adopted under the circumstances and
submitted a draft which after being amended was agreed to for
submission to our Governments as follows:
“The representatives of the United States, Great Britain,
Japan and France, acting under instructions from their
Governments, have the honor to recall to His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs the
solidarity which exists between China and the powers
signatories of the Washington Conference with regard
to the principles which constitute the basis of the policy
adopted by the conference.

They desire especially to refer to the two resolutions of
the Washington Conference concerning the Chinese

Eastern Railway and to emphasize the obligations
which those resolutions impose upon the Chinese
Government. In addition they wish to call the special
attention of His Excellency to the serious consequences
which would ensue from change in the economic and
legal status of the railway should such a change impair
the administrative integrity of China and the principle
of equal opportunity.

In view of the signature of the Sino-Russian Agreement
of May 31st the representatives of the four Powers
would be glad to receive satisfactory assurances on the
above-mentioned points for communication to their
Governments.”
3 [sic]. My British colleague said he had thus far sent nothing in
writing on this subject to the Chinese Government.
4. My Japanese colleague said that in view of his instructions he
believed his Government would not unite in a joint note. The
position of his Government in Manchuria was a little different
from ours as their note of June 7th24 indicated. To join in sending
this proposed note might prejudice their own.
5. Please instruct.

SCHURMAN
includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475].

[Document 489]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China
(Schurman)
joint note is calculated to improve the status of our position vis-à-vis the
Chinese Government with respect to the Chinese Eastern Railway as that
position now exists as the result of the Legation’s note of May 325 and the
Chinese Government’s reply of June 16. Should, however, the British,
Japanese, and French representatives all be authorized to join in the
proposed note, the Department would not feel disposed to object to your
taking the same action, notwithstanding the note would seem to be quite
unnecessary and would perhaps afford the Chinese Government a further
opportunity to give expression to the unreasonable attitude manifested in its
note of June 16. In the event of unanimous agreement to despatch the note
the Department, to obviate any implication of a threat, suggests as a
substitute for “serious consequences” the words “confused situation” or
“unfortunate results.”
GREW
includes portions of Doc. 475 and Doc. 476].

[Document 490]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 27, 1924—noon.
confirms negotiations between Soviet Government and Chang Tso-lin,
stating that the understanding arrived at is almost a textual repetition of
Koo-Karakhan agreement for provisional management of the Chinese

[Document 491]
The Consul at Harbin (Hanson) to the Secretary of State
American, British, French and Japanese consular seals removed from
cabinets in the land department Chinese Eastern Railway this afternoon on
the initiative of the four consuls. Informed the Embassy.
HANSON

[Document 492]
The Consul at Harbin (Hanson) to the Secretary of State
[Received 8: p.m.]

General Manager Ostroumoff arrested and imprisoned by Chinese police;
charges unknown. Informed the Legation and Mukden.
HANSON

[Document 493]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
Manchurian-Soviet Agreement received from Hanson. Preamble indicates
contracting parties are “the government of the Three Eastern Provinces of
the Chinese Republic” and Soviet Government. Article 1 in 15 sections
concerns Chinese Eastern and incorporates without important change
agreement on general principles and articles 1 to 9 of the railway agreement
signed Peking, May 31st. Section 2, however, provides free reversion of
railway to China at end of 60 instead of 80 years and that when mutually
agreed further shortening may be discussed. Soviet agrees that after
signature present agreement China shall be entitled to redeem the railway
with Chinese capital at actual just value mutually determined. Section 15
provides that portions of the agreement relating to the railway shall become
void after redemption of [or] free return indicated. Article 2 amplifies
article 8 agreement general principles and provides that details shall be
arranged by a conference of representatives of the contracting parties within
two months, with special attention to safeguarding for China and Soviet,
respectively, transportation of passengers and freight on lower Amur to the
substituting Manchurian for Chinese Government. Article 6 provides that
all joint commissions named in the agreement shall begin operations within
one month and conclude within six months unless otherwise stipulated.
Article 7 states agreement operative when signed and of three texts,
Russian, Chinese and English, latter authoritative in case of [dispute].
BELL

[Document 494]
The Consul at Harbin (Hanson) to the Secretary of State
Since the Bolsheviks took over Chinese Eastern Railway, conservative
Russians in the railway zone have been terror stricken. On October 3rd
General Manager Ostroumoff, Chief of the Land Department Gondatti, and
Chief of the Economic Bureau Mikhailoff were arrested by Chinese police,
acting under orders from Mukden, without charges being preferred, placed
in solitary confinement, treated like desperate criminals and not permitted
to consult with the counsel or to see their wives. Arrests were made before
they were able legally to transfer their offices to their Soviet successors. On
October 6th Kirin provincial authorities prohibited departure of Russians
from Harbin. On October 7th a merchant, Gavriloff, and the chief
bookkeeper of the railway were arrested without charges made and placed
in prison. As the first three mentioned worked with and under Inter-Allied
Technical Board, as the first two were given American, British, French and
Japanese diplomatic support and encouragement in their efforts to resist
Chinese encroachments in the land department question, and as I suspect
that certain Chinese authorities with Bolshevik approval are attempting to
persecute them for attempting to preserve the interests of the railway in
accordance with the resolutions of the Washington Conference, it is my
opinion that the matter of these outrageous arrests and the conduct of these
railway officials while in charge of railway administration should be
investigated immediately by an international commission, if possible. If not
possible, then foreign consular officers should be present at the trials of the
accused.

This matter is urgent as Ostroumoff who has long been in ill health and
suffering from a severe strain may become seriously if not fatally ill in the
Chinese prison. It is suggested that pressure be brought upon Chang Tso-lin
to have the prisoners moved to Mukden because it is feared they may at any

moment be handed over by the local authorities, willing or unwilling, to the
Bolshevists for transportation to and punishment in Siberia.
The Department might suggest to the Associated Press or other news
agency that it detail to Harbin a special correspondent in order to report
regarding Bolshevik activities in North Manchuria and on the Chinese
Eastern Railway, arrests of foreigners by Chinese military and police and
trials of foreigners by Chinese courts. Such reports would enlighten the
American public in regard to communism and the necessity of retaining
extraterritorial rights in China.

Informed the Legation.

HANSON

[Document 495]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
382. 1. Referring to telegrams to the Department from Hanson, Harbin.
Consular body asked diplomatic body to take some action in respect of
situation at Harbin created by arrest of Ostroumoff, Gondatti, Mikhailoff
and others, consular body stating local foreigners seriously alarmed and
fearing extension of arbitrary acts for the treaty-power nationals.
2. Diplomatic body meeting today decided they could take no action as such
in matter of arrest of Ostroumoff and others, Harbin consular body being so
informed by telegraph.
3. Japanese, British and French representatives here have all informally
interceded with Chang on behalf of arrested men on ground of humanity
and justice asking that they be admitted to bail or brought to speedy trial but
with no success thus far. I have telegraphed American consul Mukden to
associate him [self] in these informal representations. Hanson informed.
BELL

[Document 496]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Bell)
any further action in this matter would be warranted, and considers it
unlikely that such action would produce any good result. Advise Consuls at
Mukden and Harbin.

GREW

[Document 497]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
476. American consul Harbin’s recent telegram to Department29 to effect
that Ostroumoff and others turned over to Chinese procurator general who
can keep prisoners in solitary confinement for four months prior to
consideration, in view of this new factor in situation, I consented to join
with French, British and Japanese colleagues in addressing informal
communication to Marshal Chang Tso-lin expressing hope on grounds of
humanity that he would bring the prisoners to speedy trial, if trial is to tako
place, and to permit Ostroumoff to reside at his house in Harbin while
awaiting trial in view of the fact that latter’s health appears menaced.
MAYER

[Document 498]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Received 7: p.m.]
77. I have received from the Minister for Foreign Affairs a note dated
March 10th29 relative to special conference to be held Washington nine-
power treaty30 which rehearses proposals of Chinese delegates at
Washington and action taken; points out that because of the fact that all
signatory powers have not yet given, approval, special conference has not
been called and stresses difficulty of Chinese Government in reorganizing
its finances and inability to pay internal and foreign obligations which they
had hoped to do from surtax. Since conference cannot yet be called
Chinese? Government hopes that a preliminary conference may first be held
to make preparations for future formal conference. Preliminary; conference
to decide tentative agenda for formal conference and investigate and decide
questions to be presented to it. Representatives of signatory powers could
exchange views and do in advance the work which would be referr[ed] to
committees of future special conference. Hope is expressed that in putting
surtax into operation condition of China’s finance will be improved and that
both internal and foreign debts can be reorganized.

I imagine this move is the result of reports to Chinese Government of Yen’s
a.m. 1923, and that its object is to obtain some specific promise from the
foreign powers at the preliminary conference relative to imposition of
surtax.

Other ministers have received identic notes and we shall hold meeting next
week to consider proposal.

SCHURMAN

<2 Not printed.

[Document 499]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurmcm)
15. Pending the receipt of further instructions, you should not take such a
part in conference with your colleagues as to indicate or commit in any way
the position of this Government with respect to the proposal for a
preliminary conference.

HUGHES

[Document 500]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
1. Following is a translation of the French text of an identic
telegram to their Governments adopted at a conference today by
the representatives of the signatory powers of the treaties of
Washington Conference and of the powers which adhered to those
treaties.
2.

“The representatives of the powers signatory to the
treaties of Washington consider that their Governments
might in reply to the Chinese note of March 10, 1924,
authorize
them
to
examine
with
the
Chinese
Government the financial situation of China and the
future “destinations” (purposes) of the surtax of two
and a half percent but they should be instructed to
demand that the Chinese Government communicate to
them in advance the measures contemplated by it for
the abolition of likin and the interim provisions to be
applied prior to the time of such abolition.”
3. There were objections to the proposed preliminary conference
and to the name which seemed too formal. All agreed that the
proposal was inspired by the need of money and contemplated
preeminently to determine the purposes to which the surtax
revenue should be devoted. Representatives were of the opinion
this question should not be considered without (1) examination of

Chinese finances, and (2) receipt of Chinese plan for abolition of
likin, etc.
4. While favoring the program suggested, I consider it my duty to
point out to the Department that if it is carried out and the
representatives cannot agree among themselves as to the purposes
for which the surtax revenue is to be used that might hereafter be
urged as an argument against the holding of the special
conference itself.

SCHURMAN

[Document 501]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
Though the diplomatic representatives felt that the Chinese
Government should be reminded of its obligations in respect of
the abolition of likin, they are all convinced that whatever plan
the Government may present for that purpose no practical results
will follow as the Government is powerless to assert its will in the
provinces.

SCHURMAN

[Document 502]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
of my colleagues have committed our Governments in any way or indicated
what their position might be with respect to Koo’s proposal for a
preliminary conference.

I had received visits from representatives of the Government as well as
from Acting Governor Chang, Bank of China, urging me to support the
proposal and recommend it to my colleagues, and I listened to them all,
asked questions, and remained absolutely noncommittal. Privately, I
considered Koo’s proposal impossible of acceptance but thought it might
possibly be used to bring about a financial show-down. …
SCHURMAN

[Document 503]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
60. The Department is informing London of the substance of your Nos. 77
Commenting upon the identic telegram, the Department states in substance
that
1. This recommendation while not approving of the proposed
preliminary
conference,
apparently
favors
a
preliminary
discussion of matters which are essentially for determination by
the Conference. Such a discussion could not, therefore, in the
opinion of this Government be distinguished from the proposal
made by the Chinese Government for a preliminary conference.
2. This Government might find difficulty, from the administrative
standpoint, in arranging for its suitable representation in a
preliminary conference ancillary to the Special Conference for
which definite authority exists and for which appropriations have
been made.
3. Inasmuch as the foreign delegates to such a preliminary
conference would presumably be without plenipotentiary powers
it is believed that they might find themselves at a tactical
disadvantage in that they would be unable to carry on effective
negotiations, impose any conditions, or give any assurances; and
their activities would therefore of necessity be limited to
expressions of views and formulation of preparatory plans which
might possibly serve to prejudice and embarrass the work of the
Special Conference itself.

4. In view of the widespread disregard of treaty rights by Chinese
officials in the provinces, even in those professing allegiance to
the Peking Government, as instanced by the Kiangsu cigarette
tax; and in view of the growing attitude of irresponsibility on the
part of the Peking Government itself as evidenced by the
imposition of discriminatory railway rates, and by numerous
instances of failure to accord prompt satisfaction in cases of
outrages upon foreigners, this Government questions whether it is
not now inopportune and even dangerous to assume a responsive
attitude toward requests from the Peking Government which are
not based upon any definite right.
5. In furtherance of the cooperation with the British Government
in this matter which was initiated by Mr. Wellesley’s conferences
with the Department a year or so ago, it is desired that the
Embassy consult informally with the British Foreign Office and
explain this Government’s views as above outlined, and inquire
concerning the attitude of the British Government toward the
proposed preliminary conference.

HUGHES

[Document 504]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
Department has been informed that the British Prime Minister, while not yet
prepared to make a definite decision with regard to the proposed
Preliminary Conference, is inclined to agree completely in principle with
the views of this Government, and that he is consulting Macleay34 in order
to give him an opportunity to express his views before the British
Government definitely commits itself.

The Counselor of the Japanese Embassy in an informal conversation with
the Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs has indicated that his
Government, while not yet decided, is disposed to an unfavorable view of
the Chinese proposal for reasons substantially the same as those of this
Government.

HUGHES

[Document 505]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
Department has received the following telegram from London:
“At a conference at the Foreign Office I was informed that the
British Government is entirely in agreement with the views
expressed by the Department. If the Department will inform the
Foreign Office through me the instructions it proposes to send to
the American Minister at Peking in accordance with those views,
the Foreign Office is prepared to instruct the British Minister to
join with his American colleague. The Foreign Office believes,
however, that it would be impolitic to give a flat refusal to the
Chinese Government’s request for a preliminary conference; that
it might be wise to state while refusing the request that the treaty
powers are thoroughly alive to the importance of the situation and
intend to consult together concerning the best means of giving
practical effect to the Washington agreements having regard to
present conditions in China. The Foreign Minister suggests that
the form of the note be left to the Diplomatic Body at Peking ad
referendum”
The Department is replying to London36 that it is telegraphing you to
consider as definite instructions the views in Department’s telegram to you
above quoted is being transmitted to you with the statement that the
Department concurs in the opinion of the British Foreign Office that it
would be impolitic to state the refusal of the Chinese Government’s request
too flatly.

HUGHES

“© Telegram not printed.

[Document 506]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
London has reported36 that the Foreign Office has telegraphed the British
Minister at Peking that he is to regard as definite instructions the views
shared by the American and British Governments as to the reply that should
be returned to the Chinese request for a preliminary conference, and to act
with you in this connection.

HUGHES

[Document 507]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
1. I have conferred with British Minister who has prepared the
following draft reply to Minister for Foreign Affairs.

2.

“The representatives of the powers signatories of the
treaty concluded at Washington on February 6, 1922,
relative to the Chinese customs tariff and of the powers
which have subsequently adhered thereto duly referred
to their respective Governments the suggestion
contained in the Wai Chiao Pu’s identic notes of the
10th March, that in view of the delay which had
occurred in holding the special tariff conference a
preliminary conference should be arranged for the
purpose of preparing the ground for the formal
conference.

The aforesaid representatives have been instructed by
their respective Governments to inform the Chinese
Government in reply that they are unable to accept this
suggestion
because
in
the
opinion
of
their
Governments, the foreign representatives at the
proposed preliminary conference would be debarred
from carrying on effective negotiations and the task of
the preliminary conference would be limited to the

formulation of views and plans which might prejudice
the work of the special tariff conference when it is held.
In making this communication the above-mentioned
representatives are authorized to state that the powers
concerned are thoroughly alive to the importance of the
situation and intend to consult together as to the best
means for giving practical effect to the Washington
agreements, having regard to present conditions in
China.”
3. I consider foregoing satisfactory if Department approves of
consultations contemplated in last paragraph and participation
therein by all the powers mentioned in the first paragraph. It is
based on instruction by telegraph to British Minister for which
heading.
4. Please telegraph whether draft is satisfactory and if not what
alterations you wish made.
5. Above draft contemplates collective note from foreign
representatives in accordance with instructions received by
Macleay but we anticipate difficulty in securing assent of
representatives of certain powers to the last paragraph of the draft.
In such event I assume Department wishes me to address an
individual reply in accordance with your views to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs which would be natural course as Chinese notes
of March 10 were addressed to each foreign minister individually.
SCHURMAN

[Document 508]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
you and your British colleague to the last paragraph of the draft note may
be obviated by substituting therefor the following:
“In making this communication, I am authorized to state that the
Powers concerned appreciate the importance of the situation and
will continue, having regard to present conditions in China, to
give consideration to the question of bringing into effect the
provisions of the Washington Treaty.”
In view of the fact that the Chinese Government addressed separate notes, it
is believed preferable that the replies should likewise be made separately,
though so far as possible in identic language.

HUGHES

[Document 509]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
1. Action has hitherto been delayed by failure of British Minister
to receive his Government’s assent to proposed collective note
received approval of first two paragraphs but British Government
desire to omit entirely third paragraph which was originally
drafted in accordance with their instructions. This affords an
interesting indication of development of the views of the
MacDonald government regarding China. At meeting [of] the
diplomatic body to consider matter June 3rd it became apparent
that a collective note would not be possible, as French, Belgian
and Italian representatives had already informed Wai Chiao Pu
orally that their Governments would agree to no conference of
any description until gold franc question settled, while Japanese
Minister stated his Government would be willing to consider
holding preliminary conference after France had ratified Nine-
Power Treaty and before deposit of ratifications in Washington as
they did not want to discourage the Chinese Government.
3 [sic]. In the circumstances it was decided to address individual
notes and I have today written Chinese Foreign Office as follows
on the basis of first two paragraphs of draft submitted May 7, 5
“I duly referred to my Government the suggestion
contained in your note of March 10, 1924, that in view
of the delay which has occurred in holding the special

tariff conference a preliminary conference should be
arranged for the purpose of preparing the ground for the
formal conference.

Under instructions from the Secretary of State at
Washington I have now the honor to inform Your
Excellency that my Government is unable to comply
with this suggestion because in their opinion the foreign
representatives at the proposed preliminary conference
would not be in a position to carry on effective
negotiations and the task of the preparatory conference
would be limited [to] the formation [formulation] of
views and plans which might prejudice the work of the
special tariff conference when it is held.”
4. British Minister sending similar note. I shall forward texts of
all notes when copies received.

SCHURMAN
copies of notes sent to the Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs by the
American, Belgian, British, French, Italian, and Japanese Ministers.

[Document 510]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
for Foreign Affairs at interview February 13 again expressed a desire to
know nature of the reply received from each government. He expressed
gratitude for past good offices of the United States and requested their
continuance. The following unofficial record of his remarks left with me by
a secretary of the Foreign Office on February 15, 3 p.m., is correct:
“The Minister of Foreign Affairs requested Dr. Schurman to
telegraph to Mr. Hughes requesting his good offices to prevail on
the signatory powers for the despatch of the Commission of
Inquiry of Extraterritorial Jurisdiction to come to China in
November next. In making this request, the Minister suggested
the following reasons:
1. One of the main objects of the Washington
Conference was to promote better international
cooperation. The United States being the convener of
the conference, China naturally looks upon it as the
intermediary through whom to arrange for the execution
of the treaties and agreements made at Washington in
her interest. If there should be any, there ought to be a
frank exchange of views. It was, therefore, hoped that
the State Department would not hesitate to inform
China fully as regards the real situation concerning the
visit of the Commission this November. If China knew
which powers were not able to agree to the suggested
extension of one year, she could explain her point of
view in regard to it.

2. China has been hoping that the signatory powers who
attended the Washington Conference would carry out
the covenants made at Washington as early as possible.
3. The nonfulfillment of the covenants in the present
case may be seized as a precedent by other powers who
may not be anxious to carry out the terms of the other
treaties and agreements.
4. Since there was a special resolution providing that
the powers are free to accept or reject all or any portion
of the recommendations of the Commission, it does not
seem necessary for the powers to take a collective
attitude and share the responsibility for delaying the
visit of the Commission.
5. The early despatch of the Commission will further
demonstrate the importance of the Washington
Conference to the Chinese people and stimulate the
interest and encourage them to get together to solve
their political problems.”
In reply to Dr. Koo’s question regarding the attitude of each of the
individual governments, I replied that I was not fully informed on these
conditions.

The danger of further delay in the visit of the Commission affects Dr. Koo
very strongly, the more so [as] he was one of China’s delegates to the
Washington Conference.

SCHURMAN

[Document 511]
The Chinese Legation to the Department of State
MEMORANDUM
With reference to the time for the meeting of the Extraterritoriality
Commission provided for in Resolution V adopted on December 10, 1921,
by the Washington Conference on the Limitation of Armament, the
American Government suggested in November, 1923, to the Powers
participating in or adhering to the Resolution that November 1, 1924,
should be the date fixed for the convening of the Commission.
The result of the inquiry on the part of the American Government brought
out the fact that unanimity with respect to this date could not be obtained,
and the Chinese Government was accordingly informed to this effect in the
Ever since the adjournment of the Washington Conference in February,
1922, the Chinese Government has spared no efforts to obtain all available
data bearing upon extraterritoriality in China in preparation for the meeting
of the Commission. The Chinese Government, therefore, earnestly requests
that the American Government approach again all the participating or
adhering Powers concerned in regard to the matter and use its powerful
influence to secure their unanimous consent for the convening of the
Commission on a definite date.

This request of the Chinese Government has been presented to the
American Government through the American Minister at Peking.

In connection with this subject the Chinese Government has been informed
by the French Minister at Peking that the French Government informed the
American Ambassador in Paris to the effect that the consent of the French

[Document 512]
The Secretary of State to the Chinese Minister (Sze)
WASHINGTON, April 10, 1924.

SIR: I have the honor to refer to your memorandum of March 27, 1924, in
which you convey the request of the Chinese Government that this
Government should approach the Powers participating in, or adhering to,
Resolution V of the Washington Conference regarding extraterritoriality in
China with a view to obtaining their unanimous consent to the convening of
the Commission on a definite date.

After careful consideration of your request, this Government is convinced
that the present moment is not an opportune one to make the representations
in question. It accordingly suggests that the Chinese Government may wish
to reconsider its request and postpone the proposed action for the time
being. Let me, however, assure you that this Government will not, in any
case, fail to urge the fixing of a definite date for the convening of the
Commission as soon as it may appear that such action would be likely to
bring about a favorable result.

Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 513]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
Foreign Office addressed a note to the dean43 pressing for a reply to its note
of October 26, 1922, asking for the rendition of the Mixed Court at
Shanghai.

Further consideration of the rendition was postponed in 1923 because of the
impending meeting of the Extraterritoriality Commission. My colleagues
and I now feel that owing to the uncertainty of the date of the Commission
no strong reason remains for further postponing resumption of rendition
negotiations on the basis of the draft agreement of 1915, as subsequently
modified by the Foreign Office note of October 26, 1922, and consular
body report. I favor such resumption not only in order to remedy
disadvantageous results of present isolated status of the court and similar
reasons but also to offset possible impressions of obstructiveness of the
powers arising from lack of progress in Washington Conference program.
Proposed note from dean to the Chinese Foreign Office after indicating
readiness to negotiate on the above basis requires guarantees from the
Chinese Government as follows: 1. That provision will be made for meeting
court expenses. 2. That all Mixed Court decisions will be recognized and
given effect where necessary by all Chinese courts throughout Republic. 3.
That the local authorities at Shanghai will execute terms of rendition arrived
at.

The note further states that the diplomatic body would be glad to receive in
addition to guarantees an assurance from the Chinese Government that it is
prepared to enter into early negotiations for satisfactory settlement of other

[Document 514]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
[Paraphrase]
China seem to give confirmation to the position which was taken generally
by the diplomatic corps as indicated by the comments on circular 69
Government at Peking does not have sufficient control in the vicinity of
Shanghai to make it possible for it to offer satisfactory guarantees that it
will fulfill any agreements which might result from negotiations for the
rendition of the Mixed Court and possibly other matters affecting port of
Shanghai. This opinion appears to be given support especially by the
passage of an act for a cigarette tax by the Provincial Assembly of Kiangsu
and its imposition, imminent if not actual, in spite of your protests.
Moreover, the widespread disregard which provincial authorities show for
treaty rights and the lack of any evidence of a real desire on their part to
correct this situation causes the Department to question the advisability of
taking action which many elements among the Chinese might interpret as
resulting from weakness or as indicating, or being preliminary to, a
surrender of extraterritorial rights in the near future. As the reasons given by
your colleagues last year for not entering into negotiations seem more
cogent now than then, the Department is at a loss to understand their
present willingness to do so.

Furthermore, the Department is not ready to admit that the date for the
meeting of the Commission on Extraterritoriality is so indefinite as to bar
the hope that that body may make a survey of the status of the Mixed Court.
The Department would like to receive your comments regarding the views
presented above before it authorizes you to concur in the proposed note of

[Document 515]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
1. It is true that Chinese Government does not today exercise
effective control at Shanghai but its powerlessness does not
vitally affect Mixed Court which functions in the International
Settlement and through the municipal police.
2. The present proposal is merely to resume negotiations
interrupted by the Great War and does not necessarily imply
rendition which would depend upon the obtaining of satisfactory
guarantees, Such negotiations might also afford the opportunity
for consideration of the violation of treaties like the cigarette
taxes.
3. Rendition of court and surrender of extraterritoriality are not
associated in the public mind and former would not therefore be
taken as indicative of latter.
4. Court belongs to Chinese. We foreigners found it a derelict in
1911 and took possession of it. Chinese have never been
reconciled to the seizure and the court’s decisions are not
recognized anywhere in China. If we returned the court the regard
shown for China’s rights would strengthen not weaken us in the
assertion of our own treaty rights.
5. If it were certain that the Extraterritoriality Commission would
meet this year I should be willing to renew the observation I made

on circular number 69 in April 192347 but the outlook for the
meeting seems too dubious.
6. [Paraphrase.] Objections offered by members of the diplomatic
corps in 1923 circular 69 appear to indicate greater concern for
other interests than for the Mixed Court. This was especially true
with respect to the British Minister. I had a conversation with him
yesterday in which he admitted that political conditions had not
improved, but said that, despite these conditions, longer
experience as a Minister had strengthened his feeling of the
importance of the rendition of the court. I also gathered that he
had come to realize the unquestionable fact that, until this basic
cause of Chinese resentment is removed, it will not be possible to
secure any public improvement in Shanghai, which is dependent
upon Chinese concurrence. [End paraphrase.]
7. The American consul general at Shanghai in despatch just
mailed to the Department48 strongly urges resumption rendition
negotiations at earliest practicable moment. Among urgent
reasons he advances are desirability of securing effect in other
Chinese courts for the Mixed Court decisions and processes and
hope that through rendition appeal court may be organized, lack
of which is universally regretted and condemned. He also refers
to the continual Chinese agitation for return of court especially in
the matter of purely Chinese civil cases, which agitation
negotiations will serve to appease.
8. [Paraphrase.] It would put the United States in an embarrassing
and false position in China should our Government oppose
negotiations for rendition of the Mixed Court. A policy of
conciliation toward China has been adopted by Japan and, more
recently, by Great Britain. As an example, note the way the
British Minister has reversed himself in this matter. The Soviet
Union also is now courting China and is casting odium upon the
Chinese policy of other powers. To put ourselves in the position
of leadership in a program with respect to the Mixed Court which
would be denounced by many foreigners, as well as by the

[Document 516]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
resume negotiations for the rendition of the Mixed Court seems to demand
consideration at the present time by the Diplomatic Body and not to permit
such further postponement as would enable a thorough survey of the
Court’s status to be made by the Extraterritoriality Commission, since such
a survey would appear to form an important part of the work of that
Commission. The Department, however, recognizes the force of your
argument that this Government could not well take an isolated position in
opposing the rendition of the Court even for a temporary period; and, in
view of your statement that this matter would not be associated in the public
mind with the surrender of extraterritoriality, you are authorized to join with
your colleagues in negotiations looking toward rendition as outlined in your
are to be strictly limited to the question of the rendition of the Court, and
that this Government is not prepared to make rendition conditional upon
obtaining from the Chinese Government any benefits or concessions upon
extraneous subjects such as the extension of the International Settlement or
the development of the Shanghai Harbor even if such subjects appear to
have a certain relation to the rendition of the Court in connection with a
general adjustment of present Sino-foreign problems at Shanghai.
HUGHES

[Document 517]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
instructions from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has informally inquired
concerning the attitude of this Government with respect to making the
resumption of negotiations for the return of the Mixed Court conditional
upon the discussion of other extraneous questions at Shanghai as inferred
from the Dean’s note of April 10, and has stated that Koo50 is disposed to
consider that the proposal for Settlement extension is in contravention of
Article I of the Nine Power Treaty Relating to Principles and Policies
concerning China. The Minister was informed that, without passing on the
merits of this contention, the Department desired to adhere to the position
which it had consistently taken that the question of the Mixed Court should
be kept free from extraneous matters, and had so instructed the Legation.

[Document 518]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Received 3 p.m.]

Minister for Foreign Affairs questioned me regarding the dean’s note of
April 10th52 and I assured him in the clearest terms that the note did not
make the settlement of any extraneous questions a condition to the rendition
of the Mixed Court and that if such had been the intention the draft would
not have received unanimous approval. Dr. Koo stated that he had observed
that the note was drawn up in this sense.

On May 28th I asked Koo why incident to above conversation he had
telegraphed the Chinese Minister in the sense you indicate. He replied that
his telegram was sent before our conversation and that my assurances had
so far allayed his fears that he had materially modified his contemplated
reply to the dean sent May 9th. This reply expressed the opinion of the
Chinese Government that after the rendition of [sic] the three guarantees
enumerated in the dean’s note could be agreed to and indicated the
Government’s willingness to prepare for negotiations on the other subjects
with a view to attaining a satisfactory result at an early date, provided such
matters will contribute to Chinese and foreign welfare and can be put into
practice without difficulty. I placed on May 14 on the circular transmitting
this reply a notation again stating that the American Government desired
forthcoming negotiations to be strictly limited to the rendition of the
Court53 and was “not prepared to make rendition conditional upon
obtaining from the Chinese Government any benefits or concessions upon
extraneous subjects.”
I also concurred in the dean’s opinion that the three guarantees enumerated
in the dean’s note of April 10 be given before rendition takes place. I
explained the matter to the Chinese Chamber of Commerce in Shanghai and

[Document 519]
The Chargé in Portugal (Carroll) to the Secretary of State
LISBON, September 15, 1924.

[Received October 6.]

No. 896
previous correspondence concerning the attitude of the Portuguese
Government in regard to the proposal for the modification of the terms of
the existing embargo on the shipment of arms and munitions of war to
China, I have the honor to transmit herewith copies in the original and in
translation of a note from the Portuguese Foreign Office, dated September
12, 1924, and received today, stating that the Portuguese Government
approves the terms of the embargo and of the interpretative note of the
diplomatic body in Peking, and that it has instructed its representative in
that capital to make known his readiness to accord the formal assent of his
Government upon obtaining unanimity of action by the interested powers.
I have [etc.]

J. W. CARROLL

[Document 520]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, October 24, 1924.

No. 997
SIR: I have the honour to inform you that the attention of His Majesty’s
Government has been called to the fact that military aircraft and machine
guns were recently conveyed to Dairen by the French Mail steamer
Chantilly, and are understood to have now been delivered at their
destination. According to a report on the subject which appeared in the
London Times on October 17th last this vessel, although a mail steamer,
was actually diverted from her course for this purpose.

In the opinion of His Majesty’s Government a grave breach of the whole
spirit of the embargo agreement has thus been committed and the repetition
of such incidents would exercise a most detrimental effect upon the
adoption and enforcement of the Washington-Peking resolution. In these
circumstances, I have the honour to request that you will be so good as to
bring the matter to the urgent attention of the competent United States
authorities, and to enquire whether the United States Government would be
prepared to instruct their Representative at Paris to associate himself with
his British Colleague in addressing strong representations on the subject to
the French Government.

I may add that according to the information at the disposal of His Majesty’s
Government, the Japanese Government have taken steps to prevent the
delivery of anticipated further consignments via Dairen, and regret that the
necessary precautions to this end were not taken at an earlier date.
I have [etc.]

[Document 521]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, October 29, 1924.

No. 1014
SIR: I have the honour to refer to the note which you were so good as to
address to Mr. Chilton on October 17th, 1923, and to previous
correspondence regarding the embargo upon the export of arms and
munitions of war to China, and to inform you, by direction of Mr. Secretary
MacDonald, that His Majesty’s Government feel that the time is now ripe
for the definite adoption by the signatory powers of the revised Arms
Embargo resolution proposed at the Washington Conference, and of certain
portions of the interpretative note. As you are aware, this resolution
provides for the prohibition of the export of arms or munitions of war,
whether complete or in parts, to China, while the interpretative note
appended thereto further provides for the prohibition of the export of
aircraft other than commercial aircraft, together with machinery and
materials destined exclusively for the manufacture of arms or the equipment
of arsenals. You will further be aware that the only Powers of importance
who have not yet accepted the whole resolution in principle are now the
Netherlands, Norway and Sweden.

Mr. Secretary MacDonald has lately been in consultation with the
competent departments of His Majesty’s Government in regard to the action
which it would be necessary to take to enforce the Washington resolution
above-mentioned, and in the circumstances, I have been instructed to
furnish you with the following explanation of the position of my
Government in the matter. By means of an Order in Council dated
December 13th, 1921, copies of which are enclosed herein for facility of
reference, the export of the arms and munitions of war enumerated therein
is already prohibited to all destinations except under licence from the Board
of Trade, who will continue to refuse to issue licences for the export of such

goods to China. As regards the export of aircraft and parts thereof as
mentioned in the interpretative note, I would state that although there is at
present no restriction upon the export of aeroplanes from the United
Kingdom, His Majesty’s Government are prepared to take the necessary
steps to obtain the addition of the words “aircraft and component parts
thereof” to the Order in Council referred to above. In order, however, that
the export of aircraft to countries other than China may suffer no
interference, His Majesty’s Government propose to issue through the Board
of Trade a general licence permitting aircraft to be exported freely to
countries other than China.

As regards machinery and materials destined for warlike purposes, also
referred to in the interpretative note, His Majesty’s Government do not
consider it possible to prohibit the export of “machinery destined
exclusively for the manufacture of arms or the equipment of arsenals,” as in
the opinion of my Government this would not only be impossible to
administer but also it is very doubtful whether they have the power to
prohibit the exportation of such machinery, in view of the provisions of
Section 8 of the Customs and Inland Revenue Act, 1879, as amended by
Section 17 of the Finance Act, 1921. His Majesty’s Government desire me
to point out, however, that materials so destined are already very largely
covered by the list of articles specifically prohibited to be exported by the
Order in Council of December 13th, 1921.

In so far as my Government are concerned, therefore, the situation is that
they are now in a position practically to enforce the Washington resolution
and a considerable portion of the interpretative note. Consequently, now
that sufficient unanimity has been reached among the signatories of the
Embargo Agreement, I have been instructed to enquire whether the United
States Government, assuming that they are prepared, if they have not done
so already, to adopt equivalent administrative measures themselves, would
be disposed to make formal proposals to the various governments
concerned for the adoption, from January 1st, 1925, of the Washington
resolution and of at least so much of the interpretative note as His Majesty’s
Government are able to enforce. In this connection, I would add that my
Government, although, as has been explained above, unable to enforce the
portion of the interpretative note relating to machinery destined exclusively

[Document 522]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, November 11, 1924.

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your Note, No. 997
of October 24, 1924, in which you state that the attention of the British
Government has been called to the fact that military aircraft and machine
guns were recently conveyed to Dairen by the French Mail steamer
Chantilly, and inquire whether this Government would be prepared to
instruct its representative at Paris to associate himself with his British
Colleague in addressing strong representations on the subject to the French
Government.

This Government shares the view of the British Government that, if the
report appearing in the London Times of October 17 last is based on fact, a
serious contravention of the Arms Embargo Agreement has occurred.
Similar press reports have reached this Government, but they have not as
yet been officially confirmed. The American Chargé d’Affaires ad interim
in Paris is, nevertheless, being instructed to discuss the matter with his
British Colleague.

Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 523]
The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
502. … It seems evident that with the present definition for commercial
aircraft the French have not broken the letter of the law and for that reason
no purpose would be served by further representations. Phipps, the British

[Document 524]
The Chargé in Denmark (Harriman) to the Secretary of State
COPENHAGEN, November 17, 1924.

[Received December 3.]

No. 796
in which reference is made to an Instruction dated October 17, 1923,61
requesting this Legation to communicate to the Danish Foreign Office the
views of the United States Government with respect to the proposed
modification of the terms of the existing embargo on the shipment of arms
and munitions of war to China, and to express the hope of the Government
of the United States that the Danish Government would approve the terms
of the modified embargo, I have the honor to enclose, herewith, copy and
translation of a Note from the Royal Danish Foreign Office, dated
November 6, 1924, setting forth the views of the Danish Government in
regard to this matter.

I have [etc.]

OLIVER B. HARRIMAN

[Enclosure—Translation ]
The Danish Minister for Foreign Affairs (Moltke) to the American Chargé (Harriman)
COPENHAGEN, November 6, 1924.

MR. CHARGÉ D’AFFAIRES: By a note dated November 5, 1923, you were good enough
to submit to the Royal Government an interpretation of the draft resolution
in regard to the prohibition of the importation of arms and munitions into

China, presented at the Washington Conference, and discussed at a meeting
of the Chiefs of Mission at Peking on October 3, 1922. At the same time
you informed my predecessor that your Government intended to advise its
Minister at Peking that it would be ready to adhere formally to the
resolution, as well as to the interpretation, on the condition that there should
be substantial unanimity on the subject between the powers represented at
Peking.

In making this communication you expressed the hope that the Danish
Government might find it possible to instruct its representative at Peking in
a similar sense.

By a note of September 10th last, Mr. Prince63 subsequently advised my
Government that the United States Government would appreciate being
informed without delay as to the point of view of the Royal Government
with regard to this question.

After having had recourse to the competent authorities, I have the honor to
inform you as follows: The Royal Government shares warmly the general
desire to see normal conditions reestablished in China. For that same reason
it adhered in due course without hesitation to the agreement of 1919, within
the limits permitted by legislation.

The Danish Government considers it of great importance that the
arrangement eventually adopted on the subject in question shall obtain the
approval of all the powers whose adherence would have real importance for
its efficacy.

The Royal Government has subjected the draft resolution discussed at the
Washington Conference to a thorough examination, and, as far as it is
concerned, would see with much pleasure a sufficiently general support of
the resolution in order to attain the object sought.

The interpretation of the draft discussed at the meeting of the Chiefs of
Mission at Peking on October 3, 1922, does not conform to the Danish laws
now in force. However, the reports of the King’s Minister at Peking have
given the Royal Government the impression that some doubt has arisen as
to the results of that meeting, inasmuch as there is some uncertainty as to

[Document 525]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, November 20, 1924.

No. 1127
SIR: I have the honour to refer to your note of the 11th instant, in which you
were so good as to inform me that the United States Chargé d’Affaires ad
interim in Paris had been instructed to discuss with his British colleague the
question of the alleged breach of the Arms Embargo Agreement by the
French mail steamer Chantilly. I now understand from His Majesty’s
Government that the United States Chargé d’Affaires in Paris is suggesting
to you that, for the purpose of arresting the export of a large number of
aircraft recently ordered in France, a gentleman’s agreement should be
negotiated between the United States Government, the French Government
and His Majesty’s Government, prohibiting absolutely the export of all
aircraft to China during the present revolutionary disturbances in that
country.

His Majesty’s Government have instructed me to inform you that they
welcome this proposal and would be prepared to co-operate with the United
States Government in the event of their deciding to approach the French
Government to this end. His Majesty’s Government feel that it might be
desirable to include other governments in such an agreement, for example,
the Japanese and Italian Governments.

I should be grateful if you would inform me in due course of the views of
the United States Government in this matter and as to the inclusion of other
governments in such an agreement.

I have [etc.]

ESME HOWARD

[Document 526]
The Chargé in the Netherlands (Sussdorff) to the Secretary of
State
THE HAGUE, November 20, 1924.

[Received December 8.]

No. 367
SIR: With reference to the Department’s unnumbered Instruction of October
1924, I have the honor to inform the Department that I have just received
a Note from the Netherlands Minister for Foreign Affairs in which he
outlines the views of his Government with respect to the proposed
modification of the terms of the existing embargo on the shipment of arms
and munitions of war to China. A copy and translation of the Foreign
Minister’s communication is enclosed herewith.

I have [etc.]

LOUIS SUSSDORFF, Jr.

[Enclosure—Translation ]
The Netherland Minister for Foreign Affairs (Karnebeek) to the American Chargé (Sussdorff)
THE HAGUE, November 18, 1924.

Mr. Tobin, was good enough to bring to my attention the desire of the
American Government that the Government of the Queen should approve
the amended draft resolution concerning the embargo on the shipment of
arms and munitions of war to China (draft presented to the Washington

[Document 527]
The Chargé in Sweden (Gittings) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
STOCKHOLM, December 1, 1924.

[Received December 17.]

No. 319
SIR: With reference to this Legation’s despatch No. 272 of September 10,
1924, and previous correspondence concerning the proposed modification
of the terms of the existing embargo on the shipment of arms and munitions
of war to China (as set forth in the Department’s unnumbered instruction of
October 17, 192369 ), I have the honor to transmit, as enclosures, in the
original French text and in translation, the reply of the Royal Swedish
Ministry for Foreign Affairs, dated November 26, 1924.
I have [etc.]

JOHN STERETT GITTINGS, Jr.

[Enclosure—Translation ]
The Swedish Minister for Foreign Affairs (Unden) to the American Chargé (Gittings)
STOCKHOLM, November 26, 1924.

MR. CHARGÉ D’AFFAIRES: In a letter of November 6, 1923, Mr. Cord Meyer, then
Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of the United States, was good enough to
inform the Minister for Foreign Affairs that the Government of the United
States had notified its Peking representative of its acceptance of the

resolutions discussed by the diplomatic corps in Peking in a meeting held
on October 3, 1922, concerning the embargo on the export of arms and
munitions destined for China. These recommendations were based,
according to the letter in question, on the adhesion of the powers
represented in Peking to the amended project of the resolution on this
subject presented on January 31, 1922, to the Washington Conference, and
to a more extensive interpretative formula of this project of which the letter
contained the text.

At the same time Mr. Cord Meyer expressed the hope of his Government
that the Swedish Government would find itself in a position to give to its
representative in Peking instructions in the same sense.

The question having been subjected to a thorough study, I find myself to-
day able to communicate to you the following: The Swedish Government is
fully convinced of the extreme importance of the reestablishment in China
of a normal situation, and is willing to believe that measures having for
their object the effective prevention of the importation of arms and
munitions into that country cannot fail to contribute to that end. It will
therefore not refuse, on condition that all the interested powers do likewise,
to adhere in equal degree to the aforementioned project of resolution,
presented to the Washington Conference. It is also disposed, subject to the
same condition, to join in the recommendation adopted on February 9,
1923, by the Chiefs of Mission at Peking, which has for its object
extending the projected resolution aforementioned to cover aircraft other
than commercial aircraft.

As to the far greater extension of the prohibition of export set forth in the
meeting of October 3, 1922, this would not be in accordance with the
dispositions of Swedish law and so the Swedish Government does not find
itself in a position to acquiesce therein. It would, moreover, feel itself less
warranted in doing so in view of the fact that the reports concerning the
deliberations of Washington and Peking and information received from still
other sources scarcely permit a full reliance on a general adhesion to such
an extension by the powers concerned.

[Document 528]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, December 10, 1924.

No. 1205
SIR: I have the honour to refer to my note No. 1127 of the 20th ultimo in
which I informed you that His Majesty’s Government would be prepared to
co-operate with the United States Government in the event of their deciding
to adopt the proposal submitted to them by the United States Chargé
d’Affaires in Paris suggesting that for the purpose of arresting the export of
a large number of aircraft recently ordered in France, a gentleman’s
agreement should be negotiated between the United States Government, the
French Government and His Majesty’s Government, prohibiting absolutely
the export of all aircraft to China during the present revolutionary
disturbances in that country.

His Majesty’s Government now inform me that they are desirous of
ascertaining at an early date whether the United States Government are
disposed to adopt the proposal in question, and in the affirmative event, I
am instructed to enquire whether the United States Government would be
prepared to consider the possibility of giving greater efficacy to the
suggested agreement by including in it other aircraft-producing Powers,
irrespective as to whether or no such Powers are already parties to the
existing agreement enforcing the embargo upon the export of arms to
China.

I have [etc.]

(For the Ambassador)
H. G. CHILTON

[Document 529]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, December 20, 1924.
by the American Chargé d’Affaires at Paris that an informal understanding
should be negotiated between the American, British, and French
Governments prohibiting absolutely the export of any kind of aircraft to
China during the present revolutionary disturbances in that country, and
stating that the British Government would welcome such a proposal and
would be prepared to cooperate with this Government in the event of its
deciding to approach the French Government to this end, I have the honor
to inform you that this Government would be happy to inquire of the French
Government whether it would be receptive to a proposal to the effect that
the interested Powers agree to restrain their citizens and subjects from
exporting any kind of aircraft to China in so far as their respective laws and
regulations will permit.

This Government appreciates that the qualified character of the proposal as
herein set forth may fall short of the absolute degree of prohibition which
the British Government appears to have in mind. For its own part, however,
this Government would, under existing legislation, find it difficult to
obligate itself in the matter without reservation concerning the legal
limitations of its competence with regard to the export of aircraft. In this
connection, there is enclosed herewith a copy of the Joint Resolution of
1922, issued pursuant thereto, under the provisions of which this
Government is restraining its citizens from the export of arms and
munitions of war to China. As a matter of actual practice, however, I may
state that, for a period of over two years, this Government has discouraged
(with entire success, as it understands) the exportation of any kind of

aircraft to China, since it appears that, at the present time, there is no such
thing as commercial aviation in China and that shipments of this character
almost invariably are found to fall into the hands of militarists and to be
used by them for military purposes.

The suggestion of the American Chargé d’Affaires at Paris, to which you
refer, related to an agreement regarding aircraft by all the interested Powers
rather than merely by the three Powers named in your notes. In the opinion
of this Government, the participation of France in such an agreement is of
particular importance; and, should the French Government indicate a
willingness to accede to such a proposal, this Government would be glad to
join with the British and French Governments in giving immediate effect to
an agreement of the nature above indicated and to cooperate in afterward
extending its scope so as to include as many as possible of the other Powers
whose adherence might be deemed desirable.

I shall be glad if you will inform me of the attitude of the British
Government toward such a proposal, and whether it will be disposed to
instruct its representative at Paris to cooperate in sounding the French
Government with regard thereto.

Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 530]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, December 24, 1924.
concerning the China Arms Embargo Agreement in which you state that the
British Government feels that the time is now ripe for the definite adoption,
by the signatory Powers of the revised Arms Embargo resolution proposed
at the Washington Conference, and of certain portions of the interpretative
note recommended by the Diplomatic Body at Peking, I have the honor to
inform you that this Government, in its desire to strengthen in every way
the effectiveness of the embargo, has given most careful consideration to
the suggestion made in your note that it should undertake to make formal
proposals to the various governments concerned with a view to the
adoption, from January 1, 1925, of the revised Washington Resolution and
of at least so much of the interpretative note as the British Government is
able to enforce.

With regard to the question of “substantial unanimity” in the adoption of the
revised formula, on which this Government originally predicated its
readiness to proceed in the matter, it appears that the governments of
Norway, The Netherlands, and Brazil have not as yet signified their
willingness to adopt the formula in question, and that the Government of
Sweden is prepared to do so only in the event that all the other interested
Powers adopt the formula and in equal degree with Sweden. It appears,
moreover, that although the Danish Government is prepared to adopt the
language of the revised Washington Resolution, it is not prepared to adopt
the interpretative note, and desires to make the reservation that airplanes be
excluded from the scope of the embargo in so far as concerns the
regulations governing the prohibition of exportation in Denmark. In this
connection, there is quoted the final paragraph of a note on the subject,
to the American Chargé d’Affaires at Copenhagen:75

“Le Gouvernement Royal serait cependant disposé—sous
condition que tous les autres Etats interessés adoptent un procédé
analogue—à adherer, en conformité de la recommandation votée
par les chefs de mission réunis à Pékin le 9 février 1923, à la
résolution présentée a la Conference de Washington sans
interpretation, sous la réserve toutefois que les aéronefs ne sont
pas compris par les règies concernant la prohibition d’exportation
en vigueur en Danemark.”
It is the understanding of this Government that the new formula is to be
adopted in substitution for the Agreement of May, 1919; for it would
seem impracticable for the Powers to apply two varying formulae
simultaneously. If the new formula were, therefore, to be adopted at the
present time, we should lose the adherence to the embargo of the
Netherlands and Brazilian Governments, which are signatory to the
Agreement of May, 1919; and we should have, on the part of Denmark,
only a qualified adherence of substantially the same character as the 1919
Agreement.

With reference, moreover, to the question of the adoption of the new
formula in its entirety, the British Government, as explained in your note
under reference, finds itself unable to enforce the portion of the
interpretative note relating to machinery destined exclusively for the
manufacture of arms or the equipment of arsenals, although it is stated that
transactions of this character will continue to be discouraged on the
understanding that the other governments concerned do likewise. The
situation confronting the British Government in this particular is similar to
that in which this Government would find itself with respect to its strict
legal authority to prohibit the export of materials and machinery destined
exclusively for the manufacture of arms and the equipment of arsenals;
although, as a matter of actual practice, this Government has, with a very
fair degree of success, discouraged the shipment to China of exports of this
character on the part of its nationals. It would seem, however, that, before
definitely binding themselves to the new formula, it would be necessary for
both the American and British Governments to qualify the acceptance on
their part of a very considerable portion of the interpretative note.

From a survey of the actual working of the Agreement of May, 1919, it is
the view of this Government that the precise formula in use has been of less
importance than the intent and spirit of the various governments concerned
in carrying out the Agreement entered into at that time. In spite of the
infractions of the embargo which have occurred from time to time, this
Government is of the opinion that the embargo has attained a measurable
success, and it desires in every way to strengthen its effectiveness. In view,
however, of the difficulties apparently to be met at the present time in
substituting the revised Washington formula (with the interpretative note)
for the Agreement of May, 1919, this Government questions whether any
practical benefits would be derived from an attempt to do so until a more
complete unanimity can be had among the interested Powers. I need hardly
say that I regret that no greater success has thus far attended the efforts
which have been made to procure substantial unanimity in this matter.
Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 531]
The American Group to the Secretary of State
NEW YORK, June 12, 1924.

[Received June 14.]

SIR: We hand you herewith copy of a memorandum prepared by one of the
representatives of the British Group in Peking, in association with the
Chairman of the British & Chinese Corporation, Ltd., together with copy of
letter of May 23rd from Sir Charles Addis to Mr. C. F. Whigham. This
memorandum is submitted to us by the British Group for consideration in
advance of a meeting of the Consortium Council arranged to be held in
London on July 14th, which will be attended by Mr. Lamont, Chairman of
the American Group. We would appreciate very much any expression of
opinion the Department may care to make on this memorandum, as of
assistance to the American Group in discussing it at the proposed meeting.
We also enclose for the information of the Department a very brief
suggestion from our Group of matters to be placed upon the agenda of the
meeting. If the Department has any suggestions in connection with any of
these topics, they will be gratefully received.

Respectfully,
J. P. MORGAN & Co.

For the American Group
[Enclosure]
The Chairman of the British Group (Addis) to Mr. C. F. Whigham, Representative in London of
the American Group
LONDON, May 23, 1924.

MY DEAR WHIGHAM: I understand that Mr. Lamont is expected here sometime in
July and, if it would suit his convenience, I should propose to convene a
meeting of the Consortium Council at this office for Monday, July 28.
As soon as we have agreed the date of the meeting with Lamont I should
advise the other groups and invite them to give me as early notice as
possible of any items they desire to place on the agenda.

I may take this opportunity of reminding you that the Consortium
Agreement, which was for a period of five years, will expire in October,
1925. It may be expedient, therefore, at our meeting to consider in advance
what step, if any, should be taken to provide for its renewal. It might take
the form, for instance, of a resolution for its renewal without any limit of
time, subject to the right of any Group to withdraw on giving six or twelve
months’ notice.

I have taken advantage of the return from China of Major Nathan, C. M. G.,
who has recently been appointed Chairman of the British and Chinese
Corporation, and of the presence of Mayers, to ask them to formulate what
in their view constitutes the chief difficulties in the way of industrial
progress in China. I enclose an advance copy of the memorandum which
they have prepared.

With the permission of my colleagues on the Council I should propose to
ask these gentlemen to be present at our meeting in July for the purpose of
answering any questions which the Council may wish to put to them. Their
proposals, which, it will be noted, involve the elimination of Residuary
Participation, are intended to secure greater individual freedom of action on
the part of the Peking Representatives of the Consortium.

I reserve the expression of any opinion on the merits of the proposals until
their authors have had an opportunity of explaining them to the Council.
As soon as the date of the meeting is fixed I propose to communicate a copy
of the Memorandum to each of the other Groups who will, no doubt, wish
to discuss this very important matter with their respective Governments.

Yours sincerely,
C. S. ADDIS
[Subenclosure]
Memorandum by Mr. S. F. Mayers, of the British Group in Peking, and Mr. W. S. Nathan,
Chairman of the British and Chinese Corporation, Ltd.
LONDON, May 12, 1924.

LACK OF PROGRESS IN RAILWAY CONSTRUCTION
1. It is now two years since the Consortium recorded the view that there
was no reason why the development of railways should wait on the solution
of China’s administrative problems.
2. During these two years the increase of disorder in China and the
continued reluctance of the Government to seek assistance from the
Consortium have rendered progress impossible.

3. We suggest that the time has arrived to bring to a test the question as to
how far assistance from the Consortium, as at present constituted, is
practicable.

CHINESE RELUCTANCE TO NEGOTIATE WITH THE CONSORTIUM
4. In the sphere of general debt consolidation the Chinese objections to
dealing with the Consortium are apparently less pronounced than in the
sphere of railway development. In the opinion of our representatives on the
spot, the prospects of assistance from the Consortium being ultimately
found practicable for financial or administrative loans are better than the
prospects of making a Consortium loan for railway purposes.
5. The reason they assign for this is that the Chinese have less fear of losing
their liberty of action by concluding a financial loan, with an international
combination such as the Consortium than they have of seeking from such a

combination the funds needed for railway purposes. In the case of a
financial loan the Chinese feel that once the security has been allocated and
the arrangements made for its supervision by the Customs or Salt Revenue
departments, there will be no marked increase in foreign control of their
affairs. On the other hand, in the case of railway loans, they foresee serious
administrative difficulties in entrusting to the nominees of a quadruple
international body the increased foreign control of their railways which they
know is inevitable if they are to regain the confidence of foreign investors.
DISSOLUTION OF THE CONSORTIUM UNDESIRABLE
6. The disordered condition of China, with the consequent lack of security,
renders it difficult to see any advantage, at the present time, in considering
either the dissolution of the Consortium or the separation of industrial or
railway loans from the scope of its intended activities. If such loans were
now thrown open to international competition, it is at least doubtful whether
railway development would be accelerated. In any case, before such
considerations are taken into account, it appears advisable to examine the
possibility of making some progress by means of an understanding which
would permit of greater liberty of action on the part of the individual
Groups.

POSSIBILITY OF DEVELOPING EXISTING BRITISH-FINANCED RAILWAYS
7. The various existing railways, for example those in which the British
Group is especially interested, viz. the Peking-Mukden, Tientsin-Pukow,
Shanghai-Nanking, Shanghai-Hangchow-Ningpo and Canton-Kowloon
lines, could each profitably employ a considerable amount of new capital;
but the Ministry of Communications will not entertain any suggestion of a
Consortium loan for these railways, and the Consortium Agreement
precludes any proposal for public issues for these lines without participation
being offered to the other groups. In these circumstances it would conduce
to progress if the British Group were at liberty to arrange for the finance
required by these existing railways without the obligation of offering
participation to the other groups.

POSSIBILITY OF DEVELOPING OTHER EXISTING OR NEW RAILWAYS

8. As regards other existing railways, the Peking-Hankow and Peking
Suiyuan lines are in urgent need of new capital for the payment of debts and
for further development. We believe that an offer of a loan for the
rehabilitation of these two railways would be welcomed by the Ministry of
Communications, if means can be found to present such an offer in a
manner acceptable to Chinese public opinion. We therefore suggest that, so
soon as any one of the groups has decided on its ability to make such an
offer, it should inform the other groups of its intention and proceed with
negotiations individually.
9. Similarly, in the case of loans for the construction of new railways any
group which is in a position to make proposals to the Ministry of
Communications for the issue of a loan should be at liberty to do so
individually, after informing the other groups of its intention.
10. In both of these cases it would be understood that upon signature of an
agreement the group concerned would be bound to offer a share to any
other group desirous of actual participation but without obligation to offer
residuary participation.

PROPOSALS FOR GREATER INDIVIDUAL LIBERTY OF ACTION
11. In order to put the foregoing into concrete form, we suggest the
adoption by the Consortium of a resolution on the following lines:—
With a view to giving effect to the opinion expressed in Article 12
of the Report of the Consortium Council dated May 1922, that the
development of railways in China should not wait upon the
solution of China’s administrative problems it is resolved that:—
(a) With regard to existing railways in respect to which
any group holds mortgage rights or rights in respect of
further finance, such group shall be free to conclude
agreements for the further finance of such railways by
public issue without offering participation to other
groups.

(b) With regard to other existing railways, new railways
or industrial enterprises, any group which is in a
position and desires to make a public issue shall be free,
after informing the other groups, to negotiate and
conclude agreements for such railways or enterprises
either individually or with any other group or groups
who are also in a position and desire to take their share
of the public issue for the same purpose.

(c) It shall be understood that no negotiations for any
one of the railways for which an agreement has been
pooled by an individual group shall be initiated without
the consent in writing of that group.

ALTERNATIVE PROPOSAL FOR INTER-GOVERNMENT NEGOTIATIONS
12. If, on the other hand, it is felt by all the groups that the principle of
equal participation must be strictly maintained, it appears to us advisable to
ask the four Governments to ascertain, either through their Ministers in
Peking, or by sending a special mission to China, by what means and under
what conditions the Chinese Government can be induced to agree to a
Consortium loan for railways on the lines of equal participation
contemplated by the Agreement. In the absence of an understanding
between the Chinese Government on the one side and the Consortium
Powers on the other, it appears to us improbable that the Consortium
Agreement as it stands can be made operative for railway loans.
W. S. NATHAN
S. F. MAYERS

[Document 532]
The Secretary of State to the American Group
WASHINGTON, June 26, 1924.

SIRS: I have received the letter of June 12, 1924, with which you enclosed a
copy of a memorandum prepared by Mr. S. F. Mayers, of the British Group
in Peking, in association with Mr. W. S. Nathan, Chairman of the British
and Chinese Corporation, Ltd., containing certain proposals in modification
of the Consortium Agreement of October 15, 1920; also a copy of a letter
dated May 23, 1924, relating to these proposals from Sir Charles Addis to
Mr. C. F. Whigham.

In view of the fact that the existing Consortium Agreement will expire in
October, 1925, the question has arisen of the advisability of continuing that
Agreement and of the possible necessity of making arrangements in the
near future to that end. I approve of the continued application to the field of
Chinese finance of the principles which that Agreement embodies, namely,
that loans made to China should be based upon sound investments, and that
this result should be assured by a mutual undertaking among the principal
national financial groups to abstain from reckless competition. While it is
no doubt true that the results of the past few years have been purely
negative, and that it is of course impossible to appraise the value of such
results, I nevertheless venture the opinion that, but for the existence of the
Consortium during this period, the financial situation of the Chinese
Government would present an even more difficult problem than it now
does. I therefore see no occasion for dissatisfaction with the policy which
has been followed, and I should welcome the making of arrangements to
continue that policy substantially unmodified.

With regard to the proposals contained in the memorandum prepared by Mr.
Mayers and Mr. Nathan, I am frankly disposed to concur in the criticism
made by Mr. Anderson in his telegram to Mr. Lamont of June 14 (a copy of
which was enclosed with Mr. Simpson’s letterito Mr. MacMurray of June

16), that these proposals “seem almost tantamount to abandoning
Consortium principles entirely”, at least in so far as concerns loans for
industrial purposes. I am apprehensive that the adoption of the phraseology
of Clause 11 of the memorandum would be likely to lead to
misunderstandings among the several national groups of the Consortium,
such as might tend to disrupt their unity of action and lead to a reversion to
the former regime of nationalistic competition which it was the fundamental
purpose of the Consortium to obviate.

It is possibly premature to make more detailed comment upon these
proposals until Mr. Mayers and Mr. Nathan shall have had an opportunity to
elaborate them at the meeting of the Consortium Council on July 14 next. If
it is then felt that there is sufficient ground for their belief that the Chinese
Government would be more readily inclined to negotiate with individual
groups, it would seem that the modifications to the proposals, as outlined by
Mr. Anderson in his telegram above mentioned, might afford a means of
facilitating dealing with the Chinese Government and at the same time
conserving the essential basis of principle animating the Consortium
Agreement, in the event that it should still appear desirable, in spite of the
progressive disintegration of the Chinese Government, that the development
of railways should proceed without awaiting a solution of China’s
administrative problems.

I have read with much interest the proposed agenda which you have
submitted for the meeting of the Consortium Council in London on July 14,
1924.

CHARLES E. HUGHES
secretary for the American group and Mr. John Van A. MacMurray was
Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs of the Department of State.

[Document 533]
The American Group to the Secretary of State
NEW YORK, July 29, 1924.

[Received July 30.]

SIR: We enclose, for the information and files of the Department, printed text
of Minutes of the Meeting of the Consortium Council held in London on
July 14th. …
Respectfully,
J. P. MORGAN & Co.

For the American Group
[Enclosure—Extracts]
Minutes of a Meeting of the Consortium Council Held July 14, 1924, in the Office of the
Hongkong & Shanghai Banking Corporation, London
CONSORTIUM AGREEMENT. It was resolved [It was agreed to recommend] that the
Consortium Agreement of October 15, 1920, remain in force on and after
October 15, 1925, subject to the right of any party thereto on or after
October 15, 1924, to give twelve months’ previous notice in writing
addressed to the other parties thereto withdrawing from such Agreement,
and on the expiration of such notice such party shall forthwith be released
from all obligations incurred by him by reason or arising out of such
Agreement, and shall cease to participate in any future rights, privileges and
obligations thereunder.

RAILWAY DEVELOPMENT. At the invitation of the Council Major W. S. Nathan, C. M.
G., and Mr. S. F. Mayers attended in person in support of their Joint

Memorandum containing proposals for greater elasticity in the working of
Railway loans.

It was decided to leave the Memorandum for further consideration in order
to enable the writers to discuss further the proposed resolutions therein
contained with the object of meeting the views of the Delegates.
CHINESE GROUP. Referring to the original declaration of the Consortium, made
upon its meeting at New York, October 15, 1920, expressing its desire to
receive co-operation from a Chinese Banking Group, it is the sense of the
Council that the Peking Representatives of the Consortium be requested to
consider again measures for undertaking at some appropriate moment
conversations with Chinese Bankers in order to discuss possible means
looking to the formation of a Representative Chinese Banking Group
organised to co-operate with the Consortium.

The meeting then adjourned.

C. S. ADDIS
R. TH. DE LA CHAUME
THOMAS W. LAMONT
K. YANO

[Document 534]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
1921, a joint resolution was introduced in the Senate on December 6,
1923, in language identical with that of the resolution introduced in 1921,
authorizing the President in his discretion to remit the balance of the Boxer

[Document 535]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
1. As regards the policy of remitting to China the remainder of
Boxer Indemnity permit me to say at once that I have been and
am strongly in favor of it. This also the sentiment of
overwhelming majority of Americans in China. In view of all the
past American legislation and of utterances official and unofficial
the Chinese also expect it though the Chinese Government has
refrained from any allusion to the subject.
2. A practical difficulty at the present time is that there is no
agency to receive the funds representing the Chinese people as a
whole for whose benefit remission would be made here. From
onethird to one-half of the provinces are independent of Peking
Government. People of these provinces would have just ground
for complaint if the benefits of the returned funds were
monopolized by the rival if larger group of provinces which
accept the Peking Government.
3. Another practical difficulty is that Peking Government is in
desperate financial straits. It cannot collect taxes, yet military
governors of the provinces and the other military commanders
insist that it shall make them appropriations for their forces which
are practically personal armies. Politicians too get public funds
for their own purposes. If in these circumstances the remainder of
the, indemnity funds were liberated for the uncontrolled use of the
Peking Government at the present time they would quickly
disappear through these military and political channels greatly to

the injury of the Chinese people. Both Chinese and Americans
would however oppose an unconditional grant of the balance of
the Boxer Indemnity funds to the Peking Government.
4. The time is inopportune for the enactment of the proposed
legislation. Not only does the Chinese Government persist in its
refusal to pay loans and debts to American citizens, not only were
American ships engaged in lawful traffic last season on the
Yangtze fired on, but today American treaty rights in regard to
trade and commerce are violated in several provinces and 6
American missionaries within the last 60 days have been attacked
or carried off or murdered by bandits or soldiers. Against these
enormities the American Government has protested. The display
at this juncture of the generosity and friendship towards China
contemplated in the joint resolution introduced in the Senate
December 6, 1923, could not fail seriously to weaken the force of
these protests both with the Chinese Government and the Chinese
public opinion.
5. If the passage of the joint resolution involves the
relinquishment by the United States of the position it has
maintained in relation to the Chinese Maritime Customs since the
indemnity was imposed upon China in 1901, I should consider
this result under existing conditions in China gravely detrimental
to Chinese interests. China must soon face the great issues of
unification, stabilization of government, financial rehabilitation,
disbandment of troops, etc., and she will need the help of
America. Until these questions are disposed of America, should
not either in her own interest or in the interest of China part with
any of the leverage she now enjoys in common with other
nations. In comparison with the British, French and Japanese our
diplomatic position has already been impaired by our
nonparticipation in the control of the salt revenues. To turn over
to these nations the power and influence we now share with them
in connection with the customs revenues would be a fatal mistake.

[Document 536]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
WASHINGTON, April 22, 1924.

No. 638
concerning the proposed remission of the Boxer Indemnity, there is
enclosed herewith, for the information of the Legation, a copy of the
“Hearings before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of
Representatives, on H. J. Res. 201”, which provides for the remission of
the balance of the Indemnity.

Your views with respect to the advisability of such action at the present time
received most careful consideration. The legislative aspect of the situation,
however, was such as seemed to present the immediate alternatives of
supporting the Resolution at the present time, and opposing its passage—a
course which appeared likely to defeat entirely the policy of remission.
While fully appreciating the force of your views as to the danger of
misconstruction which might be placed by the Chinese upon such action by
this Government at the present time, I therefore deemed it preferable to give
my support to the Resolution, and instructed the Chief of the Far Eastern
Division to appear before the House Committee for this purpose.
CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 537]
The Secretary of State to the Chinese Minister (Sze)
WASHINGTON, June 14, 1924.

SIR: I have the honor to enclose herewith a copy of an act of Congress,
approved May 21, 1924, whereby the President is authorized, in his
discretion, to remit to China the balance of the Boxer Indemnity, such
remission to begin as from October 1, 1917, and to be at such times and in
such manner as the President shall deem just, the intent of the Congress, as
stated in the preamble to the Act, being further to develop the educational
and other cultural activities of China.

Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES
[Enclosure]
Joint Resolution of Congress, Approved May 21, 1924, Providing for the Remission of Further
Payments of the Annual Installments of the Chinese Indemnity
WHEREAS by authority of a joint resolution of Congress approved May 25,
1908, the President of the United States was authorized to remit unto
China the sum of $11,961,121. of the Boxer indemnity fund accredited to
the United States, which sum the President on December 28, 1908, duly
remitted and which, at the request of China, was specified to be used for
educational purposes; and
WHEREAS it is deemed proper as a further act of friendship to remit the balance
of said indemnity fund amounting to $6,137,552. in order further to
develop the educational and other cultural activities of China: Now
therefore be it Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled, That the President is

hereby authorized, in his discretion, to remit to China as an act of friendship
any or all further payments of the annual installments of the Chinese
indemnity due under the bond received from China pursuant to the protocol
December, 1908, pursuant to the authority of the joint resolution of
Congress approved May 25, 1908, for indemnity against losses and
expenses incurred by reason of the so-called Boxer disturbances in China
to be at such times and in such manner as the President shall deem just.

[Document 538]
The Chinese Minister (Sze) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, June 14, 1924.

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of June 14th,
1924, in which you are good enough to convey to me the welcome
information that the President has approved the Joint Resolution passed by
the American Congress to provide for the remission of further payments of
the annual installments of the Chinese indemnity. I hasten to express to you
the thanks of the Government and people of China for this signal proof of
American friendship for China. The Chinese Nation will ever hold this
generous action on the part of the United States in grateful remembrance.
The first remission by the American Government in 1908 enabled the
Chinese Government to devote the annual payments of the indemnity thus
set free to educational purposes. The results of the experiment have
convinced the Chinese Government of the wisdom of the step taken in this
direction. It is the purpose of the Chinese Government to continue the
policy with the further payments remitted by the present act of the
American Government with such modifications as experience and the
demands of the times may dictate. As the demand for scientific education
has in recent years been increasingly urgent in China my Government now
proposes to devote the funds thus made available by the generosity of the
American Government to educational and cultural purposes, paying
especial attention to scientific requirements. Moreover, it is the intention of
my Government to intrust the administration of the funds to a Board which
shall be composed of Chinese and American citizens as members, and also
to avail itself of the services of experts in working out the details along the
lines indicated. Upon the formulation of some definite plan I shall take
pleasure in laying it before you for your consideration.

Accept [etc.]

Sao-Ke Arrep Sze

[Document 539]
The Chinese Minister (Sze) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, June 14, 1924.

SIR: I have the honor to inform you that I have received a cable message
addressed by the President of the Republic of China to the President of the
United States of America, the text of which is enclosed herewith.
I shall be greatly obliged if you will be so kind as to transmit the message to
its high destination.

Accept [etc.]

SAO-KE ALFRED SZE
[Enclosure—Telegram]
The President of China (Tsao Kun) to President Coolidge
MR. PRESIDENT: I consider it a privilege to bespeak, on behalf of my fellow
citizens, to Your Excellency and the people of the United States our sincere
appreciation of the generosity shown in the remission of their portion of the
1901 indemnity. The remission of a part of this indemnity in 1908
contributed much to the special friendliness toward the people of the United
States, which had developed in the hearts of the Chinese people ever since
the beginning of intercourse between our two peoples. The present action
will still further increase the friendliness, and Your Excellency’s
Government have thus placed the people of China under an endless debt of
gratitude to the people of the United States.

TSAO KUN

[Document 540]
The Secretary of State to President Coolidge
WASHINGTON, December 15, 1924.

MY DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: I have the honor to invite your attention at this time to the
matter of the exercise of your authority in remitting to China the balance of
the Boxer Indemnity. This remission is to be in accordance with the
provisions of the Joint Resolution of May 21, 1924, (a copy of which is
enclosed), at such times and in such manner as you shall deem just.
The steps heretofore taken are these: On June 14 the Department
transmitted to the Chinese Minister in Washington a copy of the Joint
Resolution. Mr. Sze then stated that his Government intended to intrust the
administration of the funds to a Board which should be composed of
Chinese and American citizens, to avail itself of the services of experts in
working out the details of this arrangement, and, upon the formulation of a
definite plan, to lay it before the Department for its consideration. In
pursuance of this plan, Doctor Paul Monroe, Director of the Teachers
College of Columbia University, proceeded to Peking last August at the
instance of the Chinese Government, and held conferences with Chinese
officials and educators. As a result of conclusions thereby reached, a
Presidential Mandate was issued on September 17, creating the “China
Foundation for the Promotion of Education and Culture,” and appointing
nine Chinese and five American citizens members of the Foundation and
trustees of the funds to be realized from the successive remissions of the
balance of the Indemnity. It is my understanding that, by this action, the
Chinese Government definitely divorced itself from any future control or
supervision over the funds of the Indemnity, surrendering the authority,
which it would otherwise normally exercise, to the Foundation, which,
under the terms of its constitution is a self-perpetuating body.
While not undertaking to give formal approval to the measures which the
Chinese Government has thus far adopted, the Department has made known

to the Minister of Foreign Affairs that it perceived no objection to the
personnel of the Board of Trustees. Before, however, venturing to
recommend to you affirmative action on this matter, it has seemed to me
highly desirable, and perhaps essential, that this Government should receive
some reasonably definite statement as to the general purposes to which the
Foundation contemplates devoting the Indemnity funds. While appreciating
that the determination of the specific uses of the funds within its control
will perhaps form the most important function of the Board of Trustees, and
not desiring inappropriately to circumscribe its latitude of action, I have felt
that this Government might subject itself to criticism, were it not to require
some such statement as I have indicated, in order that there may be an
assurance that the funds will actually be expended in conformity with the
intent of the Congress. With a view to providing a satisfactory formula,
there has been informally suggested to me the following Resolution:
“That the Board of Trustees of the China Foundation for the
promotion of Education and Culture resolves that the released
Boxer Indemnity funds shall be used for the promotion of
scientific study, for the application of modern science to the
specific needs of China, and for the training of individuals and the
conduct of experiment, either individual or group, for the
application of modern science to the specific conditions of
China.”
The language of this resolution appears to me quite satisfactory, but before
proceeding further with respect to this question I should like to have your
views. Should the course suggested meet with your approval, I shall be glad
to take such further action as will, within the near future, I hope, enable the
Department formally to submit to you its recommendations.

There are certain other facts in our relations with China, which, although
not directly connected with the question of the remission of the Indemnity,
nevertheless seem to me to deserve consideration simultaneously. There
have been within the last few years numerous instances in China of assaults
and depredations by Chinese bandits and soldiers upon the persons and
property of American citizens. In a majority of these cases, the Department
has had reason to hold that the outrages, as well as the failure to take steps

properly to punish those guilty of them, were due to the negligence of the
Chinese Government; and, as a result, numerous claims for damages have
been presented to that Government, a large portion of which remain
unsatisfied.

I also regret to be obliged to bring to your attention the further fact that, in
order to tide over financial emergencies in the last few years in connection
with the maintenance of Chinese students in this country, representatives of
the Chinese Government in Washington have borrowed from local banks
amounts aggregating approximately $180,000, which sums, although long
overdue, have not as yet been repaid. These banks have sought to have a
sufficient sum to cover these obligations retained from any funds that may
be remitted to China. The Department has, however, taken the position that
these loans, from a strictly legal point of view, are on the same basis as any
other financial obligation of the Chinese Government to American citizens,
and that it could not recommend the action desired by the banks without, at
the same time, discriminating against numerous American creditors of the
Chinese Government, the total of whose overdue obligations far exceeds the
amount involved in the remission of the Indemnity.

In both of the above classes of claims against the Chinese Government, I
am, however, of the opinion that not only a legal, but a particular moral,
obligation rests upon the Chinese Government to pay those American
citizens whose interests are suffering by reason of a failure to liquidate their
just claims. At the moment this Government is demonstrating its friendship
for China by the return of the Indemnity, it would seem peculiarly fitting for
the Government of that country to make an endeavor to satisfy these claims.
I therefore propose, if it meets with your approval to make these views
known to the Chinese Government in such manner as may seem most
appropriate for the purpose of bringing those now in authority in that
country to a realization of the peculiar obligation resting upon the Chinese
Government promptly to meet its commitments to American citizens of the
character which I have described.

Faithfully yours,
CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 541]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
from dean of the diplomatic corps, acting in behalf of all the powers
signatory to the protocol of 1901, to Minister of Foreign Affairs,
concerning
execution
by
Chinese
Government
of
Sino-Belgian
After rehearsing the negotiation of the undertaking and that up to now no
payments have been made, or funds set aside to cover such payments, the
draft note contains a concluding paragraph as follows:
“The representatives of the powers above mentioned (protocol
powers) are of opinion that under these circumstances the
obligations arising from the final payments of 1901 with regard to
the indemnity have not entirely been met and consequently they
wish me to request Your Excellency to be good enough to instruct
the Inspector General of Customs that, as the payments due to the
Belgian Government for the refunding of the suspended
indemnity installments have—together with the other indemnity
payments and the services of the loans concluded previous to
1900—priority before all other payments out of the customs
funds, he should make the necessary arrangements accordingly.”
2. I indorsed observation on circular to effect that this arrangement did not
appear to have been communicated to the American Government and since
United States was not signatory to the Allied Powers’ joint memorandum of
that year relative to method of effecting individual arrangements for the
payment of the suspended portion of the indemnity, I desired to hear from
my Government before taking action in the matter.

3. In requesting telegraphic instructions whether I should participate in
supporting the Belgian Government in this matter, I venture to direct the
Department’s attention to the fact that it would appear from the joint
memorandum of 191894 referred to in my observation that each of the
powers signatory, namely, Belgium, France, Great Britain, Italy, Japan,
Portugal and Russia, are at liberty to effect individual arrangements with the
Chinese Government as to the method by which the suspended portion of
the indemnity shall be paid. Therefore, if we now assist the Belgian
Government in securing execution of its preferential treatment arrangement
with the Chinese authorities, a precedent will be established for our acting
similarly in the event of any other of the afore-mentioned of having made or
making such individual arrangements with the Chinese Government
possibly in terms especially advantageous to the respective powers.
Likewise, it is to be observed that thus far we have made no arrangement
ourselves with the Chinese Government regarding the payment of the
suspended portion of the indemnity. While the desirability of perfect
unanimity among the protocol powers in all that relates to the execution of
that instrument is evident, I venture to suggest that disadvantages may arise
from our associating ourselves with the other signatories in invoking the
protocol to support an arrangement like the present one. I am not convinced
that the obligation of China to pay the suspended Belgian indemnity at a
particular time and in a particular manner is an obligation of the same order
as the obligations arising from the final protocol of 1901 with regard to the
indemnity generally.
4. I am informed by the Belgian Minister that he has addressed a formal
note to the Chinese Government requesting the payment in question to
which no reply has been received and I also have it on good authority that
the Inspector General of Customs states that he has no money with which to
liquidate the Sino-Belgian undertaking.

SCHURMAN

[Document 542]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
have been privy to, or cognizant of, the Allied joint memorandum of 1918,
the Department considers that you should not associate yourself with any
representations based upon separate arrangements made thereunder by other
Protocol Powers either individually or as a group.

In view of the fact that this Government has not been apprised of any such
arrangements, the Department furthermore questions the advisability of the
Legation lending its further cooperation in any representations in
connection with Indemnity payments until it shall have been informed in
detail of those arrangements.

HUGHES

[Document 543]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, February 2, 1924—noon.
presented to the Chinese Government in 1917, not 1918. Preliminary draft
was submitted to the American Minister for his approval but the files of the
Legation contain no indications of the nature of his comment nor of any
report to the Department. Subject to Department’s approval, I shall decline
to participate in the joint support of the Belgian arrangement on the ground
that United States was not signatory to 1917 memorandum nor apprised of

[Document 544]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Received 4: p.m.]
my signing the diplomatic body’s reply to Koo’s note of December 2696 in
which Koo constructs his entire argument on the assumption that the word
“gold” in the protocol and agreement connotes not so much metal of such a
fineness but the currency of a country having a gold standard. It will be
seen that Koo’s position involves the interpretation of a collective treaty to
which the United States is signatory. An effective reply has been drafted
and will be submitted for approval to full diplomatic body at meeting
tomorrow morning.

[Paraphrase.] At a dinner February 1 which Koo gave for Mrs. Roosevelt I
was informed by Yen that the Government wished for a reply as soon as
possible from the diplomatic body. The Government would then place
before Parliament both the Chinese note of December 26 and the reply of
the diplomatic body and with both sides presented leave Parliament to act.
Yen expected that the Cabinet and Parliament would ask that the issue be
arbitrated. It would be possible, he said, for China and the powers which
participated in the Washington Conference, as soon as that disposition of
this vexing problem is accepted by the other side, to make arrangements
immediately for holding the special conference on surtaxes. [End
paraphrase.]

It is very desirable that the gold franc question be speedily settled. It has got
entirely beyond the control of the politicians who first raised it. The
Chinese press and people, as well as Parliament, have come to espouse the
antigold side as a great national issue. The Government know that in the
end they must pay in gold and they really desire that the diplomatic body

should make a strong reply to Koo’s note so that it will be obvious to
everybody that no settlement is possible except by arbitration.
If at this critical juncture the American Minister refused to sign the
diplomatic body’s reply, a new situation would be created and further delay
become unavoidable.

Please telegraph instructions.

SCHURMAN

[Document 545]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
Department approves your declining to participate in support of the Belgian
arrangement in view of this Government’s having had no cognizance of it,
discretion the matter of joining in further representations in connection with
Indemnity payments. The Department has no objection to your signing the
proposed note of the Diplomatic body to Koo, if such action recommends
itself to you. It is assumed that the note insists upon payment in gold or its
equivalent.

HUGHES

[Document 546]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
65. In informal conversation 27th, Minister for Foreign Affairs remarked
that if gold franc case were arbitrated it might be referred to Hague or
League Court or to distinguished individual. The objection to Hague was
the time consumed before final decision; as to League Court, he wondered
if United States would have any objection. He took for granted that as the
arbitration would concern the interpretation of a treaty to which the United
States was one of the signatories the United States would be one of the
parties to the arbitration. I was noncommittal on these points and have the
honor to ask for instructions for my guidance should the matter come up
again.

SCHURMAN

[Document 547]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, February 29, 1924.

[Received March 31.]

No. 2108
correspondence relative to the payment in gold of the Indemnity of 1901 by
the Chinese Government, I have the honor to transmit herewith for the
Department’s information copy of an English translation made by the
Legation of a note transmitted to the Chinese Government on February 11,
1924, by the Dean of the Diplomatic Body on behalf of the Governments of
the Netherlands, Belgium, The United States, France, Italy, Great Britain
and Japan, in reply to separate notes on this subject addressed by the Wai
Chiao Pu to the Ministers of the aforementioned Powers on December 26,
I have been informed by an American adviser to the Chinese Government,
in respect of the Chinese Government’s note of December 26, that the
arguments advanced therein by Dr. Koo were with a view to a possible
future submission of the entire matter to some form of arbitration.
I have [etc.]

JACOB GOULD SCHURMAN
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Dean of the Diplomatic Corps at Peking (Oudendijk) to the Chinese Minister for Foreign
Affairs (Wellington Koo)
[PEKING, February 11, 1924.]

MONSIEUR
LE MINISTRE: The eight undersigned Ministers of the Netherlands,
Belgium, The United States, France, Italy, Great Britain and Japan have
taken cognizance of the note which Your Excellency addressed to them
separately on December 26th last in reply to their collective notes of
the Indemnity stipulated for by Article 6 of the Final Protocol of September
7, 1901. The eight Ministers conclude from the above-mentioned note that
the Chinese Government claims a right to pay the arrears of the Indemnity
of 1901 at the rate of what it calls the current exchange of each one of the
currencies inscribed upon the national bonds belonging to each of the
Signatory Powers.

The Chinese Government bases its claim on the definition which it gives to
each Haikwan Tael due to each one of the Powers China must pay ‘in gold’
the sum indicated in Article 6 of the Final Protocol as the equivalent of a
tael”.

According to the Chinese Government’s contention, the words “in gold”
have been used in this sentence to distinguish the gold standard monetary
systems of the Signatory Powers from the silver standard monetary system
to which belongs the Haikwan Tael, the currency in which the total of the
Indemnity has been expressed.

The Chinese Government bases its claim in equal measure on the manner of
payment of the Indemnity which, according to it, was definitively fixed by
transfer) appearing to it as solely devoted to the exchange of national
currencies customarily used in the international exchanges.

The eight Ministers ought not to conceal from Your Excellency that study of
your note has not altered the opinion expressed in their notes of February 24
1905, seemed to them and still seems to them to be perfectly clear. It means
that for each Haikwan Tael due to each of the Powers China must pay in
gold the sum which is indicated in Article VI. of the Final Protocol as the

equivalent of a tael, comformably to the respective weights and legal
standards of each one of the eight gold currencies mentioned in the said
Article VI.; in other words, insofar as the franc is concerned, for each
Haikwan Tael owed to Belgium or to Spain or to France or to Italy, China
In support of its definition of the words “in gold”, the Chinese note does not
present any argument except the assertion that the known reports of the
discussions between the Signatory Powers leading up to the Final Protocol
were favorable to the Chinese Government’s contention. The eight
Ministers are in a position to state that the reports of these discussions show
the unanimous desire of the Signatory Powers to give to the words “in gold”
the sense which they have set forth in the preceding paragraph. That is
confirmed, moreover, by the documents pertaining to this matter. It suffices
to call to mind the principal ones.

China having accepted the principle of the Indemnity on October 20, 1900,
the Powers concerned themselves on the one hand in making separate
estimations of the sums to which each one was entitled under this count and
on the other hand in fixing the total sum which could be paid by China
without hampering the progress of its Government and the development of
by a letter from the Dean of the Diplomatic Body to the Chinese
Plenipotentiaries. It was less than the total amount of the individual
indemnities of the Powers which it was finally necessary to reduce. To
bring about these reductions, to subsequently settle their respective portions
of the total indemnity and finally to assure the just division of the arrears of
the total indemnity in the proportions to be agreed upon among themselves,
the Signatory Powers adopted gold as the basis of their calculations and the
payments to be received. They decided and China agreed that the indemnity
although expressed in Haikwan Taels was an indemnity “in gold” and that
the rate in gold of the Haikwan Tael should be fixed on a definite day. This
decision was transmitted to the Chinese Plenipotentiaries on July 30, 1901,
in the following terms: “The sum of 450,000,000 Haikwan Taels payable
the grand total of the indemnity demanded by the Powers. [”]

The rates of exchange of the Haikwan Tael on April 1, 1901, were inserted
in Article 6 of the Final Protocol whose text it is fitting to quote below in
order to cause to stand out clearly how the Powers and China insisted at that
time on the importance of a payment “in gold”.
1901, His Majesty the Emperor of China agreed to pay the
Powers an indemnity of 450,000,000 Haikwan Taels.
(a) These 450,000,000 constitute a debt in gold based on the rate
of exchange of the Haikwan Tael in relation to the gold currency
of each country in the manner set forth hereinafter.
One Haikwan Tael = Marks
3,055
= Astro-Hungarian Crown
3,595
= Gold dollar
0,742
= Francs
3,750
= Pound Sterling
= Yen
1,407
= Netherlands Florin
1,796
= Gold rouble (17,424 dolias fine) 1,412
This sum in gold shall bear interest …
Capital and interest shall be payable in gold or at the rates of
exchange corresponding to the dates at which the different
payments fall due.”
In the above-mentioned text, the Powers were careful to define the meaning
which they intended to give, and which China agreed to give, to the words
“in gold”:
1) The United States of America which has just adopted the gold
standard specified that the rate of exchange of 0,742 referred to
the “gold dollar”.

Russia took the same precaution with regard to the gold rouble in
adding the legal weight of fine gold of this currency.
2) The currencies of Belgium, France and Italy have always been
quoted at different rates in the international exchanges. On April
were at rates almost alike and equivalent to par in gold; the Italian
But, even if the exchange currencies of these four states differ,
their gold coinage is legally of the same weight and the same
denomination, and it was to represent this weight of 0,290322 of
fine gold to a franc that Belgium, Spain, France and Italy all
adopted the same rate of exchange of 3. to a Tael.
3) Finally all the Signatory Powers as well as China in using the
words “rate of the Haikwan Tael to the gold currency of each
currency [country?]”, excluded from the measures aimed at by
Article 6 every evaluation of the Haikwan Tael in relation to the
currencies of each country other than their gold currency. They
have the right to refuse payment of a Tael in their silver currency,
their fiduciary money, their exchange currencies, etc. …
The measures which the interested Powers took in the Final Protocol were
confirmed by China in the text of the letters exchanged on July 2, 1905, as
well as in the wording of the bonds delivered to each of the Powers and in
the coupons attached to these bonds because Payment “in gold” was the
procedure which they adopted in order to assure the distribution of the total
Indemnity in the proportions agreed upon by them. To return to the
definition of the words “in gold” in the sentence given above from the
letters of July 2, 1905, it is clearly the gold value in conformity to the
weight and legal standard of each of the currencies specified in Article 6,
(a) and at the rates of exchange indicated in, the same Article as the
equivalent of a Tael which China must pay to each Power for each Tael of
the Indemnity of 1901 which she owes.

The eight Ministers have desired to show on what foundations the definition
which was given by their governments and accepted in 1901 and 1905 by
the Chinese Government for the payment in gold of the Indemnity of 1901

rested. In answering the first contention of the note of December 26, 1923,
regarding the meaning of the words “in gold” they have, in so doing,
refuted the second which, as the Chinese note itself admits, refers solely to
the manner of execution of the obligations subscribed to by the Chinese
Government in 1901. The character and the total amount of the debt owed
by virtue of an obligation cannot depend upon the means adopted for the
settlement of this debt.

After having recalled this principle of law which is certainly recognized by
the Chinese Government, the eight Ministers consider it their duty to take
up the principal points of the portion of the notes of December 26, 1923,
which concern the exchange of letters of July 2, 1905. The arrangement
resulting from this exchange confirmed and carried out Article 6 of the
Final Protocol which it had completed. Such as it is, it answers perfectly to
their present needs and the Signatory Powers have never thought of
modifying it.

In recalling the circumstances which preceded and brought about the
evident that at that time the Chinese Government endeavored to secure
payment of the arrears of the Indemnity of 1901 in silver and that it was
obliged to recognize its obligation to pay “in gold”. This fact furnishes a
new argument in favor of the ruling “in gold” as it has been set forth above.
This is worth noting in passing.

It would be possible to dispute the correctness of this statement of the
Chinese note to which the preceding paragraph refers. But the eight
Ministers limit themselves in this instance to the repairing of one omission
in the said recital and of noting that the arrangement of 1905 had for aim
and object the solution of the problem presented by the changing of silver,
the currency of China the debtor, into gold.

China, having no gold, has had to buy and still has to buy with the silver
she possesses, that is to say, with Taels, the gold necessary for the service of
the Indemnity of 1901. The method of this transaction not having been

settled by the Protocol of 1901, occasioned the subsequent rise of
discussions and difficulties ended by the exchange of letters of July 2, 1905.
By the terms of Section 3 of these letters China was entitled to bring about
the payment to the Powers of the Indemnity of 1901 by one of three
systems: “either in silver according to the price of silver on the London
market, or in gold bills, or in telegraphic transfers.” The machinery of the
two last systems, gold drafts and telegraphic transfers, differ only in the
more or less rapid means of transmission of the document of exchange from
one place to another with a resulting difference corresponding to the rates of
exchange.

In the two cases, China, the debtor, buys with silver Taels instruments of
exchange representing the amount of gold which she owes to her creditor.
These purchases, insofar as the service of the Indemnity of 1901 is
concerned, are generally made of the banking agents of the Signatory
Powers at Shanghai. The arrangement of 1905 has at the same time and
quite justly reserved to China the, right “to obtain drafts and telegraphic
transfers to the best of her interests in any locality and in any bank as
cheaply as possible, or by award.”
The three methods of payment enumerated in Section 3 of the letters of July
2, 1905, lend themselves perfectly to payment “in gold” as it has been
defined above by the eight Ministers. The note of December 26 last has
confused the quotations of the international exchanges by telegraphic
transfer with the telegraphic transfer itself. Telegraphic transfer, in effect, is
applied as well to a gold currency as to a silver currency, to a paper
currency or an exchange currency.

When, on December 30, 1922, the Chinese Government attempted to
resume the service of the Indemnity of 1901, in the matter indicated by its
note of December 26 [1923?], her representative presented himself,
according to established custom, to the Shanghai agents of the interested
Governments to negotiate the purchase of telegraphic transfers in francs.
The disagreement which ensued was solely about the rates of exchange of
the Tael quoted by the two parties. If the representative of the Chinese

Government had accepted the rate of the gold franc quoted by the agents of
the interested Governments, these agents would have effected the required
telegraphic transfers.

The Chinese Government, moreover, cannot be ignorant of the possibility
of carrying on transactions in gold francs, since it must pay its share of the
expenses of the League of Nations in gold francs and since it has accepted
the gold franc as the currency of the Universal Postal Union and of its
postal conventions with several countries.

The eight Ministers, accordingly, support the conclusions drawn in their
affirming that for each Haikwan Tael due to each of the Powers under the
heading of the Indemnity of 1901, China must pay in gold the sum which is
indicated in Article 6 of the Final Protocol as the equivalent of a Tael
conformably to the respective weights and legal standards of each of the
gold currencies enumerated in the said Article 6.

The explanations which the eight Ministers have given above authorize
them to state that they require only the complete and unmodified execution
of the conventions drawn up in 1901 between China and the Signatory
Powers with regard to the Indemnity of 1901. They insist upon this
complete execution in order to cause to be respected the right of each one of
the interested Powers to receive the proportion of a total Indemnity
determined among themselves, whose service and guarantees have been
placed under their common control.

[File copy not signed]
593.

[Document 548]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
[Paraphrase]
any such direct interest in the controversy regarding the payment of the
indemnity in gold francs as would lead it to offer any suggestion as to
means whereby the dispute might be settled. If occasion requires, you may
inform Minister for Foreign Affairs to this effect.

You are confidentially informed that should the issue be referred to the
World Court while the relation of the United States to it continues as at
present, the Senate not having acted on the proposal that this country accept
the Court, the American Government would probably not desire to make
use of its right to appear in such a case regarding the interpretation of the
protocol of 1901.

HUGHES
[For further information regarding the attitude of the French Government
on the gold franc controversy, see note from the French Ambassador,

[Document 549]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
Legation, apparently at the instance of the Foreign Office, and quite
unofficially asked whether some compromise measure could not be
suggested by the Legation which would induce the Japanese to abandon
their strong diplomatic pressure in opposition to the Federal Telegraph
Company’s contracts and in favor of the Mitsui Company. His suggestion
was that some joint operation of the Mitsui Peking station might be
arranged. It would be appreciated by the Chinese authorities if some
method of relief could be devised by the American Government, as they
feel that they have been loyally supporting American rights in spite of the
great difficulties they have been called upon to face.

For the Minister:
BELL

[Document 550]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China
(Schurman)
[Paraphrase]
Department that he would be very glad if a solution could be found which
would end the continued agitation to which the Chinese are subjected
because of the Federal contract. He does not believe, however, that the
Federal Telegraph Company can take over the Mitsui station at Peking to
relieve the Japanese of a bad bargain. He says that should his company try
to unite with the Japanese, the latter would insist upon sharing in the
activities of all the company’s stations. He also says that this would nullify
all the efforts of his company to give the American and Chinese people the
right of communication with each other without interference from any other
country.

Schwerin says he cannot go back to China before March.

PHILLIPS

[Document 551]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, January 29, 1924.

No. 87
SIR: I have the honour to refer to the note which you were so good as to
address to me on November 24th last, on the subject of radio and cable
communications in China, and to inform you that, after giving the contents
thereof the most careful consideration, His Majesty’s Government have
come to the conclusion that the refusal of the Japanese Government to
accept the recommendations signed by their expert at Washington8 has
placed His Majesty’s Government under the necessity of maintaining the
existing rights of the cable companies pending the conclusion of an
agreement based on those recommendations.

In coming to this decision His Majesty’s Government have been influenced
by the fact that there is no difference of opinion between the United States
Government and His Majesty’s Government, who both consider the
recommendations to represent a practicable adjustment of the interests of
the four Powers concerned and who both still hope that they may furnish a
basis of a satisfactory understanding. The only point seriously at issue is
between the United States and Japan in regard to Section 2 of the experts’
memorandum, and my Government greatly regret that they are unable to
allow this divergence of view to operate to the disadvantage of the cable
companies, whose existing agreements provide that until December 31st,
1930, no other party will be allowed without their consent “to establish
telegraphic connections which might create competition with, or injure the
interests of, the existing lines”.

In these circumstances, His Majesty’s Ambassador at Tokio has been
instructed to inform the Imperial Japanese Government that, while His
Majesty’s Government would have been glad if the views of the United
States and Japanese Governments could have been harmonised in respect of
Section 2, they are in agreement with the United States Government in
considering the experts’ recommendations as providing a reasonable
compromise which it is hoped will still furnish a basis for a satisfactory
understanding, but that His Majesty’s Government cannot allow this
divergence of views between the United States and the Japanese
Governments to operate to the prejudice of the existing contractual interests
of the cable companies.

In bringing to your notice the sense of the instructions sent to Sir C. Eliot I
have been directed to assure you that the action of His Majesty’s
Government in China has been taken in no spirit of hostility to the United
States interests concerned, but as the only course available in the
circumstances to protect the existing rights of the Eastern Extension
Telegraph Company.

I have [etc.]

H. G. CHILTON

[Document 552]
The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
WASHINGTON, February 16, 1924.

SIR: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of the note (No. 87) under date of
January 29 last, in which you advised me of the conclusion of the British
Government that the refusal of the Japanese Government to accept the
recommendations formulated at Washington on February 4, 1922, by the
radio experts of the American, British, French and Japanese Governments,
had placed the British Government under the necessity of maintaining the
existing rights of the cable companies pending the conclusions of an
agreement based on those recommendations.

While frankly disappointed by what appears to be the abrupt abandonment
by the British Government of the position which it had urged this and the
other interested Governments to adopt, I am happy to note the assurance
that this action of the British Government has been taken in no spirit of
hostility to the American interests concerned, and trust that I may construe
this assurance to mean that the British Government has no intention of
renewing direct or indirect pressure upon the Chinese Government to
prevent the carrying out of the contracts between that Government and the
Federal Telegraph Company with regard to the establishment of radio
stations in China.

Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 553]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
67. The Department has been requested by Mr. Schwerin to assure the
Chinese Government that there will be no evasion on the part of the Federal
Telegraph Company of Delaware in the fulfillment of its part of the contract
between that Company and the Chinese Government. The Radio
Corporation of America, so far as concerns its part in relation to the
contract, also desires that the Chinese Government shall be assured that the
Corporation has a very vital interest in seeing the terms of the contract
carried out by both parties at the earliest practicable date, and states that it is
greatly interested in doing everything it can to expedite the erection of the
stations in China.

While the Department, for its part, is not in a position to give any
guarantees on behalf of this Government, you are authorized on behalf of
the Companies above mentioned to give to the Chinese Government the
assurance as requested by them. In so doing you will make it plain to the
Chinese Government that the Department assumes no responsibility in
connection with the matter and is merely conveying the assurance at the
request of the companies concerned.

HUGHES

[Document 554]
The President of the Radio Corporation of America (J. G.
Harbord) to the Secretary of State
NEW YORK, April 18, 1924.

[Received April 23, 1924.]

MR DEAR MR. SECRETARY: I have the honor to invite your attention to the following
resolution adopted by the Board of Directors of the Radio Corporation of
America at a meeting held this date:
“Whereas, it has been brought to the attention of the Board of
Directors of the Radio Corporation of America, that Rudolph
Spreckels, a director and the principal stockholder of the Federal
Telegraph Company of California, by communication dated April
8th, 1924, to the Directors of the Federal Telegraph Company of
California did state:
‘After careful consideration, I am convinced that the
language used in the Chinese contracts is deceptive in
that they create a partnership, but do not disclose the
fact that the Chinese Government is to actually provide
the entire sum necessary to complete the project.
‘I cannot believe that the State Department at
Washington has been correctly informed of the true
situation in connection with these contracts.
‘The contracts were negotiated by Mr. R. P. Schwerin as
President of the Federal Telegraph Co. (California), but
said contracts have been assumed by the Federal
Telegraph Co. of Delaware in which company the
Federal Telegraph Co. (California) holds a thirty per
cent stock interest.

‘I acquired my stock holdings in the Federal Telegraph
Co. (California) after the contracts were consummated,
but I cannot permit this company to become further
involved in a transaction of this character without
protest.
‘It is quite clear to me that the present attitude of the
Chinese Government toward the contracts concern the
Federal Telegraph Co. of Delaware alone, but I am
unwilling that any officer of the Federal Telegraph Co.
(California) shall be involved in negotiations with the
Chinese
Government
in
connection
with
these
contracts, or in the execution of the contracts. In other
words, it is no longer satisfactory for this company and
the Federal Telegraph Co. of Delaware to have the same
individual as the executive head.

Yours very truly,
(Signed) R. SPRECKELS’
and
Whereas, at a meeting of the Board of Directors of the Federal
Telegraph Company of California on April 15th, 1924, R. P.
Schwerin was removed as President of that corporation and all
powers of attorney theretofore given by that corporation to him as
President or General Manager or otherwise to act for or on behalf
of that corporation were revoked, and
Whereas, notwithstanding the fact that the Board of Directors of
the Radio Corporation of America understand and believe that the
State Department at Washington has been correctly informed of
the true situation in connection with these contracts and has
always understood the precise scope and meaning thereof, and
Whereas, Radio Corporation of America does not believe that any
advantage has been taken of the ignorance or lack of

understanding of the Chinese Government in the negotiation of
these contracts, and
Whereas, Radio Corporation of America did cause to be
organized the Federal Telegraph Company of Delaware, for the
purpose of taking over said Chinese concessions from the Federal
Telegraph Company of California and the financing and
construction of the Chinese stations, in which Federal Telegraph
Company of Delaware the Radio Corporation of America owns
seventy per cent of the capital stock.

Nevertheless, the Radio Corporation of America being unwilling
to proceed with the carrying out of these contracts, if it be true
that the Chinese Government has acted under misapprehension or
lack of knowledge and if the said Chinese Government shall so
assert,
Resolved that the Radio Corporation of America is willing and
tenders itself ready to join with the Federal Telegraph Company
of California in cancelling all contracts relating to the said
concessions or to the carrying out thereof, and
Further Resolved, that the President be and he hereby is
authorized and instructed to take steps to ascertain whether the
State Department has been correctly informed of the true situation
in connection with these contracts and whether the Chinese
Government makes any claim or complaint as to having signed
these contracts under misapprehension of fact or lack of
knowledge.”
The Radio Corporation of America entered upon this Chino-Federal
enterprise on direct assurance from Mr. R. P. Schwerin that it had the hearty
approval of both the American State Department and the Chinese
Government. Copies of all the contracts were long since furnished to the
State Department. That it has understood and has had no question of their
integrity has been shown by its continued and efficient support of them to
this day. The signatures of the proper officials of the Chinese Government
to the contracts have been witnessed by proper American Legation officials

in Peking. Our information is that Dr. Sun, the Chinese Vice Minister of
Communications, is a graduate of Cornell University, knowing English
well, and that he repeatedly discussed these contracts with Mr. Bell, Mr.
Peck, Mr. Julean Arnold of the American Legation and Mr. Schwerin and
Mr. Moss. These gentlemen with Minister Schurman had numerous
discussions with Dr. Koo, Wu Yu Lin, the Minister of Communications, and
the Prime Minister Chan Tze Ti’In[sic]. Of the integrity of the contracts we
have had no doubt.

Mr. Rudolph Spreckels, of San Francisco, very recently and suddenly
purchased a control in the Federal Telegraph Company of California, and
now charges that our State Department has not been correctly informed of
the true situation in connection with these contracts and that the Chinese
Government signed them under deception. I am instructed by the Board of
Directors of the Radio Corporation of America to ask assurance of the State
Department on these two points, in order that we may know whether it is
proper for us to proceed in this enterprise from the standpoint of morality
and business integrity.

Very respectfully,
J. G. HARBORD

[Document 555]
The Secretary of State to the President of the Radio Corporation
of America (J. G. Harbord)
WASHINGTON, April 26, 1924.

SIR: I have received the letter of April 18, 1924, in which you quote a
resolution adopted on that date by the Board of Directors of your
corporation, with reference to a letter understood to have been addressed on
April 8 to the Directors of the Federal Telegraph Company of California by
Mr. Rudolph Spreckels, a Director of that company, in which (referring to
1921, between the Federal Telegraph Company of California and the
Chinese Government, and thereafter assigned to the Federal Telegraph
Company of Delaware by arrangement with the Radio Corporation and in
accordance with a further agreement with the Chinese Government under
date of July 13, 1923) he states that
“After careful consideration, I am convinced that the language
used in the Chinese contracts is deceptive in that they create a
partnership, but do not disclose the fact that the Chinese
Government is to actually provide the entire sum necessary to
complete the project.

“I cannot believe that the State Department at Washington has
been correctly informed of the true situation in connection with
these contracts.”
I have noted that the resolution of your Board of Directors further sets forth
that, while your corporation believes that the contracts with the Chinese
Government were not concluded without the full understanding of the
Chinese Government and of this Department, it is nevertheless unwilling to
proceed with the carrying out of these contracts if it be true that the Chinese
Government has acted under misapprehension or lack of knowledge and if

that Government so asserts; that your corporation would in that case be
willing and ready to join with the Federal Telegraph Company of California
in cancelling all the contracts in question; and that you are therefore
instructed to take steps to ascertain whether the Department of State has
been correctly informed of the true situation in regard to these contracts and
whether the Chinese Government makes any claim or complaint of having
signed these contracts under misapprehension of fact or lack of knowledge.
In reply I am happy to inform you, for the reassurance of your Board of
Directors, that I know of no basis whatsoever for the assumptions stated in
the letter quoted in the resolution.

As you are no doubt aware, the several contracts between the Federal
Telegraph Company of California and the Chinese Government in regard to
this matter were all negotiated with the cognizance of the Department of
State and in consultation with the American Legation at Peking, were
witnessed by officials of that Legation, and were in each case
communicated immediately to this Department, which considered the
project to be of primary importance to American interests in China as a test
of the practical application of the principle of the open door or equality of
opportunity in such enterprises in China and as a means of establishing a
direct and wholly independent Chinese-American circuit between the two
countries.

It is understood that the American interests concerned are to construct the
proposed wireless stations for the Chinese Government at a cost to that
Government of approximately $13,000,000, $6,500,000 of which is to be
paid in bonds and the balance to be paid in cash over a period of ten years
from the time of completing the last station; and that during the period to
elapse until the cash payments are completed, the contractors are to
participate with the Chinese Government, under an arrangement analogous
to a partnership, in the operation of the stations. The project thus
contemplated has not been the subject of any complaint by the Chinese
Government to the Department of State, and I have no reason to believe that
that Government misapprehends the arrangement or considers that the
contracts establishing it were concluded under any misunderstanding or in
ignorance of their scope and meaning.

Carnes E. Hocues

[Document 556]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, May 15, 1924.

No. 434
SIR: In the note which you were so good as to address to Mr. Chilton on
February 16th last, on the subject of radio and cable communications in
China, you stated that, while frankly disappointed by what appeared to be
the abrupt abandonment by the British Government of the position which it
had urged the United States and other interested Governments to adopt, you
were happy to note the assurance that this action of the British Government
had been taken in no spirit of hostility to the American interests concerned.
Under instructions from His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs, I now have the honour to inform you, in order that there
may be no misunderstanding of the attitude of my Government, that His
Majesty’s Government have not abandoned their position in this matter. His
Majesty’s Government continue in agreement with the United States
Government in considering that the Washington recommendations provide a
reasonable compromise and, like the United States Government, they still
hope that those recommendations will furnish a basis for a satisfactory
settlement of this complicated question. Since, however, the carrying out of
the recommendations has been obstructed by a difference of view which
concerns the United States and Japan, His Majesty’s Government also feel
that they are justified in drawing the attention of both the United States and
the Japanese Governments to the fact that the cable companies have rights,
which, in the absence of a general agreement based on the
recommendations, cannot be ignored.

In this connection, I am instructed to add that it is of course always open to
the United States wireless interests to come to a reasonable arrangement
with the cable companies.

Esme Howarp

[Document 557]
The Secretary of State to the President of the Radio Corporation
of America (J. G. Harbord)
WASHINGTON, August 21, 1924.

No. 434
which you transmitted copies of correspondence which you exchanged with
Mr. Rudolph Spreckels, Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Federal
Telegraph Company of California.

The following statement made in Mr. Brown’s11 memorandum dated June
Spreckels, is noted:
“… I therefore submit that the Delaware Company is clearly
entitled to charges and reimbursement above production cost as
above set forth. This subject has been thoroughly discussed with
the Washington authorities, without their voicing objections. …
If, as appears to be intended, this mention of “the Washington authorities”
has reference to the Department of State, I feel it is due alike to this
Department and to your corporation to obviate the possibility of any such
misunderstanding as might arise out of the use of the language quoted from
Mr. Brown’s memorandum. The Department desires to state, therefore, that
while the scope and effect of the contracts between the Federal Telegraph
Company of California and the Chinese Government were the subject of
discussion on the occasion of several of Mr. Schwerin’s visits to the
Department stated in a general way what its understanding of the
obligations of the two contracting parties was, it should be stated that the
Department has not considered the relations of the Radio Corporation of

America, the Federal Telegraph Company of California and the Federal
Telegraph Company of Delaware with each other or the respective rights of
those companies, nor has the Department considered the question whether
the contracts between the Federal Telegraph Company of California and the
Chinese Government include the terms and conditions which are usually
contained in such contracts or whether they contemplate the payment of
reasonable or excessive compensation for the services to be rendered and
the material to be furnished by the Company. This is a question which, of
course, the contracting parties should consider and decide for themselves.
In iteration and confirmation of what has already been orally communicated
to Mr. Schwerin by representatives of this Department it should be stated
that it is not within the province of the Department to negotiate contracts
between foreign governments and American interests, and that the
Department’s activities in relation to the contracts between the Federal
Telegraph Company of California and the Chinese Government have been
calculated to obtain a practical application of the principle of the open door
in China and to assist the American interests concerned in their negotiations
with the Chinese Government to the end that a circuit of communication
might be established which would prove advantageous to the relations
between the United States and China.

For the Secretary of State:
LELAND HARRISON
Assistant Secretary

[Document 558]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
who signed original Federal radio contract has assumed office as Minister
of Communications and Chiang Tsun-wei [Chiang Tsim-i?], former

[Document 559]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
communicated to the Radio Corporation which now has the matter under
consideration with officers of the Federal Telegraph Company. The Federal
Company does not contemplate abandoning the project and it seems
probable that an agent will proceed to China in the near future to conduct
negotiations. The Department will advise you as soon as the Company
formulates definite plans.

HUGHES

Washington, April 1, 1924.

[564] The Foreign Secretary of the American Board of Commissioners
for Foreign Missions (James L. Barton) to the Chief of the Division of
Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State (MacMurray)

[Document 560]
Report of the Annual Meeting of the Associated American
Chambers of Commerce of China, at Shanghai, October 16 and
AMERICAN RELATIONS WITH CHINA
“America has a definite and well-established policy toward China, based
upon the open-door policy of John Hay and the principles of the Nine-
Power Treaty adopted at the Washington Conference, but the trouble with
America’s relations with China at the present time is due principally to the
lack of a definite program.” This statement by a prominent American
observer of conditions in China summarizes pretty well the general feeling
of the American residents of China, whether they are interested in
commercial enterprises or missionary-educational work.

The resolutions adopted at the annual meeting of the Associated American
city of Shanghai do not attempt to outline an American program suitable for
coping with the serious situation which has developed in China in recent
years. The resolutions do, however, represent the feelings or reactions of the
American commercial communities in China in respect to certain matters
which we believe should receive the serious attention of our people at
home, both in government service and outside.

The lack of a definite program on the part of the American Government in
respect to China which has been very much in evidence since the close of
the Washington Conference, has been nothing short of disastrous to
American interests in this country. The uncertainty has prevented the
extension of business generally and in the case of firms with branches in the

interior of China it has caused withdrawals and losses or depreciation of
investment which has been most serious.

Practically the same thing applies to American missionary and educational
endeavor in the interior of the country. Obviously a country harassed by
unrestrained banditry and uncontrolled soldiery offers little opportunity for
the efficient conduct of missionary educational work. The American people
have probably invested in China an amount of money in missionary-
education work which far exceeds the amount which has been invested in
business and it obviously is the affair of the American Government to adopt
measures for protecting these enterprises as well as the enterprises of
business men.

It is our hope that these resolutions will be of service to American
Governmental officials, chambers of commerce and other bodies in the
United States which are interested in China and in a continuance of
American effort in this part of the world, as well as a further cementing of
the relations of the American and Chinese peoples.

Inasmuch as America took the lead in calling the Washington. Conference
and in directing its discussions, it is to be expected that this leadership on
the part of the United States is to be maintained, otherwise the prestige
which accrued to America as a result of the Washington meeting is likely to
be lost.

[RESOLUTIONS]

ILLEGAL TAXATION
Various treaties between China and the foreign powers have put a limitation
upon the taxation of imported goods, without regard to their nature. Any
taxation levied in excess of those provided for in these treaties is therefore a
violation of the said treaties. The first exception to this principle appears in
the Washington Agreement in the provision that has been made for the
levying of a tax on luxuries. It therefore applies that any violation of treaties
by the illegal taxation of any article of commerce jeopardises the principle
established by treaty and would further establish a precedent which might
be extended to all importations.

Under the treaties, when goods are imported into China they may be
shipped from treaty ports to the interior under transit pass, the payment for
which exempts goods from all other taxation. This however, has been a
point in dispute between the Chinese Government and foreign powers, the
Chinese claiming that when goods reach their destination they are subject to
additional taxes. This position has been strongly contested by the various
Legations and the maintenance of the spirit of the treaties has been insisted
upon although the Government in Peking does not successfully exercise its
authority over all the provinces.

Under the provisions of the treaties providing for the use of the transit pass
the shipper is given the option of either using the transit pass or shipping his
goods to the interior without a transit pass, paying instead the local taxes.
When the tax is paid by the use of the transit pass the funds are put into the
regular Customs revenues which are hypothecated for certain purposes.
Taxes paid in this form do not directly reach the provincial Governments or
any other branch of the Central Government than the Customs. Certain
provinces, however, have fixed the local taxes at such rates as would induce
shippers to forward their goods without transit passes thus benefiting the
particular locality. The effect of the treaties has therefore been to make the
cost of the transit pass the limit of taxation on any article of commerce
shipped into the interior. The treaties also provide that trade in the treaty
ports be free from taxation so that the only taxes a merchant has to consider
are those levied upon his goods when they leave the treaty port. But in spite

of treaty obligations and special agreements arrived at between the Chinese
Government and several Legations, various provinces have illegally
imposed further taxes on certain commodities not only in the interior
districts but even in treaty ports. The action of these provinces has been
strongly protested by the British and American Legations both to the Peking
Government and thru the consulates to the provincial authorities. The
Peking authorities have admitted the illegality of the action on the part of
the provinces but declare themselves helpless to enforce the rights and
obligations created by the treaties and agreements made thru the Legations.
But as these violations of the rights of foreign merchants established a
precedent which may be followed and extended by military leaders in all
sections of the country in order to secure funds for the maintenance of their
armies: therefore, in view of the action taken at the Washington Conference
wherein it is provided that a Special Conference is to be held in China for
the purpose of revising China’s customs revenues by the addition of a 2½
percent surtax on ordinary commercial goods and a 5 percent surtax on
luxuries, the Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China
recommend that the American Delegation to the Special Conference in
association with the other delegations from the various nations give serious
consideration to this matter of illegal taxation before agreeing to China’s
request for further increases in the customs tariff.

DISORDER IN CHINA
In view of the long series of outrages in China culminating in the so-called
Lincheng Incident of May 5, 1923, which constitute a menace to the lives
and property of American citizens and other foreign nationals residing in
the country, the Diplomatic Body consisting of official representatives of
sixteen nations on August 10, 1923, addressed a formal note of protest to
the Chinese Government. This note demanded that the foreign passengers
be reimbursed for property losses, for loss of time and injuries sustained
and also demanded the punishment of Chinese officials responsible and that
proper means be taken at once by the Chinese Government for the
protection of travelers and transportation of merchandise on the Chinese
Government Railways.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Chinese Government in reply to this
note stated among other things that
“The safety of foreigners has always been the subject of very
deep solicitude on the part of the Chinese Government,” and said
further “That through the series of measures recently adopted the
lives, property and interests of foreigners in China will enjoy
added security.”
Since this reply of the Chinese Government was written there have been
additional bandit and military outrages, one of which in Szechuan province
resulted in the murder of two missionaries, and others in Honan and Hupeh
provinces resulting in the murder of a Catholic priest, the kidnapping of two
women missionaries and the destruction of considerable missionary
property. In addition to these incidents there has been frequent firing upon
peaceful American cargo and passenger boats on the Upper Yangtsze and in
the case of a ship belonging to another foreign nation interested in this trade
the vessel was raided by soldiers, several members of the crew killed, the
chief officers carried into captivity and the cargo destroyed. Lists of these
outrages affecting the lives and property interests of American and other
foreigners and the Chinese people as well have been compiled by the

Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China and are on file at
the American Legation in Peking.

These outrages are a direct consequence of the condition of military
anarchy which has developed in China since the country became a republic
in 1911 which matter received the attention of the Washington Conference
earnest hope that immediate and effective steps would be taken by China to
reduce the military forces and expenditures. This resolution received the
signature of the Chinese Delegates as well as those of the delegates
representing other nations at the Conference.

In spite of the foregoing action of the Washington Conference and the
continued protests of foreign governments, the recruiting of troops into the
various Chinese armies has steadily continued until the number of soldiers
under arms in the country at the present time, according to the 1923 edition
of the China Year Book, amounts to 1,335,835 [1,332,835] men, the largest
standing army in the world.

The inability of the Chinese Government to keep this army paid and under
control is the chief cause of unsettled conditions existing in the country. As
the authority of the Central Government has broken down through
conspiracy and civil war, the army has broken up into provincial units under
the control of Military Governors or Tuchuns. Sections of the army, unable
to obtain pay, constantly rebel and become bandits. The bandit gangs in turn
terrorize the country, pillaging villages, burning property or menacing the
lives of foreigners until they become strong enough to force their way back
into some provincial army.

This situation of military anarchy which has developed in China constitutes
a menace not only to the peace of the Far East, but to the entire world. It is
a matter of special and vital interest on the part of the United States on
account of our well known policies and trade relations with this part of the
world, and especially because of our position of leadership in the calling
and deliberations of the Washington Conference.

The Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China has always
been of the opinion that nothing short of a definite stand on the part of the

Powers would be sufficient to bring China’s military dictators to a
realization of the obligations of China as a sovereign and independent
country among the nations of the world. Until such time as the nations
which participated in the Washington Conference are prepared to adopt a
definite policy in respect to China, it is vital that the United States take
steps to secure to American citizens their just treaty rights in China.
To this end we feel that at the present time the maximum of protection in
China for our interests can only be obtained by increasing our military and
naval forces to the strength we are entitled to under treaty rights. This
involves the bringing of our military and marine forces stationed in Peking
and Tientsin under the Boxer protocol of 190118 up to their full strength,
and additions to the China section of the Pacific Fleet and the Yangtsze
Patrol Squadron.

Both the State and Navy Departments at Washington in correspondence
signified the necessity for immediately increasing our naval force on the
Yangtsze River and other navigable streams of China. It is understood that
the Navy Department has put in its estimates for the Budget to be presented
to the next session of Congress, a request for the immediate construction of
six river patrol boats of special construction for service on the Upper
Yangtsze. It has been recommended that these boats be built on the Asiatic
station in order to expedite their being put into service and for economy in
the cost of construction. The Associated American Chambers of Commerce
of China desire to go on record as being heartily in favor of these
recommendations and urges that Congress give immediate and serious
consideration to the proposals.

NEED FOR AMERICAN OWNED CONSULAR PROPERTY IN CHINA
The United States Government maintains consular officials in nineteen
different treaty ports in China and with the exception of Shanghai and
Amoy has never acquired property for the housing of the consul or office
space for the transaction of the official business of the United States.

In the cases of Shanghai and Amoy where the consular property is owned,
the property consists of antiquated residence buildings in a dilapidated
condition which have been converted to office use. The condition of these
buildings is such that frequent repairs are necessary to keep them in a
habitable condition. In all of the other points in China, the American
Government follows the shortsighted policy of renting property usually
from native landlords and in very few cases is the property suitable for the
purpose desired. In Tientsin a few years ago, the American Consul was
forced to vacate his premises at short notice because the property was
desired for other purposes by a Japanese landlord. In the city of Antung, the
house occupied by the American Consul in 1923 collapsed during a heavy
rain storm and had it not been for the hospitality offered by the
Commissioner of the Chinese Customs, the official representative of the
United States Government would have had no place to go At one station in
South China the house occupied by the American Consul is located on
ground so poorly located as to be frequently flooded at high tide. In
Hankow the foreign concession where the American Consulate is located
has become so congested that it is questionable whether the present lease
can be renewed on any terms.

The examples above, which are typical of the situation, point to the
necessity of the United States Government acquiring its own consular
property in China. The present rented property in use at most of the ports is
inadequate from the standpoint of efficient conduct of the business of the
United States which has grown proportionately with the rapid increase of
American interests in this part of the world. America’s share in the direct
cent in 1922. The amount of money expended for rentals would pay for
suitable consular property in a few years and when the rapid increase in
property values at all of the Chinese ports is considered, there can be no
question of the benefit of property ownership from the standpoint of
investment.

In addition to the foregoing obvious reasons for the ownership of its own
consular property on the part of the United States Government, there is the
additional element of prestige which would accrue to America through the
ownership of suitable structures for the residences and office requirements

of the American consuls. It is difficult for the average Chinese, whose
principal knowledge of the United States comes from his acquaintance with
the American consul and his surroundings, to understand why America
which plays such an important part in the affairs of the Far East, should be
so negligent in respect to the housing of its official representatives.
The Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China recommend
that a Government architect be sent to China to make a report and
recommendation on the possibility of obtaining suitable land and the
construction of buildings at the principal Chinese ports and cities where
American consular officials are maintained.

IMPROVEMENT OF DIPLOMATIC AND CONSULAR SERVICES
There has been before Congress for several years a measure known as the
“Rogers Bill” which is intended to improve the consular and diplomatic
services of the United States through combining the two services into a
unified foreign service.

According to the terms of the Rogers Bill provision is made for increases in
salaries, travelling expenses, retirement and for promotions in accordance
with the abilities of the individual.

In view of the fact that the question of improvements in the United States
Consular and Diplomatic Services in China have been a frequent source of
consideration on the part of this body as well as other American
organizations in China the Associated American Chambers of Commerce of
China desire to go on record as being in favor of and fully endorsing the
Rogers Bill and expresses the hope it may be speedily enacted into law by
Congress.

AMERICAN POLICY TOWARD CHINA
The Washington Conference which met in Washington on November 12,
1921, while called principally for the purpose of discussing the limitation of
naval armament devoted most of its time to a consideration of the problem
of China. At the close of the Conference a number of treaties and
resolutions were adopted calculated to improve not only the international
status of China but also provide a basis for an improvement of the internal
situation.

In spite of the hopes of the leading statesmen of the world as expressed in
the treaties and resolutions of the Washington Conference in respect to
China, conditions in this country have deteriorated rather than improved
and up to the present the leaders of China have shown an absolute disregard
of the obligations of China as a sovereign power among the nations of the
world.

Owing to the failure of the unanimous ratification of the various treaties and
resolutions adopted at the Washington Conference the United States has
made no move toward bringing into effect the Washington Conference
decisions. In view of the serious situation which has developed in China as
a result of the continued serious internal disorder the practical effect has
been to damage the prestige of the United States which nation took the lead
in the call and deliberations of the Washington Conference. Unless all
Governments concerned ratify the Washington Conference treaties without
further delay the Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China
recommend that the United States Government take up this question with
the Governments prepared to adopt a united policy in respect to the
protection of their nationals and the general improvement of conditions in
this country.

Inasmuch as America took the lead in calling the Washington Conference
and in directing its discussions it is to be expected that this leadership on
the part of the United States is to be maintained, otherwise the prestige
which accrued to America as a result of the Washington Meeting is likely to
be lost.

EXTRATERRITORIALITY
In accordance with the terms of a resolution adopted at the Washington
Conference21 an international commission of jurists was to visit China
within six months after the adjournment of the Conference to report upon
the status of extraterritoriality and to make recommendations for
improvements.

On May 6, 1922, the Chinese Minister to the United States requested the
State Department to postpone the visit of the Commission for a year owing
to the desperate political situation existing in China. In view of the fact that
the year’s postponement requested by the Chinese Minister has now expired
and conditions in China have deteriorated rather than improved it is the
opinion of the Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China that
any consideration of a revision of the system of extraterritoriality now
existing in China should be indefinitely postponed.

TONNAGE DUES IN CHINESE PORTS
The tonnage dues which China is permitted to charge foreign vessels are
based upon treaties between China and other nations beginning with the
Tientsin treaty between China and Great Britain signed in 1858. These dues
amount to 4 mace (equivalent to 30 cents U. S. currency) per net registered
currency) per net registered ton on vessels of 150 tons and under. The dues
are levied in a lump sum upon any foreign ship that touches at a Chinese
port, and cover a period of four months. These dues are higher than those
charged by any other country and were adopted originally more than a half
century ago because of the fact that few foreign ships touched Chinese ports
and the high dues were necessary to provide funds for the construction and
maintenance of light houses, etc. Since these high rates work a handicap
upon American shipping not engaged in the coastwise trade of China, the
Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China recommend that
steps be taken by the United States Government to revise these regulations
which have been in effect without change for 64 years.

The Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China recommend
that all foreign vessels be granted the privilege of paying tonnage dues at
the rate of 4 mace (equivalent to 30 cents U. S. currency) per net registered
ton and good for a period of 4 months or the privilege of paying tonnage
dues at a fair rate per net registered ton per call.

SPECIAL TARIFF CONFERENCE
In accordance with the terms of a treaty adopted at the Washington
Conference on February 6, 1922, a special conference of the powers is to
be held in China to prepare the way for the speedy abolition of likin with a
view to levying surtaxes provided for in the treaty, the surtax to be levied at
the uniform rate of 2½ per cent ad valorem provided that in case of certain
articles of luxury which in the opinion of the special conference can bear a
greater increase without unduly impeding trade the total surtax may be
increased to but may not exceed 5 percent ad valorem.

Although two years have elapsed since the close of the Washington
Conference the special Tariff Conference has not been called owing to the
non-ratification of the various treaties and resolutions by all of the Powers
concerned. In case the various Governments finally ratify the treaties and
the special Conference is called, the Associated American Chambers of
Commerce of China desire to go on record that any increases granted to
China under the Washington Conference treaty be predicated upon the
condition that all defaulted foreign obligations be secured out of the
increased monies resulting from the revised tariff regulations; it being
understood that obligations incurred by the operating departments of the
Chinese Government for materials supplied take precedence over all
bonded indebtedness.

EXCHANGE OF NEWS BETWEEN UNITED STATES AND CHINA
Among the resolutions adopted by this body at its last annual meeting was
one urging the importance of a fuller exchange and distribution of American
news in this part of the world. Since the passage of this resolution the
Federal Telegraph Corporation of San Francisco in association with the
Radio Corporation of America has made a contract with the Chinese
Government whereby a number of high powered American radio stations
are to be constructed in China, the chief one being at Shanghai with feeder
stations in the interior.

Owing to protests by other foreign interests the work of the American
companies in the construction of these radio stations has been seriously
retarded. The Chamber heartily approves of the policy of Secretary of State
Hughes in upholding American rights in connection with the Federal
Telegraph Company’s contract24 and hopes that his vigorous policy in this
connection will be continued.

It is the belief of the Associated American Chambers of Commerce of
China that the erection here of a high powered radio station will be of
tremendous service in placing China in direct communication with the
United States for the exchange not only of news but of commercial
messages as well at reasonable rates.

YANGTZE PATROL FORCE
In view of the serious political situation existing along the Yangtze River
which constitutes a menace to the lives and property of American citizens
engaged in business and missionary activities, the Associated American
Chambers of Commerce of China desire to incorporate as a part of this
report a pamphlet entitled “For the Protection of American Lives and
circulated to members of Congress and other officials of the United States
Government and to Chambers of Commerce in the United States.
For years the American Chambers of Commerce in China have protested
against the frequent changes in American officials assigned to posts in
China. The Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China desire
to repeat this protest and especially emphasize the importance of retaining
experienced men in control of the Yangtze Patrol. In the past the policy of
the United States has been to send naval officers to this post and as soon as
they became familiar with conditions and have made connections with
Chinese officials transfer them to other posts. This has had an unfortunate
effect upon American prestige and has militated against the development of
a definite and continuing American policy on the Yangtze. It is therefore
recommended that experienced men be retained in this work as well as in
other lines of American Governmental activity in this part of the world.

REPRESENTATION AT WASHINGTON
The Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China realize that
more suitable action may be obtained on matters pertaining to China and
the Far East, affecting American business and interests generally, if the
Associated Chambers were directly represented at Washington. It is
therefore recommended that arrangements be made at once to appoint a
resident representative of the Associated American Chambers of Commerce
of China at Washington who shall be empowered to give publicity to all
matters which may be referred to him from time to time, to enlist the aid of
the Chamber of Commerce of the United States of America, Government
officials and departments and commercial and other organizations interested
in the various subjects referred to him for attention.

PAYMENT OF CLAIMS AGAINST THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT
As a result of the disorder which has existed in China for many years
American interests have suffered greatly by the loss or destruction of
property resulting from bandit outrages, uncontrolled soldiery and internal
fighting.

Claims covering these losses have been on file at the various consulates and
the Legation in Peking for years with no settlement being made by the
Chinese Government.

The Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China recommend
that these claims be brought forward by the American authorities at the
special conference and that the American Delegation, be instructed to insist
upon payment of these claims before agreement is given to the revision of
the Customs Tariff.

PUBLICITY CAMPAIGN IN AMERICA
Owing to the fact that foreign trade occupies such a small portion of the
interest or activities of the American people generally, it is always difficult
to induce the American Government to adopt constructive and continuing
policies in foreign affairs and especially in respect to American interests in
this part of the world. The lack of familiarity on the part of many of the
officials at Washington in respect to the protection of the lives and property
of its own citizens not to mention the larger diplomatic and strategic
interests of America in the Far East has made it necessary for American
citizens both individually and through their organizations to frequently
conduct publicity campaigns in the United States. Such publicity campaigns
in the past, although largely unorganized, have nevertheless been of
considerable benefit in concentrating the attention of the American people
and through them of the government upon particular problems affecting the
interests of Americans in this part of the world.

In view of the serious situation now existing in China which constitute[s] a
menace to the lives and interests of American citizens residing in the
Chinese Republic, it is recommended that the Associated American
Chambers of Commerce of China give this subject special attention and that
a special committee be appointed to work out in cooperation with other
American organizations, a definite publicity campaign calculated to bring to
the attention of the American people, members of Congress and other
officials of our government the necessity of a definite policy in respect to
the present situation of China.

THE BOXER INDEMNITY
In view of the fact that Congress has not yet taken action in respect to the
disposition of the unexpended balance of the American share of the Boxer
Indemnity amounting to approximately fifteen million gold dollars, it was
decided that it would not be in accordance with traditional American policy
toward China for the United States Government to withhold payment of this
money on account of the present default on the part of the Chinese
Government of American loans or obligations for materials purchased by
the Chinese Government Railways and other departments.

In view of the great number of proposals which have been placed before
this body covering possible uses for this money it was decided that the
Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China should take no
action on this subject at the present time.

The Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China are of the
opinion however that any expenditure for educational or other purposes in
China should be closely supervised by an American committee composed
of representatives of the United States diplomatic or consular services and
of the American business and missionary organizations in China.

AMERICAN INCOME TAX
American Chambers of Commerce in London, Paris, Mexico City, Buenos
Aires, Manila and elsewhere representing American commercial interests
engaged in foreign trade have for many years agitated against the injustice
of the United States Government enforcing its domestic income tax
regulations upon Americans residing abroad who derive their income from
non-American sources.

The American Chamber of Commerce (Shanghai) after an agitation lasting
over several years was able to obtain the passage by Congress of a measure
known as the China Trade Act26 which exempts American companies
registered under the Act from the operation of the domestic income and
excess profits taxes but was unable to obtain an exemption of American
citizens generally from the domestic personal income taxes.
The provision in the Revenue Bill passed by Congress in 1921 intended to
exempt Americans residing in the Far East including the Philippine Islands,
and China was stricken from the bill when it went to conference before final
passage.

There are approximately 240,000 foreigners residing in China of which
number about 9,000 are Americans. Americans are the only foreigners who
are required by their home Government to pay income taxes upon income
derived from activities in this part of the world and entirely outside of the
United States.

The handicap which this places upon the American citizen in his
competition with the British, Japanese, French, Germans and other
foreigners interested in foreign trade in this part of the world is self-evident.
Governor-General Leonard Wood of the Philippine Islands has well stated
the case in letters and cables to the Secretary of War and to the President of
Governor-General Wood said:

“Filipinos and foreign residents of the Philippine Islands, business
competitors of Americans, are exempt from Federal income tax
paying only local taxes which are very much lower. Resulting
discrimination against Americans on an outpost of our foreign
commerce is grossly unjust.—British subjects abroad have never
been subjected to British taxation on income derived from sources
outside of Great Britain. By the Finance Act of 1920 Great Britain
has even gone to the extent of refunding to overseas British
subjects taxes heretofore levied on income derived solely from
British sources. Relief on the part of Congress would greatly
facilitate the general efforts to build up our foreign trade now
seriously interfered with by subjecting it here and elsewhere
abroad to the handicap of heavier income taxes than those paid by
foreign competitors. … I feel very strongly that the least the home
Government can do is to give a considerate hearing to the
American business men of this community in order that all the
facts may be before you before definite action is taken.”
The situation affecting Americans interested in business and other activities
in China is exactly the same as the situation outlined by Governor-General
Wood in the Philippines. All foreigners residing in China are subject to
certain municipal and other taxes in the communities wherein they live but
it is only the Americans residing in China who are subjected by their home
Government to all of the domestic taxes of the United States even though
the incomes are derived from sources entirely outside of the United States.
In view of the above factors the Associated American Chambers of
Commerce of China desire to approve of the action of other American
Chambers of Commerce in various parts of the world, and especially the
action of the American Chamber of Commerce of the Philippine Islands, as
well as the action of the Chamber of Commerce of the United States of
America to the effect that Congress in framing the next Revenue Bill may
exempt Americans residing overseas and deriving their income from non-
American sources from the operation of our domestic income tax law.

UNPAID ACCOUNTS FOR MATERIALS SUPPLIED TO THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT RAILWAYS AND OTHER SERVICES

[Document 561]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
WASHINGTON, March 15, 1924.

No. 600
SIR: The Department has received from the Consul General at Shanghai a
pamphlet entitled “Report of the Annual Meeting of the Associated
American Chambers of Commerce of China, Shanghai, October 16 and 17,
1923”, a copy of which has doubtless been transmitted to the Legation.
Much of this report is devoted to criticisms of the conduct of the foreign
relations of this Government with respect to China, which suggest to the
Department the desirability of making, for the information and guidance of
the Legation, such observations as appear pertinent to the criticisms made
by the Chambers of Commerce.

The statement will be noted, in the introduction to the Report, that
“the lack of a definite program on the part of the American
Government in respect to China …28 has been nothing short of
disastrous to American interests in this country”.

The introduction also contains the statement that
“the resolutions adopted … do not attempt to outline an American
program suitable for coping with the serious situation which has
developed in recent years.”
While, therefore, complaining of the “lack of a definite program”, the
Chambers do not offer any suggestion as to measures which the Department
might consider with a view to improving the very serious situation which
unquestionably exists with respect to the adequate protection of the rights of
all foreigners in China. The business men who have adopted the sixteen

resolutions contained in this report presumably represent the leadership of
American business in China. They are doubtless well informed with respect
to conditions in that country. Although they may not have in general as full
a knowledge of the political conditions, of which they complain, as
diplomatic and consular officials have, they nevertheless come in even
closer contact, in some respects, with the resulting practical conditions, than
do government officials. They have a first-hand access to many sources of
information which the Government’s representatives lack; and the
information obtained by Government officials comes in large part from the
business firms represented by these Chambers of Commerce.

It may furthermore be remarked that the problems to be solved in
connection with the maintenance of our treaty rights in the protection of
persons and property are not, in general, of a technical character. The
problems, and the practical remedies to be applied, if such may be found,
are such as may appropriately be made the subject of discussion and
recommendation by any group of intelligent persons having an accurate
knowledge of the existing conditions. The question of the adequate
protection of American interests in China is one in which these business
men may be presumed to have a vital interest; for the failure to receive an
adequate degree of protection means the serious impairment, if not the
ultimate destruction, of the business interests which they have built up. The
Department, accordingly, notes with surprise that (with such few exceptions
as will be noted later) these resolutions are phrased in the most general
language and contain almost nothing which is of assistance to the
Department either by way of concrete proposals or by way of suggestions
from which it might be possible to evolve some practical method of dealing
with the situation.

By way of example, your attention is invited to the recommendation with
respect to illegal taxation (page 529 ) that
“… the American Delegation to the Special Conference … give
serious consideration to this matter of illegal taxation before
agreeing to China’s request for further increases in the Customs
tariff.”

On the subject of disorders in China, the Chambers are of the opinion (page
8) that
“nothing short of a definite stand on the part of the Powers would
be sufficient to bring China’s military dictators to a realization of
the obligations of China … Until such time as the nations … are
prepared to adopt a definite policy in respect to China, it is vital
that the United States take steps to secure to American citizens
their just treaty rights in China.”
In the section entitled “American Policy in China”, it is stated (pages 13–
14) that
“Unless all governments concerned ratify the Washington
Conference treaties without further delay, the Associated
American Chambers of Commerce of China recommend that the
United States Government take up this question with the
governments prepared to adopt a united policy in respect to the
protection of their nationals and the general improvement of
conditions in this country.”
Under the heading of “Publicity Campaign in America”, reference is made
to the “necessity of a definite policy in respect to the situation in China”
(page 22). The Report closes with the recommendation, relating to the
unpaid accounts due from the Chinese Government for materials supplied
by American firms (page 27), that
“The State Department instruct the American Minister to bring
more pressure to bear on the Chinese Government and that he
insist that immediate arrangements be made to meet the
obligations incurred by the Chinese Government.”
The phrases underlined above indicate the vagueness of the resolutions
forming this report; and I cannot but acknowledge my regret that, in matters
so vital to their interests, the Chambers have not found it possible to make,
for my consideration, more definite and more helpful suggestions as to
measures that might prove practical to adopt for the better safeguarding of
American interests in China.

This sense of disappointment is deepened by a consideration of the one or
two concrete suggestions which the Chambers have offered. On page 8
occurs the statement:
“… we feel that at the present time the maximum of protection in
China for our interests can only be obtained by increasing our
military and naval forces to the strength we are entitled under
treaty rights. This involves the bringing of our military and
marine forces stationed in Peking and Tientsin under the Boxer
Protocol of 1901 up to their full strength, and additions to the
China section of the Pacific fleet, and the Yangtze Patrol
Squadron.”
To the best of the information and judgment of both this Department and
the War Department, the contingents now stationed at Peking and Tientsin
are sufficient in point of numbers for the purposes of their detail; and, in the
absence of any special emergency, there would appear to be no special
advantage to be derived by adding to the number of Marines at Peking or by
transferring from Manila to Tientsin another battalion of the 15th Infantry.
As to the latter of these alternatives, it should be understood that such a
disposition of troops is considered by the War Department not to be
feasible, in view of the requirements to be met elsewhere with the limited
available military establishment which the Congress has determined in
accordance with the manifest desire of the people of this country. Quite
apart from the administrative impracticability of this proposal, however, it
seems plain that the presence of these few hundred soldiers would have no
effect whatsoever upon the general protection of the persons and property
of American citizens scattered throughout China, and would afford no
remedy for the widespread conditions of which the Chambers complain.
It is not clear what is the interest in the Chamber’s recommendation that
“additions to the China section of the Pacific fleet” should be made. The
cruising ships of the Asiatic fleet, including a large number of destroyers,
have been readily available at Chinese seaports; and this Government
recently assembled at Canton a larger number of vessels for a naval
demonstration than did any other foreign Power. On this point, it would
appear that the Chambers are in error as to the facts, and that there is no

paucity of naval units of this character for the purpose of such conditions as
exist at present. The recommendation with respect to an increase in the
force of the Yangtze Patrol is, on the other hand, most pertinent; and as you
are aware, the Department has for a long time been endeavoring, in
cooperation with the Navy Department, to obtain legislative authority for
the construction of new ships for this purpose. You were informed in the
Department has, with the sanction of the Director of the Budget, introduced
appropriate legislation into Congress for the construction of six high-
powered lightdraft gunboats for service on Chinese rivers.

In view of the serious actualities which confront Americans in China, both
business men and missionaries, the Department does not regard it as
surprising that they should feel strongly upon the subject of obtaining
adequate protection, and should feel some anxiety lest the Government
should prove indifferent to their interests. And it is no doubt but natural
that, in their concern for those interests, they should fail to realize that the
state of domestic opinion in this country would not permit the despatch of
any further considerable military forces to China unless in the event of
some impending catastrophe such as the Boxer movement of 1900. The
extent of possible protection is, and must remain, substantially that which
may be obtained by Diplomatic means and by the presence, actual or
potential, of our naval forces in Chinese waters. Under these circumstances,
I regard it as unfortunate that the American Chambers of Commerce should
so far fail to appreciate the essential nature of the situation and the limits of
action permissible to this Government as to give publicity to the resolutions
contained in this report. Such publication serves but to emphasize the very
precarious condition in which the whole system of foreign treaty rights in
China now, unfortunately, finds itself in consequence of the great changes
which are taking place in China which it is not within the power of the
interested foreign nations to control or to restrain in any effective degree. It
is my opinion that it would better serve the ends of American business and
other interests in China not to invite public attention to this regrettable but
unavoidable state of affairs, but, carefully and quietly, to give thought to the
devising of practical means by which the problems involved may be met. I
would heartily welcome the considered expressions of American residents
in China upon this subject.

Deploring the evident existence of a feeling of dissatisfaction and
misunderstanding among American business men in China as to the attitude
of the Department toward the protection of their interests, I hope that, in the
exercise of a sound discretion, you may find occasions to acquaint
representative business men and others with the facts of the situation in
such a way as will lead them to bring a less impetuous judgment to bear
upon the question of dealing with those common American interests, with
the protection of which this Department is charged. It is particularly
suggested that you might find it possible to impress upon the more
responsible and influential members of the American community the futility
and the danger of the reiteration of threats of intervention, which, when for
any reason not carried out, tend inevitably to lead the Chinese to the
conviction that the remonstrances of the foreign Powers may safely be
ignored.

The unfortunate state of domestic politics now existing in China,
approaching a condition of political chaos, has likewise, and even to a
greater degree, affected adversely the interests of foreign missionaries. The
very great extent of American enterprise in this direction, constituting, both
in the number of persons engaged and in the amount of capital invested, a
larger element of American activity than is found in trade, adds materially
to the problem of affording protection to our nationals in China. The right
of residence in the interior, of which this group of our citizens has taken full
advantage, has resulted in a diffusion of American missionaries throughout
even the most remote and isolated parts of the country. This movement,
over which the Government cannot exercise any degree of positive control,
and which it would only reluctantly use, its influence to restrict, has, in the
growing disorder now so general, greatly complicated the problem of
protection. In this particular, it is not possible to separate the interests of the
trader from those of the missionary; and an act of violence to a member of
either group reacts equally unfavorably upon the safety and well-being of
both. It is felt that this has possibly not been wholly appreciated by the
Chambers of Commerce, although the recent report of the formation in
Shanghai of a joint committee, composed of both traders and missionaries,
for the study of matters affecting their common interests, would indicate a
quickening perception in this respect.

It may be remarked, furthermore, that the missionaries, as a group, have
reacted to the present adverse situation in a somewhat different manner than
have the business interests. With the exception of the Lincheng outrage,
cases of actual violence to American persons and property have occurred
chiefly to the missionaries. In so far as the Department is informed,
however, missionaries have refrained from public resolutions of the kind
passed by the American Chambers of Commerce, and have sought rather to
keep their Boards at home informed of the very dangerous trend of Chinese
affairs and to bring to the attention of the Department through various
agencies, the difficulties of their situation and the very real need of such
protection as the Government is able to extend. This attitude has suggested
to the Department the desirability of obtaining a measure of direct
cooperation with these interests in matters relating to the direction of their
policies in China, in so far as such policies have a bearing on the problem
of protection; and it has been felt that a frank exchange of views with
representatives of the various Boards, in confidence, would be of service to
this end. For this purpose I authorized the Chief of the Far Eastern Division
to meet in New York, on February 21, with representatives of the Foreign
Missions Conference of North America. In the course of this conference he
made it clear that the Department had no intention of dictating to them or
even of advising them, but desired only to give them an exposition of the
present situation in China from the viewpoint of the Department, in order
that they might be in a position to understand the problems of protection
involved, and make their own decisions accordingly. He quite unreservedly
explained the impossibility of controlling the situation by a display of force,
or by such diplomatic methods as a proposal to withdraw recognition from
the Peking Government; and he pointed out that this Government would in
all probability find it increasingly difficult to give adequate protection to
our missionary and other interests in the interior of China, and that it is
possible only to rely upon our moral position, and to deal with each
individual case as it arises. Under such circumstances, the mission Boards
would have to take into consideration, in formulating the policies of their
respective organizations, the very considerable limitations upon our ability
to afford protection, especially in isolated stations, against the dangers
likely to result from the revulsion of Chinese feeling against the special
privileges enjoyed by foreigners and from the greatly lowered prestige of
our western civilization in the eyes of the Chinese. The response of those

[Document 562]
The Foreign Secretary of the American Board of Commissioners
for Foreign Missions (James L. Barton) to the Chief of the
Division of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State
(MacMurray)
BOSTON, March 18, 1924.

[Received March 19.]

DEAR MR. MACMURRAY: Bearing directly upon the subject of the conference you
were so kind as to give us the honor of having with you in New York two
weeks ago on the subject of China and the relation of American
missionaries to the present situation, I would like to submit to you a
question which is evidently coming to the front in China, perhaps more
rapidly than some of us are aware.

It is evident that a spirit of opposition to the extra-territorial conditions and
of government protection for American missionaries is rising in some parts
of China. There has just come into my hands a statement in terms as
follows:
“Without attempting to enter into the general question of
extraterritorial rights but having regard to the fact that we are here
as messengers of the Gospel of peace and that our task is to
establish peace by leading men and women one by one into that
new life in Christ which takes away the occasion for all wars, we
express our earnest desire that no form of military pressure may
be exerted to protect us or our property, that in the event of our
capture by lawless persons or our death at their hands no money
be paid for our release, no punitive expedition be sent out and no
indemnity exacted. We take this stand believing that the way to
maintain righteousness and peace is through suffering without
retaliation and through bringing the spirit of personal good will to

bear on all persons under all circumstances. So we understand the
teaching and example of Jesus Christ our Lord and it is to the
extension of His Kingdom that our lives are dedicated. In signing
this statement we wish it to be clear that we have no authority to
speak for our missions or churches, and sign simply in our
individual capacity.”
This statement originated in China, but I have no information as to how
many if any signatures were secured thereto. I would like to ask therefore if
you can make a ruling upon some points which seem to bear upon this
entire question.
1. The extra-territorial rights in China are rights by treaty as I
understand. Has an American the right and privilege of vacating
rights thus secured?
2. Should a missionary, in accordance with the above statement,
decline to accept those rights as they relate to his person and
property? Would that position endanger the life and property of
other American missionaries, and if other American missionaries,
then other Americans engaged in other pursuits in China?
3. If a missionary, contrary to the treaty, should be arrested and
imprisoned and should refuse to make an appeal to his consul or
the representatives of his government in China for protection,
would the consul or representatives of the government, for that
reason, refuse to insist that the Chinese Government should
observe the treaties existing between the United States and China
quite irrespective of the wishes of the party more directly
affected? In a word, has an American the right in any country, and
would that right be recognized by the U. S. government, to vacate
his rights which belong to him as an American citizen by treaty,
thus excusing the government in his case from insisting that
treaties shall be observed? That is, can an American in China in
some respects be an American citizen and in other respects not, so
far as the claiming of his rights as a citizen are concerned?

I am preparing an article bearing upon some of these subjects for the
general instruction of mission boards represented in the Committee of
Reference and Counsel, and I would very much appreciate a ruling if you
could give me one upon the question involved in this communication for
use with these boards and with the missionaries concerned.
I have [etc.]

JAMES L. BARTON

[Document 563]
The Secretary of State to the Foreign Secretary of the American
Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions (James L. Barton)
WASHINGTON, April 1, 1924.

SIR: The Department has received your letter of March 18, 1924, stating that
there exists among American missionaries in China a growing spirit of
opposition to the extraterritorial conditions and to government protection of
missionaries thereunder, and making certain inquiries with regard to the
right of American citizens to waive such privileges, if they so desire. In
general, I may state that American citizens are not entitled to waive rights
of the character to which you refer. The treaties concluded between China
and the United States are contracts between the two governments. They
expressly provide that American citizens in China shall enjoy, with respect
to their person and property, the protection of the local authorities of
government, and that they shall be exempt from the processes of Chinese
law. The observance of these provisions of the treaties this Government has
a right to insist upon, and doubtless would insist upon, irrespective of the
wishes of particular individuals who may be influenced by religious or
other beliefs. It has been repeatedly held that a citizen cannot by his
independent act control the right of his government to intervene or afford
protection in an appropriate case. In this connection, you may be interested
to refer to Moore’s International Law Digest, Vol. VI, p. 293.
With reference to the exercise of extraterritorial rights, Congress has,
furthermore, enacted legislation extending to American citizens in China
the laws of the United States. No American citizen in China, so long as he
remains such, can waive the application to his person or property of such
laws by the claim of a preference to be subject to the laws of China.
I think you will agree with me that the surrender of such rights by a portion
of the American community in China, even if by a very small number of
individuals, would seriously impair the whole system of the treaties as

designed for the protection of all classes of American citizens in that
country. It is hoped, therefore, that, in the article which you are preparing
for the general instruction of mission boards, you may be in a position to
make clear the attitude? of the Department with respect to this subject.
For the Secretary of State:
J. V. A. MACMURRAY,
Chief, Division of Far Eastern Affairs

[Document 564]
The Foreign Secretary of the American Board of Commissioners
for Foreign Missions (James L. Barton) to the Chief of the
Division of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State
(MacMurray)
BOSTON, April 3, 1924.

[Received April 5.]

DEAR MR. MACMURRAY: I am grateful indeed for yours of April 1st in reply to my
inquiry of the 18th March on the subject of American missionaries
surrendering extra-territorial rights in China. The position which you have
taken is one that I have always taken in correspondence and in discussion,
namely, that no American can be half American and half not American.
When I was in Turkey many years ago I wished to set the college press in
action which had been closed and sealed by the Turkish, government. I was
informed that if I would forego my rights as an American citizen under the
capitulations in so far as my relations to the press were concerned, they
would allow me to open the press. This would have made me subject to all
the Turkish laws and courts; in so far as I was related to the press as its
responsible head. I reported the situation to Washington and received back
very speedily from Secretary Blaine a statement that, as an American
citizen, I had the full right to abrogate my citizenship and become a citizen
of Turkey or any other country, but that the Department could not recognize
my right to be in some respects an American citizen and in other respects
not. In a word, I could not be part American citizen and part citizen of some
other country. I am not quoting his words, but the principle is the same as
that which you enunciate it seems to me.

I understand from your closing words that I am at liberty to quote from your
communication to the mission boards of the United States having

missionary work in China and also in substance in the article to which I
referred.

I want to thank you for the clear answer to a question which has a very
important bearing, I believe, on mission work in China, and I think it is
unanswerable. With much appreciation [etc.]

JAMES L. BARTON

393.1123 Reimert, William A.: Telegram

[Document 565]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
December 27, 1923, authorizes cancellation of the mandate ordering trial
and punishment of Chang Ching-yao. This is believed to be a political move
to please Chang Tso-lin, Chang Ching-yao being his personal friend. I
was not consulted either before or after the granting of the pardon.
American prestige is closely involved and we shall undoubtedly be severely
criticized if we do not enter emphatic protest.

I do not think it would be possible to secure withdrawal of the pardon; but I
request authority to lodge a very strong protest against it as a violation of
the assurance given in the third paragraph the Chinese Foreign Office note
procedure is a discourtesy to my Government and also is an act that cannot
but affect most seriously the confidence my Government can in the future
place in the official utterances of the Government of China.

I think the substance of the protest should be made public and I propose to
inform the diplomatic body of the circumstances.

[Document 566]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
Chinese Government a protest against the issuance of the Presidential
Mandate of December 27, 1923, authorizing the cancellation of the mandate
for the arrest and trial of Chang Ching-yao which is regarded as a breach of
faith on the part of the Chinese Government and a specific violation of its
undertaking in this particular as stated in the note addressed by the Minister
discretion, you may add that this action cannot but affect most seriously the
confidence of this Government in the future in the official utterances of the
Government of China. You are authorized to make public the terms or
substance of the protest.

HUGHES
393.1123 Reimert, William A.: Telegram

[Document 567]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Received January 24—5 a.m.]

Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs in the sense indicated. January 23rd at
an interview I intimated to him that, in the absence of some satisfactory
measure by the Chinese Government, I should feel obliged to publish
substance of my note.

Minister for Foreign Affairs replied that apparently the nature of the
mandate pardoning Chang had been misconstrued since in it Chang had
been named with others in a general amnesty to political offenders as
customarily granted on the accession of a new Executive. Not having
particular reference to Reimert case, it could not be regarded as a breach of
faith with the American Government.

I replied that the fact remained that the Chinese Government had promised
that the charge against Chang in condition [connection] Reimert murder
would be included with the other charges for investigation, and the present
mandate absolved Chang from trial.

Referring to the alleged political character of the pardon, I inquired whether
the Chinese Government intended that Chang should still be tried in
connection with Reimert charge. Dr. Koo replied that my note had been
referred to Ministry of War and he wished to defer expressing himself
definitely until he had received a reply. I consented to refrain from publicity
or other measure until I heard further from him.

SCHURMAN

[Document 568]
The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State
[Received October 16—10 a.m.]
between American merchants [Minister?] and Chinese Minister for Foreign
Affairs failed to result in cancellation of the pardon and on October 11th
Chang was appointed by Presidential mandate one of the vice commanders
of the rear guard army. On learning of this yesterday I immediately lodged
strong oral protest with Koo who states that he had never heard of the
mandate, denied that Chinese Government had any intention of
disregarding views of the American Government and attributed issue of
mandate to inadvertence incident to extraordinary pressure on Government
departments. He seemed presumably very grateful and promised take up
matter at once with Prime Minister. Meanwhile I shall address Koo strong
BELL

[Document 569]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, November 22, 1924.

[Received December 30.]

No. 2624
negotiations concerning the trial and punishment of General Chang Ching-
yao for the death of an American missionary, Mr. William A. Reimert, I
have the honor to transmit herewith enclosed a translation of the reply made
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs36 to the note which Mr. Bell addressed
to him on October 22, 1924, in which he protested against the
appointment of Chang Ching-yao to a position of high rank in one of the
military units of the Chinese army. The Minister for Foreign Affairs in his
reply states that on October 24, 1924, a Presidential Mandate was issued
cancelling the appointment of Chang Ching-yao to the position of Vice
Commander of Reinforcements. The mandate referred to is doubtless that
abolishing the posts of Commander-in-Chief and Vice Commanders for the
Suppression of Rebellion, as no mandate has been issued specifically
cancelling the appointment of Chang Chingyao. A translation of the
mandate of October 24th was transmitted to the Department with my
I have [etc.]

FERDINAND MAYER
Colombia:

Boundary dispute with Panama. (See
under General.)

Boundary dispute with Peru. (See
under General.)

Cuba:
Passage of an amnesty bill by the Cuban Congress
(Documents 570-571)

[Document 570]
The Ambassador in Cuba (Crowder) to the Secretary of State
HABANA, June 2, 1924.

[Received June 7.]

No. 730
SIR: I have the honor to refer the Department to previous reports from me at
the time when I was Special Representative of the President regarding an
Amnesty Bill which has been before the Cuban Congress for over three
years.

I had addressed President Zayas on the subject on June 16, November 10,
a passage contained in a telegram dated November 4, 1922, from the Cuban
Chargé d’Affaires in Washington to his Government (see my Special
Loan Statute, to the following effect:
“That this Government (i. e. of the United States) when granting
said authorization, wished to express its great worry regarding
two matters, that is: First, the Amnesty recently voted by the
Cuban Senate, and, secondly, the possibility of changes being
attempted in the present Cabinet, and from the phrases and tone
used by the Sub-Secretary, I deduct that this Government would
be greatly displeased and alarmed by the realization of any of
these two propositions.”
When this Amnesty Bill was again actively being considered by the House
of Representatives, I once more addressed the President, on April 22, 1924,
and reminded him of my letter of February 6, 1923, and of the above
quotation.

[Document 571]
The Ambassador in Cuba (Crowder) to the Secretary of State
HABANA, June 6, 1924.

[Received June 11.]

No. 735
transmitting copy of my communication to President Zayas in re the then
pending Amnesty Bill, and to enclose herewith of [a] copy of his reply
thereto.

It is pertinent to note the fact that he expresses the opinion that not more
than thirty individuals will be released from the prisons in pursuance of this
amnesty. I hope that this estimate may be correct, but in case this Amnesty
Bill is like that of sixteen other amnesties which have preceded it in the
history of the Republic of Cuba, we shall never have any report of the
execution it has received.

The main application of the Amnesty Bill which the President signed will
be to pending indictments in which, as yet, no sentence has been adjudged
and which will now be dismissed; and to the still larger number of cases in
which, for one reason or another, no indictment has ever been found. The
Department will recall the Whereas Clauses of the original Amnesty Bill,
setting forth the justification therefor. One of these clauses reads as follows:
“It is therefore a fact that no one can deny or ignore that during a
period of more than fifteen years it has been the custom in this
country to favor a multitude of persons with imaginary positions
and collectorias, which were made to appear in the name of
nonexistent persons, which practice has prevailed in absolutely all
of the branches of the administration, and that absolutely all
social classes have taken advantage of this situation. The

influence of the personages was measured by the number of these
favors which lie was able to distribute.”
All cases of the character described in this quotation are covered by the
amnesty and, in addition, those that are pointed out in the clipping from the
Havana Post of June 6th hereto attached marked Enclosure “B”.
I have [etc.]

E. H. CROWDER
[Enclosure—Translation ]
President Zayas to the American Ambassador (Crowder)
HABANA, June 2, 1924.

MY DEAR MR. AMBASSADOR: I take pleasure in acknowledging the receipt of your
kind communication of May 30th last, relative to the Project of Amnesty
Law, now pending my sanction.

In truth, I remember that when steps were being taken to obtain a Foreign
Loan to take up the Floating Debt of the Cuban State, the Honorable
Secretary of State of the United States, upon notifying our Chargé
d’Affaires of the assent of his Government to said transaction, in
accordance with the provisions of the Permanent Treaty, indicated that that
Government was confident that the Secretaries of the Cabinet would not be
removed, nor the Amnesty Law, which was already projected, approved.
Naturally, I accept these friendly recommendations thankful to their good
purposes, and I complied with them, although considering them as inspired
by the circumstances of the moment in which they were made, and not as
permanently maintained.

I also remember the communications from Your Excellency of June 16th,
remarks on the Amnesty Law, likewise circumstantial, and with reference to
a determined and special situation. In fact, it is so demonstrated by the
following phrases contained in your communication of June 16th: “it seems

to extend amnesty as to most of the grave crimes, which are likely to be
disclosed by the Superior Liquidating Commission.” (This objection is now
out of place, because the Law pending excludes said cases from the
Amnesty, in paragraph 3 of Section (a) of Article I.) “I know of no measure
that would strike more directly and effectively at the financial credit of
Cuba, at a time when every effort is being made to restore public
confidence.” (The words underlined refer to a moment which has already
passed.) “No amnesty bill will be passed at the present session of
Congress.”
In the communication of November 10th, Your Excellency said: “It would
be very unfortunate if any Amnesty legislation were passed by the Cuban
Congress pending the loan negotiations. This is an inopportune time to
agitate the question of amnesty.”
Your communication of December 9th, more lengthy than the two previous
ones, was for the purpose of suggesting your points of view in connection
with the amnesty then pending, “in order that they may be the cause of
revision by such persons whose services I might request, and whose
knowledge in the matter and in the application of the Law might be better
than your own.” It is precisely the line of conduct which I have followed,
because I consider your friendly advice as proper, and, after obtaining a
delay of nearly three years, I have succeeded in reducing in an
extraordinary manner the extension of the benefits of the amnesty.
It will suffice, to demonstrate this, that on December 9, 1921, when Your
Excellency examined Article I of the Project of Law pending, listed up to
29 crimes or faults as included in the amnesty; and in the present Law, after
my efforts with the Members of the Mixed Committee of Congress, they
have been reduced to 17, and of these cases, there are two which have not
given rise to sentences.

Article II of the former Project has been left out entirely.
Article I of the Law pending, in Section (b), does not seem to me to deserve
the commentaries which Your Excellency makes, because it unquestionably
presents a wide range to doubt of the justice or equity of a sentence of

condemnation, the fact that three Magistrates, out of seven which formed
the Court, may have given a vote of absolution.

As to the inclusion in the amnesty of such cases in which the offender
alleged the complete circumstances of legitimate defence, but it is declared
that the manner in which the facts were initiated or occurred, was not
known or not proved, that is to say, the circumstances result incomplete, I
must remind you that in Article 59 of the Electoral Code so much
consideration was given to this circumstance, that, when they concur in the
crimes of homicide, greater and lesser injuries, these are exempted from
constituting penal antecedents, for the effects of said Code.
Within the opinion which peoples of saxon origin have of oath, and the
respect which they have for it, Your Excellency is right in criticising
Section (a) of Article II of the Law pending. I wish oath deserved the same
respect among us, but unfortunately this is not so, in general, and it is for
this reason that Congress includes such crime in the Amnesty, together with
that of duel, to which importance is not given also, and to simple infractions
and disciplinary corrections. It is precisely because I am convinced of the
little efficacy of oath, that I have been trying to induce Congressmen that
when Article 102 of the Electoral Code is modified, they may demand some
proof in writing to effect any inscription of electors.

Section (b) of Article II concedes amnesty to public officials and
employees. It is the second time, during the existence of the Republic that
this has been done. The first time I was the promotor in the Senate, in the
year 19) [sic], of an amnesty which included all American citizens and
their co-offenders who had committed crimes during the Intervention, and
the principal object pursued was to grant amnesty to the high officials of the
Post-Office Department, General Rathbone, Mr. Neely and Mr. Reeve.
I wish to state that the Project of Law which I saw before approving the
present, conceded the benefits of amnesty to the public officials and
employees without limiting it to the crimes or misdemeanors committed in
the exercise of their duties, or because of them; and, at my suggestion, that
limitation was introduced, for the Constitution does not permit pardon in
such circumstances.

Section (c) of said Article II has for its actual object the amnesty for
members of the same Congress which has voted it, and from the point of
view of principles, Dr. Dolz was right in attacking this extreme of the Law:
but the same Senator, in a letter, which I have before me, directed to Mr.
Wifredo Fernandez, says: “I have combatted that law with my word and my
vote: But, once it is approved by Congress, it represents the will of the
latter, which I revere, and which in my judgment, should also weigh in the
consideration of the President of the Republic.”
The two paragraphs of Article III seem to Your Excellency tobe drawn up to
cover certain cases of individuals, and not a general situation. It is probable
that that is so, but they are without importance, for it is not an attempt to
pardon crimes, but to annul penal antecedents only for political crimes,
committed previous to the year 1915; for the crime of infidelity in the
custody of prisoners, of the same epoch, and for those crimes whose penalty
was accomplished, or pardoned (it does not include those who have not
fulfilled the penalty involved), if in the sentence there were absolutory
votes, which implies doubts as to the culpability.

I think that Your Excellency wrongly interprets the provision of Article VI
of the pending Law, in thinking that it may infringe on the Constitution, in
Article XIII. To reject such an idea, it is sufficient to consider that it does
not annul nor alter any civil liability originating from the criminal actions
for which amnesty is granted. Rather, the former Laws of Amnesty, in
obliging the parties interested to discuss before the Courts of civil
jurisdiction that liability, injured them, for they had to resort to proceedings
that were costly, complicated and delayed.

By the prevailing Law of Civil Procedure, in every criminal case, the Fiscal
exercises, in addition to penal action, the civil action, for the restoration of
the things, reparation of damages, and indemnification for injuries, and on
issuing the sentence, the Court should decide all questions referring to the
civil liability. The new Law leaves in the charge of the Criminal Court, the
obligation which it had to fix the amount of the indemnification, which has
always been fixed by analogy with former cases, but in treating of injuries,
as these require proofs, and admit of discussion, the Law follows the rule
established in Article 116 of the Law of Civil Procedure, even though there

had been no sentence, for, if it had been issued and were final, they would
comply with that point.

It is true that the electoral crimes, because of the importance of the penalty
imposed, are included in the Amnesty but there will be very few cases
pending. As for the extinction of penal antecedents, for the effects of the
Electoral Code, paragraph four of Article 59 of said Code prevents the
consideration of this amnesty, which in no way influences in the application
of the Electoral Code.

I do not believe that the American citizens can feel aggrieved at a, Law of
Amnesty which is constitutionally issued by Congress, and which obligates
them in accordance with Article X of the Constitution; but, of course, the
diplomatic way is a perfectly legal channel through which to treat of any
concrete case.

I have detained, for three years, the definite passing of the Law of Amnesty,
and I have succeeded in so reducing the cases which it includes, that,
according to calculations made, there will not be more than thirty
individuals who will come out of the Prison. I must not systematically and
for a longer time oppose the manifest and persistent will of the Legislative
Power, which, I am sure, would reject the veto, for I have in my possession
a communication supporting and requesting the passing of the Law, signed
by 18 Senators and 80 Representatives. With the same purpose, of
supporting and soliciting said approbation, I was visited by a goodly
number of journalists, who represented the majority of the newspapers of
this city.

Very truly yours,
ALFREDO ZAYAS
Czechoslovakia:
Exchange of notes between the United States and
Czechoslovakia prolonging the customs agreement of

[Document 572]
The Chargé in Czechoslovakia (Pearson) to the Secretary of State
PRAGUE, December 9, 1924.

[Received January 6, 1925.]

No. 746
directing the Legation to take steps with a view to renewing indefinitely the
commercial agreement concluded October 29, 1923, between the United
States and this country, and to the Legation’s telegram No. 48, December
definitive treaty of commerce”, I have the honor to transmit herewith a
translation and copies of the Foreign Office Note on this subject, as well as
copies of my own. In this connection I venture to observe that the interested
Czechoslovak authorities objected to renewing the treaty “indefinitely” on
the ground that the use of this word might seem to imply unwillingness on
the part of the United States to conclude, eventually, a definitive treaty of
commerce; and that in view of the Department’s desire to renew the
existing agreement for an indefinite period and of its wish to negotiate a
comprehensive commercial treaty with this country, it seemed more
desirable to prolong the agreement at once, for what is in effect an
indefinite period, than, through insistence upon the use of the word
“indefinitely”, to incur the risk, which the prospective absence of the
competent Foreign Office officials appreciably increased, that the actual
agreement expire before renewal with consequent injury to American
interests.

I have [etc.]

FREDERICK F. A. PEARSON

[Enclosure 1]
The American Chargé (Pearson) to the Czechoslovak Minister for Foreign Affairs (Beneš)
PRAGUE, December 5, 1924.

No. 628
Mr. MINISTER: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Your
Excellency’s note of this day, by which you were good enough to inform
me that your Government desires to prolong the commercial arrangement
between Czechoslovakia and the United States concluded on October 29,
1923, and which not having been denounced before that date was to remain
effective until December 31, 1924.

The Government of the United States being animated by the same
intentions is in entire agreement with the proposition of the Czechoslovak
Government.

Under these circumstances I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that
my Government considers the agreement in question prolonged as from the
exchange of the present notes until the conclusion of a definitive treaty of
commerce, under the reservation, however, that each of the High
Contracting Parties be empowered to denounce this agreement on condition
that it give thirty days advance notice of such denunciation.
Accept [etc.]

FREDERICK F. A. PEARSON
[Enclosure 2—Translation]
The Czechoslovak Minister for Foreign Affairs (Beneš) to the American Chargé (Pearson)
PRAGUE, December 5, 1924.

MONSIEUR LE CHARGÉ D’AFFAIRES: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your
note of this day, by which you were good enough; to inform me that your
Government desires to prolong the commercial arrangement between the
United States and Czechoslovakia, concluded on October 29, 1923, and,
which not having been denounced before that date was to remain effective
until December 31, 1924.

The Government of Czechoslovakia being animated by the same intentions
is in entire agreement with the proposition of the United States
Government.

Under these circumstances I have the honor to inform you, Monsieur le
Chargé d’Affaires, that my Government considers the agreement in
question prolonged as from the exchange of the present notes until the
conclusion of a definitive treaty of commerce, under the reservation,
however, that each of the High Contracting Parties can denounce this
agreement on condition that it gives thirty days advance notice of such
denunciation.

I avail myself [etc.]

DR. EDUARD BENEŠ

[Document 573]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Czechoslovakia
(Einstein)
exchange of notes of December 5 require legislative and presidential
approval and publication? Department wishes to publish in Treaty Series as
soon as all Czechoslovak formalities are completed. Your omission of
“indefinitely” approved.

GREW

[Document 574]
The Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein) to the Secretary of
State
legislative approval to complete formalities and this must await
reassembling of Parliament but the agreement has already been published in
December 31st issue of Official Record and under a special law designed to
meet legislative delay became effective January 1st.
EINSTEIN

Dominican Republic:

[Document 575]
The Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (Welles) to the
Secretary of State
2. As the result of repeated suggestions on my part General Vasquez and
Señor Peynado, the two Presidential candidates, published, yesterday
official statements in which each declared that, should he be elected
President of the Republic in the coming elections, hewould maintain the
Policia Nacional Dominicana upon the same basis as that which now exists;
that it would be kept free from politics; that no appointments would be
made except in accordance with the present regulations of the force; and
that no promotions would be [made] except by merit. Finally, that the strict
impartiality of the Policia Nacional would be considered an essential
safeguard of the Republic.

These declarations which I consider of great importance provide a definite
guarantee that public order will be maintained after the Occupation is
terminated by a well-drilled nonpolitical force. Both candidates have
declared confidentially to me that they will request the United States
Government to continue American officers here as instructors of the Policia
Nacional after the evacuation takes place.

WELLES

[Document 576]
The Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (Welles) to the
Secretary of State
4. Since an active propaganda has been initiated by certain elements in both
parties in different sections of the Republic to the effect that the
Government of the United States is supporting the candidacy of one or the
other of the two Presidential candidates, I request your authorization to
issue a brief statement comprising the following points: That the
candidacies of General Vasquez and of Señor Peynado are equally agreeable
to the Government of the United States; that the election of either would in
its opinion constitute a guarantee that the coming government of the
Republic would devote itself to safeguarding the maintenance of
constitutional government in the Dominican Republic, to the continuance of
peace and order and to the commercial and economic development of the
nation; and finally that the sole interest of the United States in the coming
elections is that the Dominican people have the opportunity to indicate with
the utmost freedom their choice between the two candidates for the
Presidency and that the candidate declared elected be installed as
Constitutional President as soon thereafter as the terms of the Plan of
Evacuation may permit.

WELLES

[Document 577]
The Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (Welles) to the
Secretary of State
6. Señor Peynado advised me last night that he had definitely determined to
resign as candidate the Presidency of the Coalition Party. He will so advise
the national convention of his party today. He stated that the reason for his
decision was the fact that he had spent all of his personal fortune in
campaign expenditures, that he could obtain no further funds, and that his
supporters would spend no additional sums in view of the certainty of the
defeat of his party in the coming elections.

It is impossible for the Coalition to select any other candidate for the
Presidency who can keep together the various political elements of which
the party is composed. An attempt which will be at least in part successful is
therefore being made by the executive committee of the Coalition to reach
an agreement with the leaders of the Alliance Party by means of which the
Coalition will be granted representation in the Senate and Congress and
among the provincial officials in return for Coalition support of General
Vasquez and Señor Velasquez as sole national candidates for the Presidency
and Vice Presidency respectively.

Should this agreement be reached with the accord of the majority of the
members of the Coalition executive committee it will result in the Senate
and Congress being composed of the best elements in both parties. It will
provide assurance that the coming constitutional government will always
have majority support in the national legislature being in carrying out [sic]
of the Government’s policies and it will guarantee the successful execution
of the Plan of Evacuation, with the additional certainty that factional
disputes will be obviated in this Republic for some years. An apparent
disadvantage lies in the fact that if only one list of candidates is presented to

the voters in the coming elections the number of voters will be
comparatively small and the charge will be made by the critics of the
United States Government that the coming constitutional government does
not represent the majority of the Dominican people and that consequently
the ratification of the treaty of evacuation stipulated in the plan will have
been obtained by a minority vote. This charge can be easily disproved by
reference to the registration figures for the elections which indicate 150,000
voters desiring to vote for candidates pledged to carry out the Plan of
Evacuation and by reference to the fact that the opponents of the plan
although they have had ample opportunity to do so have never brought
forward candidates pledged to combat the carrying out of the Plan of
Evacuation.

I am [confident?] should this agreement be satisfactorily carried out that the
ablest men in the country will be disposed to enter the Cabinet, the Senate
and the House making it possible for the majority of the old school
politicians who are responsible for the disastrous history of this country to
be permanently eliminated from participation in public affairs. With the
written commitment which I have obtained from General Vasquez and
Señor Velasquez regarding the Policia Nacional Dominicana referred to in
my telegram of January 5, 11 a.m., with their like written commitment to
maintain the civil service law in all branches of the Executive department
and to obtain the adoption of a constitutional amendment providing for life
tenure of office during good behavior, I have reason to believe that the
Government of the United States can be reasonably confident that a period
of peace and progressive government is assured for this Republic.
WELLES

[Document 578]
The Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (Welles) to the
Secretary of State
[Received February 10—11 p.m.]
persuaded him for the time being from insisting upon the immediate
acceptance of his resignation as candidate for the national assembly of the
Coalition Party, the knowledge of his resignation is, however, general and
defections from the party’s ranks are widespread. Señor Enrique Jimenez,
president of the former Liberal Party, of the members of which the coalition
is largely composed, has resigned from the Coalition Party and all of his
friends will follow him. Whether or not an agreement is reached between
the leaders of the coalition and the candidates of the alliance, the Alliance
Party will now undoubtedly receive the support of majority of the better
elements in the Coalition Party as stated in my telegram above referred to.
Señor Peynado and Señor Brache yesterday requested me to exert my
influence to force General Vasquez to resign his candidacy in order that a
national candidate satisfactory to both parties might be elected. I advised
them that I would not. I called to their attention article 1 of the Plan of
Evacuation which constitutes the agreement on the part of the United States
to enable the Dominican people to elect freely their future constitutional
government, and stated that since General Vasquez was the legally
nominated candidate of one of the parties, I should assure myself that he
was given equal rights with the candidate of any other party to prove by
means of the national election whether or not his candidacy had the support
of the majority of the voters. In reply to a further inquiry in accordance with
[my?] position before my departure for Washington, I stated that the mere
fact that one of the two parties did not vote in the elections would not be
considered proof that the party which did go to the polls did not represent
the will of the people, nor that the candidates which might be so elected

were not elected in accordance with the Constitution. Finally in response to
a plea that the date of the elections be once more postponed in order that
Señor Peynado’s friends might be given an opportunity to obtain additional
funds for the campaign, I stated that the date of the elections had been set
with the consent of both parties, and that the elections without change
positively take place on that day.

Every attempt will now be made by certain elements in the coalition to
obstruct the electoral procedure and to protest against the result of the
elections, should the Alliance Party be the only party to go to the polls.
After conversation with all the leaders of the former party, however, I am
convinced that the saner element will cooperate with a government headed
by General Vasquez, should Señor Peynado persist in his resignation, and
that only a few for purely political ends will insist upon obstruction.
WELLES

[Document 579]
The Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (Welles) to the
Secretary of State
ascertaining that neither the threatened abstention of the Coalition
[candidate?] from the elections nor his threatened withdrawal as a candidate
would bring about a further postponement of the elections nor cause the
Alliance Party to consent to enter into a political deal, Señor Peynado on
February 11 definitely advised the national assembly of his party that he
would continue as Presidential candidate. The chances of success for the
Coalition Party in the national elections appear exceedingly small and it
seems to be the endeavor of the leaders of the party at present to
concentrate their efforts upon the few provinces where they have an
opportunity of winning the elections. Obstructive methods are already being
employed by the Coalition Party with a view to retarding the electoral
procedure, but I do not consider that these tactics can meet with success.
WELLES

[Document 580]
The Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (Welles) to the
Secretary of State
15. The legal period for the completion by the municipal electoral boards of
the permanent electoral registers in their respective communes expired at
midnight February 24. The boards of the three largest communes—Santo
Domingo, Santiago and La Vega—have each failed to include some
hundreds of citizens who had registered before the legal period for the
completion of the lists had terminated. This failure was largely due to the
obstructive methods pursued by the representatives of the Coalition Party
on the electoral boards in question.

The Coalition Party yesterday advised the Commission that it protest[s]
against the legality of the election to be held in those communes as well as
in others on the ground that qualified voters will be deprived of their legal
privileges as well as on the ground that the electoral boards had resorted to
illegal methods in the formation of electoral registers. This protest was
made notwithstanding the fact that the electoral law makes specific
provision for the inclusion or exclusion of qualified voters in the electoral
registers after the lists are terminated by means of petitions addressed
during the five days subsequent to the municipal boards, which petitions
may also be carried on appeal to the Central Electoral Board. The Coalition
Party through its representative on the Commission demanded that the
requirement in the electoral law that citizens in order to vote must be
included in the permanent electoral register, be abolished. It demanded that
all inhabitants in the Republic be permitted to vote on election day, the only
control maintained to be the presence of political observers in polling
booths or without. After prolonged discussion lasting over 18 hours the
members of the Commission unanimously adopted my counterproposal that
in order to obviate the difficulties presented, an extension of two days be

granted the municipal boards above referred to in which to complete the
electoral register; and that a similar extension be granted for the purpose of
demanding the inclusion or exclusion of voters in those communes after the
registers were completed. The adoption of the proposal of the Coalition
Party would necessarily have implied complete abandonment of the basic
principle upon which the entire electoral procedure under the present law is
built up.

The promulgation today by the President of a decree embodying the
modification adopted by the Commission has rendered it impossible for any
elections to be annulled on the ground that the electoral registers were not
completed within the legal time limit.

WELLES

[Document 581]
The Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (Welles) to the
Secretary of State
17. The national election took place March 15th without disturbance of any
kind. Every precaution had been taken by the national police to prevent
disorder but not a single arrest had to be made in the entire Republic for
breach of peace. In all the provinces I visited the voting took place with
entire order and apparent cordiality between the members of the opposing
parties. As an indication of this the candidate for the Presidency of the
Coalition Party and the candidate for the Vice Presidency of the Alliance
Party went together to vote in the same precinct board.

The returns received from the municipal electoral boards indicate that
General Vasquez and the candidates of the Alliance Party have swept the
country. It appears that the Alliance Party will have 11 out of 12 members
of the Senate and 25 out of 31 members of the House of Deputies. That
party has likewise apparently elected 90 percent of the municipal
governments.

While the Coalition Party will undoubtedly protest against the electoral
returns in certain communes, it is my belief that these protests will be
resolved shortly by the Central Electoral Board and that the final results of
the elections will be officially announced by that body before March 25th.
WELLES

[Document 582]
The Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (Welles) to the
Secretary of State
23. I have just been advised that the Navy Department is relieving General
Lee, present Military Governor, and that General Cole will arrive here to
replace him before April 15th. General Lee has been Military Governor
since the installation of the Provisional Government and has done most
effective work in maintaining cordial relations between the Provisional
Government and the Military Government. From present indications I
believe that the newly elected Constitutional Government will be installed
by July 1st. Under these circumstances it appears to me that the
appointment of a new Military Governor at this time may be misinterpreted
and also that the appointment of a new Military Governor unfamiliar with
local conditions is prejudicial to the satisfactory completion of the carrying
out of the Plan of Evacuation. I hope the Department may feel disposed to
request Navy Department not to make any change in the Military
Government during the short period that remains before evacuation takes
place.

WELLES

[Document 583]
The Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (Welles) to the
Secretary of State
25. In view of the precedents created by the visits to the United States of the
Presidents-elect of several Latin American Republics which produced in
general such excellent results, will you authorize me to inform the
President-elect of this Republic that should he visit United States for
reasons of health as he now purposes for a short stay prior to his
inauguration, he will be invited to come to Washington for a few days as the
guest of the United States Government.

I believe that the opportunity so afforded him of conferring with the
President and yourself, of learning your views and of thus establishing a
personal relationship would prove exceedingly beneficial in the carrying out
of our future policy here. I also believe that the honor so paid the newly
elected Chief Executive of the Republic will be highly appreciated by the
Dominican people.

WELLES

033.3911/orig.: Telegram

[Document 584]
The Secretary of State to the Commissioner in the Dominican
Republic (Welles)
practice of the Federal Government to invite Chiefs of States or Presidents-
elect to visit the United States as the guests of the Government; but you
may say to the President-elect that should he desire to come to the United

[Document 585]
The Secretary of State to the Commissioner in the Dominican
Republic (Welles)
Navy that he has decided to keep General Lee in his office as Military
Governor until after July 1, and has therefore directed that the order for his
relief in April be revoked.

HUGHES

[Document 586]
The Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (Welles) to the
Secretary of State
30. Since my return4 I have held various conferences with the Provisional
President, the President-elect, the members of the Commission and the
presidents of the Senate and House of Deputies. The constitutional reforms
submitted to the Senate by the Provisional President will be approved by
the Senate in the form presented tomorrow. They will be finally approved
by the House of Deputies not later than May 21st. These reforms were
agreed upon prior to my departure and are entirely satisfactory.
The President-elect advised me yesterday that the Cabinet appointments
tentatively agreed upon with me April 11th will be definitely made. They
are as follows: Enrique Jimenez, Minister of Foreign Affairs; Angel
Morales, Minister of the Interior and Police; Juan B. Vicini Burgos,
Minister of the Treasury; Andres Pastoriza, Minister of Fomento and
Communication; Rafael Espaillat, Minister of Agriculture and Immigration.
The positions of Minister of Justice and Public Instruction and Minister of
Sanitation are to be filled by followers of Señor Velasquez. These have not
yet been definitely determined. I cannot speak too highly of the quality of
the men above mentioned selected by General Vasquez to form his Cabinet.
Politics have been completely disregarded and he has selected the men of
the greatest ability in the country whose capacity and integrity are
recognized by all.

It is the intention of General Vasquez to go to the United States nominally
for a vacation in the beginning of June. He will be accompanied by Señor
Ariza whom he has selected as Dominican Minister at Washington and
Señor Alfredo Ricart president of the Ayuntamiento of Santo Domingo. I
have heartily encouraged this decision in order that he may in this manner

obtain the opportunity of conversing with yourself and the President
regarding the future policy of his Government as well as its relations with
the Government of the United States. It is in particular the desire of General
Vasquez to reach an agreement with the Department of State looking
towards the refunding of the foreign debt of the Republic through the
flotation of a loan in the United States. The satisfactory carrying out of this
operation which of course by reason of the convention 19075 requires the
consent of the Government of the United States would make it possible for
the Dominican Government to obtain the use of a larger portion of the
customs revenues for current expenses and at the same time obtain
additional funds to be used in the carrying out of the complete program of
public works. This operation in my opinion is essential if the Republic is
really to progress. Futhermore it is the desire of General Vasquez to discuss
the possibility of negotiating a new commercial treaty with the United
States.

In this connection I desire to refer to my telegram of March 27, 3 p.m., and
to the Department’s reply thereto of April 1, 5 p.m. I appreciate of course
that under ordinary circumstances it is not desirable for the Government of
the United States to invite the Presidents-elect of Latin American Republics
to visit the United States before they assume office. The approaching
evacuation of this Republic by the American Forces of [Occupation?] after
eight years of Military Government and the installation of a Constitutional
Government in the Dominican Republic friendly disposed to American
interests create an exceptional case. Even if the Department does not desire
to invite General Vasquez to be the guest of the nation during his brief stay
in Washington, I trust that in view of these special circumstances the
attempt will be made to accord him an official reception and to facilitate the
accomplishment of the objective which he is seeking.

The situation here is in general entirely satisfactory. My information leads
us to believe that the program of evacuation will be carried through
speedily and without delay. I consider that it would be highly desirable for
me to be in Washington during the time of General Vasquez’s visit there and
for this reason I request your permission to return to Washington without
delay. I am also exceedingly desirous of laying before you certain
considerations of the utmost importance regarding conditions in Central

America. I believe the situation in certain of the Central American countries
to be exceedingly precarious and I desire to have the opportunity of
suggesting important changes in our policy. In addition for personal reasons
it is necessary for me to return to the United States without delay. In view
of these considerations I hope that you will authorize me to return to
Washington during the week.

WELLES

[Document 587]
The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Russell) to the
Secretary of State
SANTO DOMINGO, May 25, 1924—noon.
16. The Government has named the following plenipotentiaries for the
negotiation of the treaty provided for in the Plan of Evacuation: Horacio
Vasquez, President-elect; Federico Velasquez, Vice President-elect; and
Francisco J. Peynado.

RUSSELL

[Document 588]
The Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (Welles),

[Document 589]
The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy (Wilbur)
WASHINGTON, June 4, 1924.

SIR: The final provisions of the Plan for the Evacuation of the Dominican
Republic by the American Forces of Occupation are now being carried out.
It is probable that all the remaining steps will have been taken before the
end of the present month and that the Constitutional President of the
Republic will be inaugurated upon some day between July 1st and July
10th. Since the Plan of Evacuation provides that as soon as the
Constitutional President has taken office and has signed the Convention and
the legislation stipulated in the Plan of Evacuation, the Military Forces of
the United States will at once evacuate the territory of the Dominican
Republic, I have the honor to request that the necessary instructions be sent
to the Military Governor to take all the steps necessary to make possible the
immediate evacuation of the Republic after the inauguration of the
Constitutional President. I am informed by the American Commissioner in
the Dominican Republic that he is advised by the Military Governor that no
instructions have been received by him relative to the evacuation of the
Forces of Occupation. The Military Governor has stated that some time will
be required to make the necessary arrangements, and in view of the fact that
the inauguration of the Constitutional President of the Dominican Republic
will take place approximately a month from the present date, I have the
honor to request that the Military Governor be instructed to expedite the
arrangements for evacuation.

I have [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 590]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Dominican Republic
(Russell)
WASHINGTON, June 4, 1924—noon.
12. Please transmit the following confidential message to General Vasquez
from Mr. Welles:
“In accordance with our conversation the night prior to my
departure from Santo Domingo, I trust that it will be possible for
you and the members of the party which you have selected to visit
Washington during the present month. I have ascertained that the
most desirable time for your visit would be during the week
commencing June 23rd. As you know, I attribute the greatest
importance to the opportunity which your visit here will afford for
the reaching of an agreement in principle regarding the various
matters which we have discussed. I shall be grateful if you will
advise me, by cable through the American Legation, as soon as
you have determined the date of your departure and the steamer
upon which you are sailing in order that I may make appropriate
arrangements. Please accept my most cordial greetings.”
HUGHES

[Document 591]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Dominican Republic
(Russell)
authorizing you to conclude and sign the Convention of Ratification as
contained in the Agreement of Evacuation of June 30, 1922, in the form
published on September 23, 1922.

The full powers read as follows:
[Here follows text of full powers.]

The full powers have been exhibited today to the Dominican Minister in
Washington who has found them to be in due and proper form. He is so
informing his Government. You are therefore authorized to meet the
plenipotentiaries appointed by the Dominican Government and with them to
conclude and sign this Convention. You are instructed to observe the
alternate in signing and to verify carefully the English text and the Spanish
translation.

Full powers are being forwarded by mail.

HUGHES

[Document 592]
The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Russell) to the
Secretary of State
SANTO DOMINGO, June 12, 1924.

[Received June 20.]

No. 1009
SIR: I have the honor to transmit herewith, in English and Spanish, the
Convention of Ratification provided for in the Plan of Evacuation agreed
upon on June 30, 1922. This Convention was signed today, and I am
sending it by General Vasquez who is leaving for Washington tomorrow.
Copies of the Convention will be forwarded by next mail.
I have [etc.]

WILLIAM W. RUSSELL

[Document 593]
Convention between the United States of America and the
Dominican Republic, Signed at Santo Domingo, June 12, 19249
WHEREAS, in the month of May, 1916, the territory of the Dominican Republic
was occupied by the forces of the United States of America, during which
occupation there was established, in substitution of the Dominican
Government, a Military Government which issued governmental
regulations under the name of Executive Orders and Resolutions and
Administrative Regulations, and also celebrated several contracts by virtue
of said Executive Orders or by virtue of some existing laws of the Republic;
WHEREAS, the Dominican Republic has always maintained its right to self-
government, the disoccupation of its territory and the integrity of its
sovereignty and independence; and the Government of the United States
has declared that, on occupying the territory of the Dominican Republic, it
never had, nor has at present, the purpose of attacking the sovereignty and
independence of the Dominican Nation; and these rights and declarations
gave rise to a Plan or Modus Operandi of Evacuation signed on June 30,
1922, by Monseñor A. Nouel, General Horacio Vasquez, Don Federico
Velasquez y H., Don Elías Brache, hijo, and Don Francisco J. Peynado, and
the Department of State, represented by the Honorable William W. Russell,
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States in
the Dominican Republic, and the Honorable Sumner Welles, Commissioner
of the President of the United States, which met with the approval of the
Dominican people, and which approval was confirmed at the elections that
took place on March 15, of the present year; WHEREAS, although the
Dominican Republic has never delegated authority to any foreign power to
legislate for it, still, it understands that the internal interests of the Republic
require the validation or ratification of several of the Executive Orders and
Resolutions, published in the Official Gazette, as well as the Administrative
Regulations and Contracts of the Military Government celebrated by virtue
of said Orders or of any Law of the Republic; and, on its part, the United
States considers that it is also to its interest that said acts be validated or

ratified; for these reasons one of the stipulations in the above-mentioned
Plan of Evacuation provides for the celebration of a Treaty or Convention
of Ratification or Validation of said Orders, Resolutions, Regulations and
Contracts;
THEREFORE, the United States of America and the Dominican Republic, desirous
of celebrating the above-mentioned Treaty or Convention, have named for
this purpose their Plenipotentiaries as follows:
The President of the United States, William W. Russell, Envoy
Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States in
Santo Domingo, and,
The Provisional President of the Dominican Republic, Don
Horacio Vasquez, Don Federico Velasquez y H., and Don
Francisco J. Peynado,
who, after having exchanged their full powers, and after having found them
in due and proper form, have agreed upon the following: I. The Dominican
Government hereby recognizes the validity of all the Executive Orders and
Resolutions, promulgated by the Military Government and published in the
Official Gazette, which may have levied taxes, authorized expenditures, or
established rights on behalf of third persons, and the administrative
regulations issued, and contracts which may have been entered into, in
accordance with those Orders or with any law of the Republic. Those
Executive Orders and Resolutions, Administrative Regulations and
Contracts are those listed below: EXECUTIVE ORDERS
81 —85 inclusive

110 —112 inclusive
128 —130 inclusive
133 —136 inclusive
491 —498 inclusive
504 —506 inclusive
513 —517 inclusive
519 —526 inclusive

574 —577 inclusive
579 —590 inclusive
599 —610 inclusive
660 —668 inclusive
670 —685 inclusive
712 —719 inclusive
723 —733 inclusive
735 —738 inclusive
741 —748 inclusive

Resowutions

FOMENTO AND COMMUNICATIONS
Resolution —
Official
Gazette No. 2790 —Barahona Company.
2821 —Sante Fe Plantation Sugar Co.
2845 —Central Romana.
2849 —Central Romana.
2850 —Santa Fe Plantation Sugar Co.
2861 —Central Boca Chica Co.
2862 —Installation of a telephone line.
2911 —Installation of a telephone line.
2911 —Santa Fe Plantation Sugar Co.
2929 —Ingenio Cristobal Colon.
2967 —Cancellation.
2993 —Cía. Anónima de Explotaciones
Industriales.
2993 —San Cristobal Mining Co.
3008 —Bentz Hnos.
3015 —Bentz Hnos.
3036 —Barahona Company.
3037 —Julio V. Abreu.
3076 —Central Romana.
3076 —Barahona Company.
3093 —Luis del Monte.
3093 —Jose Mota Ranché.
3106 —Central Romana.
3106 —Central Romana.
3106 —Castillo Hnos.
3106 —Barahona Company.
3106 —Barahona Company.

3121 —Consuelo Sugar Co.
3126 —Sres. Noboa Hnos.
3129 —Barahona Company.
3129 —Consuelo Sugar Co.
3159 —Barahona Company.
3159 —Central Romana.
3160 —Barahona Company.
3162 —Pardo y Ely Dorsey.

Resolution —
Official
Gazette No. 3162 —J. Amando Bermudez.
3196 —Lorenzo Gautier Olives.
3203 —Barahona Company.
3235 —Barahona Company.
3242 —Central Romana.
3243 —Manuel Bermudez.
3274 —Cía. Anonima de Inversiones
Inmobiliarias.
3243 —Cía. Anónima de Inversiones
Inmobiliarias.
3354 —Barahona Company.
3313 —Ingenio Santa Fe de San Pedro de
Macoris.
2786 —Central Romana.
2787 —L. E. Alvarez.
3358 —Barahona Company.

AGRICULTURE AND IMMIGRATION
Resolution No. 61 —
Official
Gazette No. 2838
—Declaración de Zonas
Agrícolas en la Provincia
de Barahona.
64 —
Official
Gazette Nos. 2853
and
—Declaración de Zonas
Agrícolas en la Provincia
de Barahona.
66 —
Official
Gazette No. 3003
—Declaración de Zonas
Agrícolas en la Provincia
de Barahona.
86 —
Official
Gazette No. 3089
—Luis Holguer. Todos los
permisos de inmigración y
ordenes
de
deportacion
expedidos
por
esta
Secretaría.
88 —
Official
Gazette No. 3133
—Declaración de Zonas
Agrícolas en Barahona.
89 —
Official
Gazette No. 3145
—Declaración de Zonas
Agrícolas en la Provincia
de Barahona.
91 —
Official
Gazette No. 3167
—Declaración de Zonas
Agrícolas en la Provincia
de Santo Domingo.
92 —
Official
Gazette No. 3180
—Industrial Alcohol Cía.
93 —
Official
Gazette No. 3180
—Declaración de Zonas
Agrícolas en la Provincia
de Santo Domingo.
94 —
Official
Gazette No. 3197
—Declaración de Zonas
Agrícolas en la Provincia
de Santo Domingo.

95 —
Official
Gazette No. 3219
—Declaración de Zonas
Agrícolas en la Provincia
de Monte Cristi.
96 —
Official
Gazette No. 3242
—Alvaro Fernández.
97 —“
—Rectificación
Limites
Mencionados
en
Resolución
No.
referente a Baní.
98 —
Official
Gazette No. 3301
—Cancelando Resolución
No. 97.
99 —
Official
Gazette No. 3332
—Asociación de Regantes.

Water titles issued by the Secretariat of State for Agriculture by virtue of
Executive Oder No. 318, to the following:
Domingo Rodriguez—
Agua del Río San Juan, Azua.

Jesús M. Vargas—
el
Caño
de
Boña,
Neiba,
Barahona.

Alberto Perdomo—
Plaza Cacique.

Santiago J. Rodriguez—
Macasía, Matas de Farfán.

J. Julio Coiscou—
Birán, Barahona.

Asociación La Altagracia
Agua del Río El Manguito, Neiba.

Arbaje Hnos—
Agua del Río Macasía, Matas de Farfán.

A. Santiago—
Manuel de Pérez— “
Camana, Neiba.

Sociedad de Irrigación Los Tres—Agua del Rio San Juan, San Juan, Azua.
Joaquín Gracia—Agua del Río Yaque del Sur, Barahona.

Sociedad de Irrigación Amantes de las Agricultura—Agua del Rio San
Juan, San Juan, Azua.

Ismael Mateo—Agua del Río de Jacahueque, Matas de Farfán.
Inomina Palmer—Agua del Río Jacahueque, Matas de Farfán.
Sociedad de Irrigación La Unión—Agua del Rio San Juan, San Juan, Azua.
Sociedad de Irrigación La Unión—Agua del Río Macasía, Matas de Farfán.
Sociedad de Irrigación La Competencia—Agua del Río María Chiquita,
Neiba.

Francisco Tomillo—Agua del Río San Juan, San Juan, Azua.
Sociedad de Irrigación, El Porvenir— Rio
Las Marías, Neiba.

El Esfuerzo— Agua del Rio
Bani.

El Progresso— “
La Voluntad— “
La Legalidad— “
El Adelanto— “
Wenceslao Ramirez—Agua del Río Mijo, San Juan, Azua.
Resolution No. 74—Official Gazette No. 3355—Luis L. Bogaert.
All letters of naturalization and permits to establish residence granted for
the purpose of naturalization, in accordance with Article 11 of the
Constitution.

All permits issued to establish legal residence in the Republic in accordance
with Article 14 of the Civil Code.

[INTERIOR AND POLICE]
Resolution regarding the sale of the Cruiser Independencia, under date of

yet published.) Resolution—Official Gazette No. 3203, approving the
increase in the tariff tax of the municipal aqueduct (Puerto Plata).
All the resolutions passed by the Ayuntamientos and approved by the
Military Government.

SANITATION AND CHARITY
Sanitary Code published in the Official Gazette No. 3181, December 29,
1920.

TREASURY
INTERNATIONAL CONVENTIONS ENTERED INTO DURING THE PERIOD OF THE MILITARY GOVERNMENT

FOMENTO AND COMMUNICATIONS
Spanish-American Postal Convention of Madrid of November 2, 1920.
Universal Postal Convention of Madrid of November 30, 1920. Resolution
Universal Parcel Post Convention of Madrid of November 30, 1920.
Dominican-Spanish Postal Convention of November 17, 1921. Resolution
Pan-American Convention of Buenos Aires dated September 15, 1921.
Resolution approving the Postal Convention between the Dominican
Republic and the limited States of America, under date of May 19, 1917.
ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS

FOMENTO AND COMMUNICATIONS
Departmental Order—Official Gazette No. 2801—Department of Fomento
Order No. 1.

“ “ —No. 6— Official Gazette No. 2841.
8— “
2852.
10— “
2856.
12— “
2861.
11— “
2862.
14— “
2863.
15— “
16— “
2923.
19— “
2933.
21— “
2960.
22— “
2988.
23— “
2998.
24– “
3026.
25— “
3035.
27— “
3124.
28— “
3159.
29— “
3192.

AGRICULTURE AND IMMIGRATION

Departmental Order No. 2— Official Gazette No. 2992.
“ ““  € QI— * “ “ 3128.

INTERIOR AND POLICE
Departmental Order No. 13 granting authorization to the Junta de Caridad
“Padre Billirii” in order that it might contract a loan of $15,000. (Not yet
published.)

JUSTICE AND PUBLIC INSTRUCTION
year. (Division of “comunero” lands.) All the Departmental orders of the
Department of Justice and Public Instruction relative to public instruction,
Special Order No. 1 of 1919, until the installation of the Provisional
Government.

CONTRACTS

TREASURY
Contracts entered into between the Military Government and the persons
listed below for the rental of urban properties of the Republic: Contract No.
Contract with Selidonia Petitón Vda. Parisién, under date of December 12,
(one lot)
Contract with Justiniano Acosta, under date of December 6, 1918. (one lot)
Contract with Donato Pérez, under date of December 2, 1918. (one lot)
Contract with Anita Buenrostro, under date of December 4, 1918. (one lot)
Contract with Urbano Acosta, under date of December 2, 1918. (one lot)
Contract with Celestino Fontana, under date of December 20, 1918. (one
lot)
Contract with Ulises Cuello, under date of May 26, 1919. (one lot)
Contract with Alejandro Deiio, under date of May 26, 1919. (one lot)
(one lot) Contract No. 61 with Pablo Gobaira, under date of November 11,
1919. (one lot) Contract No. 62 with Abelardo José Romano, under date of
of November 11, 1919. (one lot) Contract with Earle T. Fiddler for the
extraction of sand and other products.

Contract No. 1 with Francisco J. Peynado, under date of December 14,
1917; Rental of house No. 33 de la Calle José Reyes.
service in the Port of Macoris.

Rental of house No. 46 de la Calle Mercedes.

Calle Beler, corner of Comercio, both in Santiago.

(Designating International Banking Corporation as depositary of
Government funds) Contract No. 8 with the La Fe Lodge, under date of
September 29, 1919: Rescinding a rental contract covering the building
known by the name of “Logia La Fé”.

Contract No. 9 with Ig. Cat. Apostólica Romana, under date of September
25, 1919: Establishing an agreement pending the determination of
ownership of the buildings annexed to the Iglesia de Regina.
Transfer of rights to a tract of land in Nigua.

Contract No. 27 with Agapito, Lorenzo and Mercedes Ant. Reyes, under
date of June 27, 1920: Purchase of land in Nigua for the National Leper
Colony of Nigua.

Rental of a piece of land located in Santiago in Bella Vista which measures
96 tareas. (The Government is the renter.) Contract No. 30 with Junta
Fábrica Iglesia del Rosario in Moca, under date of September 30, 1920:
Payment of $32,315. in order that the Board might relieve the
Government of all responsibility occasioned by Executive Order No. 420
and its amendments.

Contract No. 31 with Junta Fábrica Iglesia Salcedo, under date of October
claims by reason of Executive Order No. 420.

Payment of $85,891. in order that the Government might be relieved of
all claims by reason of Executive Order No. 513.

Printing stamps.

Printing stamps.

Contract with Divanna-Grisolia & Compañia, under date of November 18,
1920: Purchase and sale of Tobacco.

Contract with Grace & Co., under date of November 18, 1920: Purchase
and sale of Tobacco in Europe.

Contract with Grace & Co., under date of September 29, 1919: Purchasing
Agency.

Contract with Frank L. Mitchell, under date of September 19, 1921:
Construction of a pump and installation of piping for pumping salt water.
Contract with Frank L. Mitchell, under date of March 16, 1921:
Construction of a railroad bridge.

Contract with Gaetan Bucher y Nicolas Cortina, under date of March 4,
1921: Construction of warehouses.

Contract with Frank L. Mitchell, under date of March 16, 1921:
Construction of a wharf.

Contract with G. H. Lippitt, under date of September 3, 1920: Installation
of a pipe line for molasses.

Contract with Lee, Higginson & Co., under date of April 4, 1922: Loan of
$6,700,000.

Contract with the Compañia de Mieles Dominicana C. por A., under date of
March 25, 1922: Extension of the concessions and for a pipe line for
molasses.

FOMENTO AND COMMUNICATIONS
All the contracts existing between the Department of Fomento and
Communications and other persons for the rental of buildings for
postoffices in force on the date of the installation of the Provisional
Government.

Marck Engineering & Contracting Co.—Contract dated August 23, 1921,
for “Construction Barahona Market”.

Chief of Surveyors:—(Land Survey) Four contracts which have been made
for the advance of funds as follows:
(a) Central Romana, Inc., June 29, 1921.

(b) Barahona and allied companies: December 31, 1921.
(c) Ingenio Santa Fé—March 3, 1922.

(d) Ingenio Santa Fé, May 16, 1920.

INTERIOR AND POLICE
Contract between the Military Government and the Commune of Azua for a
of December 31, 1919.

Contract between the Commune of Azua and the International Banking
Corporation for a loan of $15,000. (quince mil pesos), under date of
December 31, 1919.
mil pesos) with the International Banking Corporation mentioned above.

Loan of the Military Government to the Commune of Azua of $15,000.
Contract between the Comniune of Barahona and the Military Government
under date of April 8, 1920.

Contract between the Commune of Villa Mella and the Military
Government for a Loan of $14,650: (catorce mil seis cientos cincuenta
The Dominican Government likewise agrees that those Executive Orders,
those resolutions, those administrative regulations, and those contracts shall
remain in full force and effect unless and until they are abrogated by those
bodies which, in accordance with the Dominican Constitution, can legislate.
But, this ratification, in so far as concerns those of the above mentioned
Executive Orders resolutions, administrative regulations, and contracts,
which have been modified or abrogated by other Executive Orders,
resolutions, or administrative regulations of the Military Government, only
refers to the legal effects which they created while they were in force.

The Dominican Government further agrees that neither the subsequent
abrogation of those Executive Orders, resolutions, administrative
regulations, or contracts, or any other law, Executive Order, or other official
act of the Dominican Government, shall affect the validity or security of
rights acquired in accordance with those orders, those resolutions, those
administrative regulations and those contracts of the Military Government;
the controversies which may arise related with those rights acquired will be
determined solely by the Dominican Courts, subject, however, in
accordance with the generally accepted rules and principles of international
law, to the right of diplomatic intervention if those Courts should be
responsible for eases of notorious injustice or denial of justice. The
determination of such cases in which the interests of the United States and
the Dominican Republic only are concerned shall, should the two
Governments disagree, be by arbitration. In the carrying out of this
agreement, in each individual case, the High Contracting Parties, once the
necessity of arbitration is determined, shall conclude a special agreement
defining clearly the scope of the dispute, the scope of the powers of the
arbitrators, and the periods to be fixed for the formation of the arbitral
tribunal and the several stages of the procedure. It is understood that on the
part of the United States, such special agreements will be made by the
President of the United States, by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate thereto, and on the part of the Dominican Republic shall be subject
to the procedure required by the Constitution and laws thereof.

II. The Dominican Government, in accordance with the provisions of
Article I, specifically recognizes the bond issue of 1918 and the twenty-year
five and one-half percent Customs Administration Sinking Fund Gold Bond
Issue authorized in 1922, as legal, binding, and irrevocable obligations of
the Republic, and pledges its full faith and credit to the maintenance of the
service of those bond issues. With reference to the stipulation contained in
Article 10 of the Executive Order No. 735, in accordance with which the
loan of five and one-half percent authorized in 1922 was issued, which
provides:—

“That the present customs tariff will not be changed during the
life of this loan without previous agreement between the
Dominican Government and the Government of the United
States;”
the two Governments concerned agree in interpreting this stipulation in the
sense that, in accordance with article 3 of the Convention of 1907, a
previous agreement between the Dominican Government and the United
States shall be necessary to modify the import duties of the Dominican
Republic, it being an indispensable condition for the modification of such
duties that the Dominican Executive demonstrate and that the President of
the United States recognize that, on the basis of exportations and
importations to the like amount and the like character during the two years
preceding that in which it is desired to make such modification, the total net
customs receipts would at such altered rates of duties have been, for each of
such two years, in excess of the sum of $2,000,000 United States gold.
III. The Dominican Government and the Government of the United States
agree that the Convention signed on February 8, 1907, between the United
States and the Dominican Republic, shall remain in force so long as any
bonds of the issues of 1918 and 1922 shall remain unpaid, and that the
duties of the General Receiver of Dominican Customs appointed in
accordance with that Convention shall be extended to include the
application of the revenues pledged for the service of those bond issues in
accordance with the terms of the Executive Orders and of the contracts
under which the bonds were issued.

IV. This arrangement shall take effect after its approval by the Senate of the
United States and the Congress of the Dominican Republic.

DONE in four originals, two in the English language, and two in the Spanish,
and the representatives of the High Contracting Powers signing them in the
City of Santo Domingo, this twelfth day of June, nineteen hundred and
twenty-four.

[SEAL] WILLIAM W. RUSSELL
[SEAL] HORACIO VASQUEZ

[SEAL] FED co VELÁSQUEZ Y H.

[SEAL] FRAN c J. PEYNADO

[Document 594]
The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Russell) to the
Secretary of State
30. Electoral College has elected Horatio Vasquez and Doctor Velasquez
President and Vice President respectively. Proclamation will be issued July
4th and the inauguration will be set for July 12.
RUSSELL

[Document 595]
The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Russell) to the
Secretary of State
55. Provisions of the Plan of the Evacuation have been completed and all of
the Forces of Occupation have left the country.
RUSSELL

[Document 596]
The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Russell) to the
Secretary of State
SANTO DOMINGO, November 24, 1923.

[Received December 17.]

No. 909
SIR: I have the honor to enclose herewith a translation of a note to me from
the Foreign Office10 requesting the approval of the Government of the
United States for the issuance of bonds to the nominal amount of two
million dollars of the balance of the total not issued but authorized by
Executive Order No. 735 of the Military Government.
There is also enclosed a statement10 showing the application of the funds
derived from the bond issue of $6,700,000. in accordance with the
provisions of said Executive Order No. 735.
I have [etc.]

WILLIAM W. RUSSELL

[Document 597]
The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Russell) to the
Secretary of State
SANTO DOMINGO, January 7, 1924—noon.
1. Provisional Government has prepared decree similar to Executive Order
735 by which [$]6,700,000 bonds were issued out of total authorized issue
of [$] 10,000,000. New decree contemplates issue of [$]2,000,000 of the
remainder in accordance with plan forwarded in my despatch number 909
of November 24. Government requests me to ascertain if the Department
agrees to this new issue in order to have everything in readiness to comply
with obligations of contract with Santo Domingo Water, Light and Power
Company.

RUSSELL

[Document 598]
The Secretary of State to the Commissioner in the Dominican
Republic (Welles)
American Minister, Santo Domingo, the Department desires your views
regarding the possible effect of bond issue on political situation in view of
approaching elections. This of course does not refer to obligations of Power
Company contract. Reply by cable.

HUGHES

[Document 599]
The Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (Welles) to the
Secretary of State
authorization is requested by the Provisional Government can have any
prejudicial effect upon the political situation. The proceeds of the issue,
except for the amount required by fulfillment of the Light and Power
Company’s contract (should that contract be carried out), are destined for
the completion of the Government’s road construction program, of which
the entire Republic is now enthusiastically in favor. Should the bond issue
not be authorized, the construction of the projected highways—essential to
the development of the country—cannot be continued and a strong reaction
in public opinion would undoubtedly result.

The Dominican people in general are so heartily in favor of road
construction by the Government that the nacionalista elements will not be
able to oppose any governmental measure necessary to continue this work. I
therefore recommend that the Department’s authorization to the bond issue
be granted.

WELLES

[Document 600]
The Secretary of State to the Commissioner in the Dominican
Republic (Welles)
WASHINGTON, February 27, 1924.

No. 550
SIR: The Department is in receipt of a letter dated February 4, 1924,
addressed to the Secretary of State by the Secretary of the Navy, in which
Mr. Denby calls Mr. Hughes’s attention to the alleged excessive
expenditures of the Provisional Government of the Dominican Republic,
that the Military Governor, in his report for the year ending September 30,
The Secretary of the Navy concludes that “with definite signs of an
approaching financial crisis in the Dominican Republic it would appear
highly desirable to consider and develop some plan to meet the situation”. A
copy of Mr. Denby’s letter is enclosed herewith.

From information at the disposal of the Department it would appear that the
year 1922 began with a deficit of about a million dollars, and that the
bonds, amounting in nominal value to $6,700,000, of the 5½ per cent loan
produced either by a large income from taxation or other sources, or by a
policy of economy on the part of the Military Government. The Department
understands, furthermore, that a large part of the expense incurred by the
Provisional Government is due to extensive road buildings and the training
of the Dominican National Police, both of which, measures have been
strongly advocated by the military authorities. It is also reported that the
sales of government-owned tobacco, to which reference is made in Mr.

Denby’s communication, did not yield as much revenue as had been
anticipated when the budget of 1923 was compiled.
Before making a definite reply to the letter of the Secretary of the Navy, the
Department would be glad to receive such comments as you may desire to
make concerning the statements contained therein.
CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 601]
The Secretary of State to the Commissioner in the Dominican
Republic (Welles)
WASHINGTON, March 21, 1924.

No. 5
SIR: With reference to the Department’s instruction No. 550, dated February
17 [27], regarding the financial situation in the Dominican Republic, there
is transmitted herewith for your information and comment a copy of a letter
dated March 8, 1924, from the former Secretary of the Navy inviting the
Department’s attention to the increasingly critical condition of the
Republic’s finances. Mr. Denby also states that “an American financial
adviser in the Dominican Government, with authority established by mutual
assent of the two countries, somewhat along the lines of the arrangement in
Haiti, is imperatively needed.”
The Department desires an expression of your opinion by cable, whether
you consider the situation so serious as to make it advisable for the
Department to authorize you to discuss this matter informally with the
Provisional President in order to ascertain his views in the premises, and
more especially whether he would make the suggestion to the Commission
that the Provisional Government ask the United States to designate a
suitable person as Financial Adviser. It is, of course, considered essential by
the Department that the initiative in this matter should come from the
Dominicans themselves, that any decision on this point should be arrived at
by the Provisional Government of its own judgment and that the
Commission should be committed to such a decision, so that there would be
reasonable assurance that, later on, there would be no serious opposition to
such a course either among the political leaders or the people in general.
The Department considers it especially important that no unfounded
suspicion should arise in the minds of the Dominican people that an attempt
is being made to prolong the control of this Government over the Republic

[Document 602]
The Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (Welles) to the
Secretary of State
The Military Governor’s report for the quarter ending December 31, 1923,
to which Mr. Denby’s letter of March 8 to the Secretary of State refers, is
evidently due to his failure to comprehend the financial statements issued
quarterly by the Treasury Department of the Dominican Government owing
to their complicated and somewhat misleading form.

The facts relating to the governmental receipts and governmental
expenditures for the year 1923 are as follows: The total receipts for that
period were $5,980,000; the total actual expenditures for that period were
$6,136,000, leaving an apparent deficit of $156,000. This apparent deficit
was, however, offset by a special reserve fund of $800,000, so that at the
end of 1923 the Dominican Government had on deposit a supposed
$664,000 instead of having incurred the deficit of $987,825 reported by the
Military Governor. Against the cash surplus mentioned there may, however,
be deducted bills outstanding but not presented totaling approximately
$200,000, so that the Government at the beginning of the year 1924 had a
clear balance to its credit of about $450,000.

The deficit estimated by the Military Governor consists of appropriations
only have these sums not been expended for reasons of economy, but under
Dominican law appropriations authorized but not expended lapse in the
second fiscal year after authorization. Such appropriations authorized in
1921 or 1922 can, therefore, in no sense be termed liabilities.

The figure for total expenditures in 1923 includes the cost of continuing the
public works program amounting to $1,200,000. The President determined
to meet this cost from ordinary government revenues rather than from the
special reserve fund of $800,000 remaining from the loan of 1922 and
destined for public works above mentioned, for the reason that the latter
fund was drawing 6 percent interest while ordinary government deposits
draw but 3 percent. It is likewise to be noted that this total of expenditures
includes extraordinary electoral expenses of $200,000.

The statement of the Military Governor to the effect that from now on the
Dominican Government will incur a monthly deficit of $100,000
[omission?] will be by the month of May when the remainder of the reserve
fund of $800,000 for public works, which has been drawn upon since
January 1st, will be exhausted. This estimated monthly deficit corresponds
to the amount expended monthly on the continuation of the public works
program. It is, however, the President’s hope that a speedy settlement of the
controversy with the Santo Domingo Water, Light and Power Company will
make possible the issuance in the month of April of the authorized
$2,000,000 of bonds of the 1922 loan as the result of which the public
works expenditures would no longer be a charge upon the general
governmental revenues but would naturally be met from the proceeds of
this loan.

The statement of the Military Governor regarding the inability of the
Provisional Government to meet necessary educational expenses is incident
[incorrect?]. The Government is expending over $35,000 monthly on the
public instruction chapter of the budget. All schools provided for by law are
functioning for the first time since the Military Government closed the
majority of the schools for lack of funds in 1921. Every possible economy
has been effected. The salaries of the Government employees outside of the
Policia Nacional [Dominicana] have been reduced by 33 percent and all
unnecessary employees have been discharged. The Government has
likewise increased revenues by imposing special license taxes on motor
vehicles and by increasing the wharfage taxes. It is, however, unable to
accomplish more because of the restrictions occasioned by the contracts
entered into by the Military Government for the issuance of the 1918 and
1922 loans which permit the Government to receive only 15 percent of all

customs receipts in excess of 3,000,000 and because internal revenue taxes
on national products are now as high as the industries can stand. The
decision of the Department that the imposition of internal revenue taxes on
imported articles constitutes a modification of the tariff infringing the terms
of the convention of 1907, makes it impossible for the Government to
increase its revenues by establishment of a luxury or excise tax. In view of
the difficulties which it has encountered, I believe that the financial
administration of the Provisional Government has been eminently
successful and the actual financial situation of the Government
demonstrates that there is no basis for the concern shown by the Military
Government.

With reference to the opinion of Mr. Denby that an “American financial
adviser in the Dominican Republic is imperatively needed,” I am strongly
of the belief that the suggestion by the United States Government, even
made informally, would tend to destroy the beneficial effects of the
Department’s policy here. It was because of President Henríquez’s refusal
to accede to our instructions on this point that his resignation and the
resignations of the members of Iris Cabinet were forced in 1916,
resignations which brought about the establishment of a Military
Government. I feel certain that the President especially would refuse to
assume the office to which he has been elected rather than accept it under
such conditions. Furthermore, were it possible to induce the Dominican
Government on its own apparent initiative to request the appointment of an
American financial adviser, such an appointment would destroy public
confidence in the good faith of the Government of the United States since it
would undoubtedly be believed that it had not been sincere in stating to the
Dominican people when the Plan of Evacuation was adopted that it desired
no control over this Republic other than that provided in the convention of
1907. In conclusion it is my belief that such an appointment is neither
necessary nor desirable.

WELLES

[Document 603]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Commissioner in the
Dominican Republic (Welles)
15. For your information and such use as you in your discretion may deem
advisable, Department informed Mr. [W.] McCormick Blair, the member of
Lee, Higginson and Company, who is especially conversant with and
interested in Dominican affairs, is leaving for Europe at the end of May. It
would probably be advantageous, therefore, to the Dominican Government
that the flotation of the $2,000,000 installment of the unissued portion of
the 1922 loan be submitted to the consideration of this firm before his
departure.

You will remember that under the provisions of the loan contract and
agreement between Lee, Higginson and Company and the Dominican

[Document 604]
The Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (Welles) to the
Secretary of State
Santo Domingo, [and] due to the serious illness of the Provisional President
or for some other reason, the settlement of the Water, Light and Power
Company case with which the issuance of the $2,000,000 of bonds is
connected was not pressed. It was always my desire to have both of these
matters handled by the Provisional Government prior to the installation of
the National Congress. The Congress is now in session and should the
Provisional President attempt to take the necessary action at the present;
time, although he is entitled to do so by the terms of the Plan of Evacuation,
a break would at once occur between the Provisional Government and the
Congress which it is essential to avoid. General Vasquez is entirely in
accord with the settlement of the Water, Light and Power Company case on
the basis proposed by the Director of Public Works and the issuance of the
$2,000,000 of bonds immediately after the installation of the Constitutional
Government. Both of these questions I believe could be agreed upon in
advance of the installation of the Constitutional Government during the
course of General Vasquez’ intended visit to Washington. Should it be
possible for Mr. McCormick Blair to postpone his departure until after the
arrival in Washington of General Vasquez I believe it to be highly desirable.
WELLESS

[Document 605]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Dominican Republic
(Russell)
28. Please convey the following message to General Vasquez from Welles:
“I am truly hopeful that it may be possible for you to obtain the
necessary authorization by Congress before July 17th, to conclude
the negotiations for the short time loan on the terms approved by
you. I also trust that Mr. Ariza’s appointment20 may be confirmed
“before the same date and authorization be extended to him to act
on behalf of his Government. I am fearful that any considerable
delay might cause changes in the offer made because of the
shifting condition of the market.”
HUGHES

[Document 606]
The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Russell) to the
Secretary of State
SANTO DOMINGO, July 16, 1924—noon.

[Received 11: a.m.]
by the Senate yesterday and Dominican Government complying with the
formalities of the occasion desire to know whether Ariza is persona grata.
Matter of short-time loan of two and one half millions22 was presented to
Congress and referred to Finance Committee of the Senate.
RUSSELL

[Document 607]
The Dominican Chargé (Ariza) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, August 8, 1924.

MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: The Government of the Dominican Republic has decided
to make a short term loan in the sum of $2,500,000, secured by
not been used.

This money was deemed to be necessary to continue the public works for
the development of the natural resources of the country and to meet urgent
needs of the Government. The Dominican Government has already
approved the loan and negotiations are on foot with Messrs. Lee, Higginson
and Company, who appear to be inclined to supply the funds; but before
carrying on the negotiations I should like to know whether this loan would
also meet with the approval of the Government of the United States.
I avail myself [etc.]

J. C. ARIZA
amended by resolution of the Dominican Congress on Sept. 4, 1924
(Gaceta Oficial No. 3574).

[Document 608]
The Secretary of State to the Dominican Chargé (Ariza)
WASHINGTON, August 15, 1924.

SIR: The receipt is acknowledged of your note dated August 8, 1924, in
which you inform me of the decision of your Government to contract a
short term loan to the amount of $2,500,000, to be secured by $3,300,000 of
the Dominican 5½ per cent bonds of 1922 which have not been issued.
You state that this sum is considered necessary for the continuance of the
construction of public works, for the development of the natural resources
of the Dominican Republic, and to meet the urgent requirements of your
Government.

You add that the Dominican Congress has already approved the loan
referred to and that negotiations have been entered into with Messrs. Lee,
Higginson and Company, who are disposed to supply the funds in question,
but that before proceeding further with these negotiations you desire to be
informed whether this loan would meet with the approval of the
Government of the United States.

In reply, I desire to state that in order that the Department may have before
it all pertinent information which might be of assistance to it in its
consideration of the question which you have presented, I should appreciate
it if you would be so good as to inform the Department of the details of the
proposed contract for the loan under discussion.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
JOSEPH C. GREW

[Document 609]
The Dominican Chargé (Ariza) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, August 16, 1924.

MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: Supplementing my communication of August 8, 1924, I
have to inform Your Excellency that the $2,500,000 loan now being
negotiated with Messrs. Lee, Higginson and Company, is to be for two
years with an option for the Dominican Government to redeem the bonds of
that loan in whole or in part six months after the issue.
I forward herewith to Your Excellency a copy of the draft of contract
submitted by Messrs. Lee, Higginson and Company.

Before closing the negotiations I should like to know whether the President
of the United States would give his consent to this loan in accordance with
the provision in the Convention of 1907, and would agree to let the bonds
issued in that year for the face value of $6,700,000, namely
1. The Receiver General of the Dominican Customs appointed in
accordance with the Convention of 1907, will effect, while the
said Convention is in force, the payments that may be necessary
for the service of the bonds issued as security ($3,300,000, 5½%,
1922) derived from the revenues belonging to the Dominican
Government;
2. That after the expiration of the Convention of 1907 the said
Customhouse receipts will be collected and applied by an official

appointed by the President of the United States in the same
manner as was appointed the present Receiver General of the
Dominican Customs;
of bonds authorized in March 1922, or any part thereof that may
still be outstanding, will constitute a first lien on the said customs
revenues subject to the necessary expenses of collection, until all
the bonds shall have been entirely paid for. (Executive Order No.
735, Article 8.)

I hope that there will be no objection to having the security above
mentioned inserted in the bonds.

I avail myself [etc.]

J. C. ARIZA
portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613].

[Document 610]
Lee, Higginson & Company to the Secretary of State
BOSTON, September 9, 1924.

[Received September 10.]

DEAR MR. SECRETARY: We have submitted an offer to the Dominican Republic to
sell for its account $2,500,000. 5½% Two-year notes to be secured by
authorized by the Military Government of Santo Domingo March 1922 and
approved by you. The proposed Contract, the Trust Indenture, a draft of the
Two-year Note and a draft of the Bonds securing such Notes were sent for
examination to Dr. Dana G. Munro25 September 8th. We would appreciate it
if you will write us stating that the assurances set forth in the Note and
Bond concerning the cooperation of the United States Government in the
future collection of the Customs revenues and their application can be made
with your consent?

Very truly yours,
LEE, HIGGINSON & Co.

[Document 611]
The Secretary of State to the Dominican Minister (Ariza)
WASHINGTON, September 25, 1924.

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of August 16,
1924, in which you convey additional information with regard to the
projected issue of short term notes to the amount of $2,500,000. I
understand that these notes are to be issued in accordance with a contract
similar to the draft transmitted by you with your note of September 5,
1924, and that the proceeds of the sale of the notes are to be used mainly
for road construction and port improvements.

You state that you desire to know before concluding the contract with Lee,
Higginson and Company whether this Government will consent to the
proposed loan, in accordance with the Convention of 1907, and whether it
will agree that certain assurances be extended in connection with the five
and one-half per cent bonds of 1922 to the amount of $3,300,000 which
would be pledged as collateral for the loan. You state that the assurances
which you outline are similar to those extended in connection with the
bonds issued in 1922 to the amount of $6,700,000 by Executive Order No.
In reply I have the honor to inform you that the Government of the United
States agrees to the issuance by the Dominican Government of the proposed
$2,500,000 two year notes. The Government of the United States further
agrees that the Dominican Government may issue and pledge as security for
these two year notes $3,300,000 of the five and one-half per cent bonds
authorized in 1922, being the remainder of the issue of $10,000,000
authorized in that year. It is understood that these bonds are to be in form
similar to the $6,700,000 of this issue now outstanding, with such
appropriate changes as are made necessary by the difference in the amount
of the bonds and the establishment of the Constitutional Government in the
Dominican Republic. This note may be regarded as conveying the

agreement of the United States Government to the issues specified above,
as required in Article III of the Convention of 1907 between the
Government of the United States and the Government of the Dominican
Republic.

The Government of the United States will interpose no objection should the
Government of the Dominican Republic desire to extend the following
assurances in connection with the five and one-half per cent bonds of 1922
to the amount of $3,300,000, which are to be pledged as collateral for the
two year notes:
1. That the Receiver General of Customs of the Dominican
Republic, appointed under the Convention of 1907, shall during
the life of that Convention make from the customs revenues
accruing to the Dominican Government such payments as may be
necessary for the service of the bonds pledged as collateral to
secure the short term notes now to be issued.
2. That, if the Convention of 1907 should expire before the bonds
of 1922 are paid in full, the customs revenues shall continue to be
collected and applied by an official appointed by the President of
the United States in the same form as the present Receiver
General of Customs of the Dominican Republic, so long as any of
the bonds authorized in 1922 remain outstanding.
3. That, after the expiration of the Convention of 1907, the bonds
authorized in 1922 to the amount of $10,000,000, or any portion
of these bonds which remain unpaid, shall enjoy a first lien on the
customs revenues subject to the necessary expenses of collection
until these bonds have been paid in full.

Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613].

[Document 612]
The Secretary of State to Lee, Higginson & Company
WASHINGTON, September 25, 1924.

SIRS: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of September 9 with
reference to your offer to the Dominican Republic to sell for its account
bonds, the balance of the $10,000,000 loan authorized in March 1922 by the
Military Government of Santo Domingo and approved by the Department.
You request to be advised in writing whether certain statements you desire
to insert in these notes and bonds concerning the cooperation of the
Government of the United States in the future collection of the customs
revenues of the Dominican Republic and their application can be made with
the consent of this Government.

In reply I beg to inform you that this Department perceives no objection to
printing on each of the bonds in question a statement similar to that
proposed. The statement which is contained in a draft of the bond
transmitted on September 8, by Mr. C. E. Clapp27 of the firm of Ropes,
Gray, Boyden & Perkins, should be slightly modified to read as follows:
“The Department of State of the United States, as required by
Article III of the treaty between the United States and the
Dominican Republic, has consented to the issuance by the
Dominican Republic of this Second Series of $3,300,000,
completing the total bond issue of $10,000,000 authorized in
1922.

“The Government of the United States, through the State
Department, has consented that the General Receiver of
Dominican Customs, appointed under the Convention of 1907,
shall, during the life of that Convention, make such payments as
are necessary for the service of this new Loan, from the revenues

accruing to the Dominican, Government, and has further
consented to the giving of assurances by the Dominican Republic
“1. That after the expiration of said Convention of
1907, the Customs revenues pledged for the service of
this Loan shall be collected and applied by an official
appointed by the President of the United States in the
same manner as the present General Receiver of
Customs;
“2. That after the expiration of said Convention of
1907, this Loan now authorized, together with and
equally with the bonds of the same issue of 1922,
amounting to $6,700,000 previously issued, shall have a
first lien upon such Customs revenues, after the
payment of the necessary expenses of collection, until
all the bonds thereof are paid in full.”
Furthermore, this Department perceived no objection to the printing of a
statement on each of the two-year notes to the effect that the notes are
“issued with the consent of the Government of the United States of
America, as required by Article III of the treaty between the United States
and the Dominican Republic.” It will be understood by you, however, that
while the fact of this consent may appropriately appear, this letter is not to
be published in any circular or statement to be issued in connection with
these securities.

With reference to your letter of September 10, 1924, to Mr. Munro, I may
add that this Department, in a note to the Dominican Minister, has
expressed its consent that these bonds should be in form similar to the
$6,700,000 of this issue now outstanding with such appropriate changes as
are made necessary by the difference in the amount of the bonds and the
establishment of a Constitutional Government in the Dominican Republic,
and has stated that the note may be regarded as conveying the consent of
the United States Government to these issues of bonds and notes as required

by Article III of the Convention of 1907 between the Government of the
United States and the Government of the Dominican Republic.

[Document 613]
Lee, Higginson & Company to the Department of State
NEW YORK, October 30, 1924.

[Received October 31.]

SIRS: At Mr. Greene’s29 request, we take pleasure in enclosing copy of a
contract with the Dominican Republic dated September 25, 1924, regarding
the issue of $2,500,000 Dominican Republic Two-Year 5½% Collateral
Trust Gold Notes. Very truly yours, LEE, HIGGINSON & Co.

[Enclosure]
Loan Contract and Agreement of Fiscal Agency between the Dominican Republic and Lee,
Higginson & Company
1. Lee, Higginson & Company agree to offer and sell for the account of the
Dominican Republic its notes to the aggregate principal amount of
$2,500,000. at par and interest that has accrued thereon to the date of sale.
These notes are to be secured by $3,300,000. par value of the Dominican
being part of the loan then authorized and as yet unissued. Said $3,300,000.
bonds shall be in the same form as the $6,700,000. bonds of 1922 now
outstanding, but with such appropriate changes as are made necessary by
the difference in the amount of the issue of the bonds, and by the evacuation
of the Military Government and the establishing of the permanent
government of the Dominican Republic; they shall bear similar statements
as to the consent of the Government of the United States to the issue of
these bonds and the collection and application of the Customs revenues of
the Dominican Republic on which they are a lien; they shall be duly
authorized by the Congress of the Dominican Republic and signed by the
official or officials designated by law for that purpose; they shall be
countersigned and certified in the same manner as the bonds of the Loan of
1922 now outstanding.

Lee, Higginson & Company shall hold said pledged bonds as Trustees for
the noteholders under an Indenture containing appropriate provisions for
that purpose.

During the term of said notes Lee, Higginson & Company shall retain from
the monthly deposits to be made with them by the Dominican Republic for
the payment of interest on the pledged bonds in accordance with the
provisions thereof, the following sums: From the first of such deposits
the annual interest charge on said notes, and from each of such subsequent
monthly deposits one twelfth (1/12) of the annual interest charge on said
notes which at the time may be outstanding. The sums so retained shall be
applied in payment of interest on said notes and if said notes are not in
default the excess of each monthly deposit over the amount so retained shall
be placed at the disposal of the Dominican Republic.
2. Said notes are to be duly authorized by the Congress of the Dominican
Republic, to be signed by the official or officials designated by law for that
purpose. They are to be substantially in the form hereto annexed and
marked Exhibit A. They are to bear the seal of the Department of Finance
and Commerce of the Dominican Republic, and are to be signed for the
purpose of identification only by Lee, Higginson & Company as Fiscal
Agents for the service of this Loan and as Trustees. They are also to be
certified by Farmers’ Loan & Trust Company of New York, Registrar.
September 1, 1926. At the option of the Dominican Republic they may be
called for redemption as a whole or in part on March 1, 1925, or on any
interest day thereafter upon reasonable notice and in accordance with
suitable provisions to be set forth in the Trust Indenture at a premium of
one-half of one per cent. They are to be in coupon form, in denominations
of $1000 and $500 each, in such proportions as Lee, Higginson & Company
may designate.

4. They are to bear interest at the rate of five and one-half (5½) per cent, per
annum and are to be paid principal and interest in gold coin of the United
States of the present standard of weight and fineness at the offices of Lee,
Higginson & Company in Boston, New York and Chicago, at the option of
the holders. They shall be exempt from any taxes or impositions now or
hereafter to be established or levied by or within the Dominican Republic
against the notes or the income arising therefrom or the holders thereof.
5. Interest is to be payable semi-annually on the first days of March and
September.

6. The notes, bonds and legal instruments connected therewith are to be in
form appropriate to carry out the above provisions, and they and the
governmental authority therefor are to be satisfactory to counsel of Lee,
Higginson & Company. The Dominican Republic agrees to make provision
for the payment of these notes, principal and interest, in accordance with
their terms, and to have on deposit with Lee, Higginson & Company funds
sufficient for the payment of each instalment of interest and of the principal
amount at least eleven days before such payment is due.
7. A temporary note or notes and a temporary bond in form satisfactory to
counsel for Lee, Higginson & Company, without coupons may be issued in
anticipation of the definitive notes and bonds and to be exchanged therefor.
8. Lee, Higginson & Company may associate with themselves in the
disposal of these notes, such banks, banking firms, and other agencies as
they may in their discretion deem desirable. They may issue their own
interim receipts to purchasers of the notes.
9. All expenses in connection with the printing, engraving, and executing of
said notes and of said pledged bonds, and all expenses including legal
expenses incidental to their preparation shall be paid forthwith as they
accrue by the Dominican Republic, but Lee, Higginson & Company and
their associates shall bear all expenses in connection with the advertising
and sale of said notes.

10. Lee, Higginson & Company are hereby appointed by the Dominican
Republic Fiscal Agents for the service of the Loan, and accept said
appointment.
11. The Dominican Republic states that its formal intention is to use the
proceeds of these notes in connection with its public highways and public
works.
12. The proceeds from the sale of these notes by Lee, Higginson &
Company, as set forth in paragraph 1. of this contract, shall be credited on
the books of Lee, Higginson & Company to the account of the Dominican
Republic as of the dates of the sales thereof, less the compensation to be
allowed said firm as hereinafter set forth; and until the proceeds of the sale
are withdrawn by the Dominican Republic, interest is to be allowed at the
same rate as similar balances on deposit with them are receiving at the time.
13. Lee, Higginson & Company shall hold all such deposits at the disposal
of the Dominican Republic and subject to its draft or cheque.
14. Lee, Higginson & Company agree that if they have not effected the sale
of said notes within ten (10) days after the temporary note duly executed
has been delivered to them and the temporary bond and Indenture of Trust
duly executed have been delivered to them as trustees, that they will at once
purchase all of said notes then remaining unsold at par and accrued interest.
15. Lee, Higginson & Company shall receive as compensation for their
services in arranging this Loan and selling said notes a commission of 1½%
on the entire issue of $2,500,000.
16. Lee, Higginson & Company shall receive for the authentication and
countersignature of receipts and definitive notes and the pledged bonds the
sum of twenty-five cents each.
17. Lee, Higginson & Company shall receive one-fourth of one per cent, of
the amounts paid out for interest on these notes and one-twentieth of one
per cent, on principal. They shall be reimbursed for all expenses incurred in
connection with the call and redemption of said notes.

18. All coupons and notes paid shall be cancelled by Lee, Higginson &
Company by perforation and then delivered to the Auditor of the Dominican
Republic for further cancellation.
19. Lee, Higginson & Company shall allow the Dominican Republic
interest on deposits held for the payment of interest and for redemption
requirements at a rate of two per cent, less than the rediscount rate of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, with a minimum of two per cent, and a
maximum of four and one-half per cent, while such sums are on deposit
with Lee, Higginson & Company.
20. In acting under this agreement, Lee, Higginson & Company may,
subject to the provisions of these notes, not [act] in accordance with the
written order of the Secretario de Estado de Hacienda y Comercio of the
Dominican Republic, and the drafts, cheques or orders of the said Secretario
de Estado de Hacienda y Comercio shall be full protection to them for
action in accordance therewith.
21. All accounts connected with the service of the Loan shall be kept by
Lee, Higginson & Company, either in their office in the City of Boston or in
their office in the City of New York, and a statement of such accounts shall
be rendered by them to the Auditor of the Dominican Republic within a
reasonable time after the maturity of the issue. Unless objection to this
statement of account shall be made by said Auditor to them within ninety
days, particularly specifying the ground or grounds of such objection or
objections, said statement of account shall be deemed to be correct and
conclusive between the parties. The Dominican Republic shall have the
right at any time to examine and audit the books and accounts of Lee,
Higginson & Company in connection with their note as such Fiscal Agents
and Trustees.
22. In case any of the notes of this issue shall at any time become mutilated,
lost, or destroyed, the Dominican Republic may issue new notes of like
amount, tenor and date, and bearing the same serial numbers, and Lee,
Higginson & Company, at the request of the Department of Finance and
Commerce of the Dominican Republic shall authenticate the same for
delivery in exchange for, and upon cancellation of the notes so mutilated, or
in lieu of the note so lost or destroyed, but, in case of lost or destroyed

notes, only upon receipt by the Dominican Republic and Lee, Higginson &
Company of evidence satisfactory to them that such notes were lost or
destroyed and upon receipt also of indemnity satisfactory to them in their
discretion.
23. All notices, demands or requests from Lee, Higginson & Company to
the Dominican Republic in connection with this agreement or the notes
shall be sufficiently given if mailed in a securely enclosed postpaid
envelope addressed to the Secretario de Estado de Hacienda y Comercio of
the Dominican Republic, Santo Domingo City, Dominican Republic, or if
given by cable so addressed. All notices, demands or requests from the
Dominican Republic to Lee, Higginson & Company may similarly be given
addressed to them at 43 Exchange Place, New York, N. Y.
24. This employment of Lee, Higginson & Company as Fiscal Agents is
irrevocable, except for good and sufficient cause, but they may resign at any
time as such Agents by giving notice of such resignation to the Dominican
Republic in the manner provided above, and by publishing such notice at
least twice a week for six successive weeks in two daily newspapers
published and of general circulation in the City of New York. Such
resignation shall take effect upon the expiration of such publication. The
appointment of a successor to the Fiscal Agents shall be by mutual
agreement between the Dominican Republic and the Fiscal Agents who
may be retiring.
25. The provisions of this agreement shall be applicable to said firm of Lee,
Higginson & Company as the same now is or may be hereafter constituted.
It is agreed between the parties that upon the death or withdrawal of any
partner or partners of Lee, Higginson & Company, the remaining partners,
with such persons, if any, who have or may become partners of said firm,
shall have all the rights and duties and be subject to the obligations
conferred or imposed upon said firm by these presents.
26. This agreement for the sale of said notes is conditional upon receipt by
Lee, Higginson & Company of assurance satisfactory to their counsel as to
the procedure in the issue and execution of said notes and said bonds as
security therefor, and upon delivery to said firm of the temporary note or
notes herein mentioned, duly executed, and upon delivery of the temporary

bond or bonds and Indenture of Trust to Lee, Higginson & Company as
Trustees, duly executed on or before September 26th, 1924.

27. It is intended that this note issue be refunded by bonds authorized by a
new Convention now under discussion.
28. The provisions of the contract between Lee, Higginson & Company and
the Dominican Republic of April 4, 1922, shall apply to the pledged bonds
so far as applicable under the changed circumstances of their issue and
under the changed conditions of the Dominican Government.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the Dominican Republic has caused this Contract to be
signed and the seal of its Legation in the United States of America to be
affixed by José del Carmen, Ariza, its Envoy Extraordinary and Minister
Plenipotentiary, and said Lee, Higginson & Company by Jerome D. Greene,
a partner, have hereunto affixed their firm name and seal this Twentyfifth
day of September, 1924.

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
By J. C. ARIZA
E. E. and Minister Plenipotentiary
LEE, HIGGINSON & Co.,
By JEROME D. GREENE

[Document 614]
Convention between the United States of America and the
Dominican Republic, Signed at Washington, December 27,
WHEREAS a convention between the United States of America and the
Dominican Republic providing for the assistance of the United States in the
collection and application of the customs revenues of the Dominican
Republic, was concluded and signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at
the City of Santo Domingo, on the eighth day of February, one thousand
nine hundred and seven, and WHEREAS that convention was entered into to
enable the Dominican Government to carry out a plan of settlement for the
adjustment of debts and claims against the Government; and WHEREAS, in
accordance with that plan of settlement, the Dominican Republic issued in
payment of at least 1 per cent per annum for amortization; and WHEREAS
additional obligations have been incurred by the Dominican Government in
the form of the issuance, in 1918, of bonds to the amount of $5,000,000,
bearing 5 per cent interest, payable in 20 years, and redeemable at par on
each interest date as the amount of amortization fund available on such
interest dates will permit, and requiring payment of at least 5 per cent per
annum for amortization; and in the form of the issuance of bonds, in 1922,
years, and redeemable after 8 years at 101. and requiring payment after
such period of at least $563,916. per annum for amortization; and WHEREAS
certain of the terms of the contracts under which these bonds have been
issued have proven by experience unduly onerous to the Dominican
Republic and have compelled it to devote a larger portion of the customs
revenues to provide the interest and sinking fund charges pledged to the
service of such bonds than is deemed advisable or necessary; and WHEREAS it
is the desire of the Dominican Government and appears to be to the best
interest of the Dominican Republic to issue bonds to a total amount of

$25,000,000, in order to provide for the refunding on terms more
advantageous to the Republic of its obligations represented by the bonds of
the three issues above mentioned still outstanding and for a balance
remaining after such operation is concluded to be devoted to permanent
public improvements and to other projects designed to further the economic
and industrial development of the country; and WHEREAS the whole of this plan
is conditioned and dependent upon the assistance of the United States in the
collection of customs revenues of the Dominican Republic and the
application thereof so far as necessary to the interest upon and the
amortization and redemption of said bonds, and the Dominican Republic
has requested the United States to give and the United States is willing to
give such assistance: The United States of America, represented by Charles
Evans Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States of America; and the
Dominican Republic, represented by Señor José del Carmen Ariza, Envoy
Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the Dominican Republic in
Washington, have agreed: ARTICLE I
That the President of the United States shall appoint, a General Receiver of
Dominican Customs, who, with such Assistant Receivers and other
employees of the Receivership as shall be appointed by the President of the
United States in his discretion, shall collect all the customs duties accruing
at the several customs houses of the Dominican Republic until the payment
or retirement of any and all bonds issued by the Dominican Government in
accordance with the plan and under the limitations as to terms and amounts
hereinbefore recited; and said General Receiver shall apply the sums so
collected, as follows: First, to paying the expenses of the receivership;
second, to the payment of interest upon all bonds outstanding; third, to the
payment of the annual sums provided for amortization of said bonds
including interest upon all bonds held in sinking fund; fourth, to the
purchase and cancellation or the retirement and cancellation pursuant to the
terms thereof of any of said bonds as may be directed by the Dominican
Government; fifth, the remainder to be paid to the Dominican Government.
The method of distributing the current collections of revenue in order to
accomplish the application thereof as hereinbefore provided shall be as
follows: The expenses of the receivership shall be paid by the Receiver as
they arise. The allowances to the General Receiver and his assistants for the

expenses of collecting the revenues shall not exceed five per cent unless by
agreement between the two Governments.

On the first day of each calendar month shall be paid over by the Receiver
to the Fiscal Agent of the loan a sum equal to one twelfth of the annual
interest of all the bonds issued and of the annual sums provided for
amortization of said bonds and the remaining collection of the last
preceding month shall be paid over to the Dominican Government, or
applied to the sinking fund for the purchase or redemption of bonds or for
other purposes as the Dominican Government shall direct.

Provided, that in case the customs revenues collected by the General
Receiver shall in any year exceed the sum of $4,000,000, 10 per cent of the
surplus above such sum of $4,000,000 shall be applied to the sinking fund
for the redemption of bonds.

ARTICLE II
The Dominican Government will provide by law for the payment of all
customs duties to the General Receiver and his assistants, and will give to
them all needful aid and assistance and full protection to the extent of its
powers. The Government of the United States will give to the General
Receiver and his assistants such protection as it may find to be requisite for
the performance of their duties.

ARTICLE III
Until the Dominican Republic has paid the whole amount of the bonds of
the debt, its public debt shall not be increased except by previous agreement
between the Dominican Government and the United States.

ARTICLE IV
The Dominican Government agrees that the import duties will at no time be
modified to such an extent that, on the basis of exportation and importations
to the like amount and the like character during the two years preceding that

in which it is desired to make such modification, the total net customs
receipts would not at such altered rates have amounted for each of such two
years to at least 1–½ times the amount necessary to provide for the interest
and sinking fund charges upon its public debt.

ARTICLE V
The accounts of the General Receiver shall be rendered monthly to the
Ministry of Finance and Commerce of the Dominican Republic and to the
State Department of the United States and shall be subject to examination
and verification by the appropriate officers of the Dominican and the United
States Governments.

ARTICLE VI
The determination of any controversy which may arise between the
Contracting Parties in the carrying out of the provisions of this Convention
shall, should the two Governments be unable to come to an agreement
through diplomatic channels, be by arbitration. In the carrying out of this
agreement in each individual case, the Contracting Parties, once the
necessity of arbitration is determined, shall conclude a special agreement
defining clearly the scope of the dispute, the scope of the powers of the
arbitrators, and the periods to be fixed for the formation of the arbitral
tribunal and the several stages of the procedure. The special agreement
providing for arbitration shall, in all cases, be signed within a period of
three months from the date upon which either one of the Contracting Parties
shall notify the other Contracting Party of its desire to resort to arbitration.
It is understood that on the part of the United States, such special
agreements will be made by the President of the United States by and with
the advice and consent of the Senate thereto, and on the part of the
Dominican Republic, shall be subject to the procedure required by the
Constitution and laws thereof.

ARTICLE VII

This agreement shall take effect after its approval by the Contracting Parties
in accordance with their respective Constitutional methods. Upon the
exchange of ratifications of this convention, which shall take place at
Washington as soon as possible, the Convention between the United States
of America and the Dominican Republic providing for the assistance of the
United States in the collection and application of the customs revenues,
concluded and signed at the City of Santo Domingo on the 8th day of
February, 1907, shall be deemed to be abrogated.

Done in duplicate in the English and Spanish languages at the City of
Washington this 27th day of December, nineteen hundred and twenty-four.
CHARLES EVANS HUGHES [SEAL]
J. C. ARIZA [SEAL]

[Document 615]
The Secretary of State to President Coolidge
WASHINGTON, June 20, 1924.

MY DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: It appears that the approaching visit to Washington of the
President-elect of the Dominican Republic will offer a most favorable
opportunity to discuss with him and with the members of his party various
questions of importance affecting the relations between the United States
and the Dominican Republic. Among these questions is the proposed
revision of the Dominican customs tariff, which will presumably be
undertaken immediately after the new Constitutional Government of the
Dominican Republic is installed. Under the terms of the Convention
between the United States and the Dominican Republic of 1907, the
consent of the President of the United States is required before any
modification of its customs tariff can be made by the Dominican
Government.

The principal export of the Dominican Republic is sugar. Owing to the fact
that Porto Rico is able to import sugar into the United States free of all duty
and that Cuba is enabled to import sugar into the United States with a
preferential rate of 20%, Dominican sugar is unable to compete in the
United States market with the sugar produced in either of those two Islands,
and consequently, all sugar exported from the Dominican Republic is sold
either in Europe or in Canada. Because of this situation, it is possible that
the Dominican Government, when it undertakes the revision of its customs
tariff, will determine that it is to its best advantage to grant preferential rates
to Great Britain or to certain European Nations. To preclude the possibility,
should this be undertaken, of American exporters finding themselves in a
disadvantageous position in the Dominican Republic, it has occurred to me
that it might be desirable to undertake with the new Dominican Government
an exchange of notes similar to the notes which this Government has
recently exchanged with the Governments of Brazil34 and Czecho-

[Document 616]
The Secretary of State to the Dominican Minister (Ariza)
WASHINGTON, September 25, 1924.

SIR: I have the honor to make the following statement of my understanding
of the agreement reached through recent conversations held at Washington
by representatives of the Government of the United States and the
Government of the Dominican Republic with reference to the treatment
which the United States shall accord to the commerce of the Dominican
Republic and which the Dominican Republic shall accord to the commerce
of the United States.

These conversations have disclosed a mutual understanding between the
two Governments which is that, in respect to import, export and other duties
and charges affecting commerce, as well as in respect to transit,
warehousing and other facilities, the United States will accord to the
Dominican Republic and the Dominican Republic will accord to the United
States, its territories and possessions, unconditional most-favored-nation
treatment.

It is understood that
No higher or other duties shall be imposed on the importation into or
disposition in the United States, its territories or possessions, of any articles
the produce or manufacture of the Dominican Republic than are or shall be
payable on like articles the produce or manufacture of any foreign country;
No higher or other duties shall be imposed on the importation into of
disposition in the Dominican Republic of any articles the produce or
manufacture of the United States, its territories or possessions than are or
shall be payable on like articles the produce or manufacture of any foreign
country; Similarly, no higher or other duties shall be imposed in the United
States, its territories or possessions, or in the Dominican Republic on the
exportation of any articles to the other, or to any territory or possession of

the other, than are payable on the exportation of like articles to any foreign
country; Every concession with respect to any duty or charge affecting
commerce now accorded or that may hereafter be accorded by the United
States or by the Dominican Republic, by law, proclamation, decree or
commercial treaty or agreement, to the products of any third country will
become immediately applicable without request and without compensation
to the commerce of the Dominican Republic and of the United States, its
territories and possessions, respectively: Provided that this understanding
does not relate to
(1) The treatment which the United States accords or may
hereafter accord to the commerce of Cuba or any of the territories
or possessions of the United States or the Panama Canal Zone, or
to the treatment which is or may hereafter be accorded to the
commerce of the United States with any of its territories or
possessions or to the commerce of its territories or possessions
with one another;
(2) Prohibitions or restrictions of a sanitary character or designed
to protect human, animal or plant life or regulations for the
enforcement of police or revenue laws.

The present arrangement shall become operative on the day of signature
and, unless sooner terminated by mutual agreement, shall continue in force
until thirty days after notice of its termination shall have been given by
either party; but should either party be prevented by future action of its
legislature from carrying out the terms of this arrangement, the obligations
thereof shall thereupon lapse.

I shall be glad to have your confirmation of the accord thus reached.
Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 617]
The Dominican Minister (Ariza) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, September 25, 1924.

MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of the note dated
this day in which your Excellency sums up the agreement reached in the
conferences recently held in this city between the Government of the United
States and the Government of the Dominican Republic concerning the
treatment which the United States will grant to the commerce of the
Dominican Republic and which the Dominican Republic will grant to the
commerce of the United States. Those conferences disclosed a mutual
understanding between the two Governments which is that with regard to
importation, exportation and other duties and dues to which commerce is
subject as also with regard to the transit, storage, and other facilities, the
United States, its territories or possessions will grant to the Dominican
Republic, and the Dominican Republic will grant to the United States, its
territories or possessions, unconditional most favored nation treatment.
It is understood that there shall not be imposed duties of importation or of
disposal in the United States, its territories or possessions! on articles that
are the products of the soil or of the industry of the Dominican Republic
higher or other than those that are, or may be payable on said articles when
they proceed from the soil or the industry of any other foreign country and,
in the same manner, there shall not be levied duties of importation or
disposal in the Dominican Republic on articles that are the products of the
soil or of the industry of the United States, its territories or possessions
higher or other than those which are or may be payable on said articles
when they proceed from the soil or the industry of any other foreign country
whatsoever.

In the same sense there shall not be imposed in the United States, its
territories or possessions, nor in the Dominican Republic on articles
exported from one country to the other or to any territory or possession of
the other, export duties higher or other than those that are or may be
assessed when the said articles are exported to any other foreign country
whatsoever.

Any concession granted or that may be hereafter granted by the United
States, or by the Dominican Republic by means of a law, decree, resolution,
or agreement on the products of any other country with respect to the duties
or dues that affect commerce, will as of right extend without request or
compensation of any kind to the commerce of the Dominican Republic and
that of the United States, its territories and possessions respectively.
Provided, however, that this understanding does not refer:
1. To the treatment that the United States now accords or may
hereafter accord to the commerce of Cuba or any of the territories
or possessions of the United States or the Panama Canal Zone or
to the treatment that is granted or may be granted to the
commerce between the United States and any of its territories or
possessions or to the commerce of its territories and possessions
with one another.
2. To the prohibitions or restrictions of a sanitary character or for
the protection of human beings, animals or plants, or the
regulations for the enforcement of the revenue or police laws.
It is understood that this agreement will go into effect immediately upon the
date of its signature and unless terminated before, by common accord, will
continue in force until thirty days shall have elapsed after the notice given
by one party to the other of its intention to terminate the agreement; but in
case either one of the two parties should be unable to fulfill the terms of this
agreement by reason of future action of its legislature the obligations which
it imposes will be without effect.

I have the honor to inform your Excellency that I have received instructions
from my Government to confirm this agreement and to send to Your
Excellency this note in reply to yours.

I avail myself [etc.]

J. C. ARIZA

[Document 618]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Dominican Republic
(Russell)
should cover provision for issuance of bonds to Santo Domingo Water,
Light and Power Company pursuant to obligations of Dominican
Government under contract dated June 15, 1923, and is advised by A. F.
Hunt, Jr., company’s representative, that pursuant to his letter sent June 14,
1923, to Dominican Secretary of the Interior, at the latter’s request, he will
recommend to his principals that they furnish sum required for
rehabilitation of properties as determined by expert provided in contract,
provided Dominican Government shall put in escrow in hands of its fiscal
agent under proposed bond issue $951,000 par value of the bonds, with
instructions that they be delivered to the order of the Liberty Trust
Company of Boston, Massachusetts, simultaneously with the delivery to
said fiscal agent by Dwight P. Robinson and Company of certificate
contemplated by Article 5th of contract.

Ascertain and telegraph promptly intentions of Dominican Government.
HUGHES

[Document 619]
The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Russell) to the
Secretary of State
Mr. Hunt had always insisted that amount necessary to place plant in
working condition could never exceed $50,000 and that article 4 of the
contract stipulated $60,000 but that Mr. Hunt in a letter to the Minister of
the Interior agreed to induce Government [company?] to advance for this
purpose an amount not to exceed $75,000 so that Government never had the
least [expectation?] that repairs would cost any such sum as reported by
expert but that the entire amount for settlement in bonds including
estimated value of plant would be in the neighborhood of $500,000 and this
was what municipalities had in mind.

RUSSELL

[Document 620]
The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Russell) to the
Secretary of State
SANTO DOMINGO, February 1, 1924—noon.
6. In the matter of the Santo Domingo Water, Light and Power Company,
further interview with the President, and he states that he does not think that
the two million loan should be subordinated to the matter of bonds for
delivery to Light and Power Company. As it appears the former is not
authorized, all public works will have to be shut down next month. He
states that he is also disposed to arrange with Light and Power Company
and provide for reasonable settlement in some other way.
RUSSELL

[Document 621]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Dominican Republic
(Russell)
Hunt has shown Department copy letter mentioned your January 28, 5 p.m.,
and this does not appear to contain any limitation upon amount which he
agreed to recommend to his principals should be advanced for repairs.
In view Dominican Government’s apparent disinclination to carry out its
obligations under contract of June 15, 1923, Department is disposed to
recommend to Santo Domingo Company to accept $450,000 gold, or its
equivalent in Dominican bonds at 90% of their par value in full payment of
properties described in contract, which shall thereupon be transferred to the
order of the Dominican Government in their present condition.
Department desires to be promptly advised whether Dominican
Government will agree to settlement on this basis which will afford that
Government opportunity to make its own repairs on plant and apparently
render it unnecessary in order to place it in operative condition to expend
full amount set forth in expert’s report for repairs and improvements.
HUGHES

[Document 622]
The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Russell) to the
Secretary of State
SANTO DOMINGO, February, 1924—4 p.m.

[Received 11 p.m.]
8. Interview with the President today in regard to Santo Domingo Water,
Light and Power Company. He states that he will immediately commence
careful study of the report of the expert with the assistance of the former
Minister of the Interior who signed the contract of last June with a view to
reaching an equitable solution of the matter in the interest of the company
and the municipalities. He said that he could not definitely state what he
would do in regard to issuing bonds for the value of the property for
$450,000 until he had time to go over the matter carefully but that he will
give an answer as soon as possible. The President stated that as the expert
had given a basis for the present value of the property the question as to
how much the municipalities could afford to spend for putting the plant in
working condition would have to be considered. He stated that he thought
the report of the expert was greatly in excess of what was needed for
furnishing water and light. Commander Warfield, U. S. Navy, reported that
repairs could be made for $35,000.

RUSSELL

[Document 623]
The Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (Welles) to the
Secretary of State
8. For Francis White: Referring to the Department’s telegram to American
Legation dated February 6, 1 p.m., I desire to bring following consideration
to your attention: I cannot concur in the expression used in instruction
under
reference,
namely,
“apparent
disinclination
of
Dominican
Government to carry out its obligations,” under contract entered into with
Santo Domingo Water, Light and Power Company. The contract of the
Government with that company provided that the latter agreed to sell to the
former the properties specified at a price to be fixed by an expert to be
selected by common accord; the latter likewise agreed to advance to the
former a sum not to exceed $60,000 and receive in return therefor
Government bonds to pay for whatever repairs said expert might determine
were necessary to place properties in proper condition. The expert in his
report values the properties at $533,000 and fixes the necessary expenditure
for repairs at $324,000. Under the terms of the contract the Government did
not obligate itself to issue bonds the proceeds of which would be destined to
repay the company for necessary repairs to an amount greater than $60,000
and its present disinclination or rather inability to purchase the properties on
the basis set by the expert cannot in any sense be termed unwillingness to
carry out the terms of the contract. Hunt, in his statement to the
Government in May, 1923, declared specifically that necessary repairs
could be carried out for a sum less than $60,000, and while in a letter to the
Secretary of the Interior subsequent to the signing of the contract, he
implied that his company would be willing to advance a sum somewhat
larger than $60,000 for repairs, should it be necessary, neither he nor the
Government had in mind an excess of more than a few thousand dollars.

The President, as the Department has been informed, I understand, by the
American Minister, is most favorably disposed to the most speedy
settlement possible of this controversy but he, of course, cannot, in view of
the financial situation of the Government, accept a settlement on a basis
never foreseen by either party and a settlement to which his Government is
in no wise obligated. If the company desires the matter adjusted, it should
send Hunt to Santa Domingo immediately to negotiate directly with the
Government.
authorization should be granted immediately and should not be made in any
sense contingent on a settlement of the controversy with the Santo Domingo
Water, Light and Power Company. Unless the authorization is granted at
once, all public works will cease next April with disastrous results not only
with regard to the economic condition of the Republic, but to the whole
question of our policy here.

WELLES

[Document 624]
The Secretary of State to the Commissioner in the Dominican
Republic (Welles)
Water, Light and Power Company and the Dominican authorities provided
that the property specified would be sold at a price to be fixed by an expert
to be selected by common accord. In fact, however, the Department
understands the expert was picked by the Dominican Government and the
Company acceded to the choice. The Government wished the Company to
advance the cash necessary for the repairs for whatever sum that might be,
taking bonds at 90 therefor. As Hunt did not have authority to bind his
principals for an indefinite sum he was only willing to pledge himself in the
contract to make repairs up to $60,000 although he states the Government
repeatedly requested, him not to fix a limit. However, in order to meet the
wishes of the Dominican Government as far as possible he signed a letter to
the Secretary of the Interior before the conclusion of the contract by which
he agreed, should the expert fix the expenditure necessary for repairs at an
amount greater than $60,000. to recommend to his principals that they
advance the money for this purpose. The expert picked by the Government
reported the value of the property in its present condition at $533,012. and
fixed the expenditures necessary for the repairs at $323,420. Upon receipt
of this information Mr. Hunt, in accordance with his promise to the
Secretary of the Interior, recommended to his principals that they advance
the money necessary for these repairs. The latter agreed to do so and
the projected loan issue be held in escrow for the Company to be turned
over to it at such time as the expert should state that the necessary repairs
had been satisfactorily completed. The Company and Hunt have
scrupulously lived up to their agreement. The Government apparently has
endeavored to find a technicality in the $60,000. provision for not living up

to the agreement. The Government is doubtless surprised that an impartial
expert should find the property as valuable as it is but this does not appear
to furnish grounds not to carry out its obligations under the contract.
However, in view of the apparent feeling of the Government that the
estimate for repairs is too high, the Department stated in its telegram to the
Legation of February 6, 1 p.m., that it would be disposed to recommend to
the Company to accept $450,000. gold or its equivalent in Dominican bonds
at 90 per cent of their par value in full payment of properties described in
contract which shall thereupon be transferred to the order of the Dominican
Government in their present condition. This was practically the same
settlement that the Department had suggested in its telegram No. 7 to the
had been appraised and when the bonds were quoted at approximately 85. If
the Dominican Government should wish to settle on this basis it would
receive the property at $83,000. gold less than its appraised value and
the President is giving this matter careful consideration.

However, the Department, in view of your telegram and without awaiting
the President’s reply, has recommended to the Company that it accept the
proposition contained in the penultimate paragraph of the Department’s
therefore made an offer either “(1) to furnish the sum required to pay the
cost of rehabilitation of the properties described in the contract of June 15,
1923, as determined by the experts therein named, provided the Dominican
Government shall put in escrow in the hands of its Fiscal Agent under its
proposed bond issue $951,000. par value of the bonds agreed to be issued
with instructions that the same be delivered to the order of the Liberty Trust
Company of Boston, Massachusetts, simultaneously with the delivery to
said Fiscal Agent by Dwight P. Robinson and Company, Incorporated, of
the certificate provided to be given by said last named company under the
equivalent in Dominican 5½ per cent bonds at 90 per cent of their par value,
in full payment of the properties described in said contract of June 15, 1923,
which shall thereupon be transferred to the order of the Dominican
Government in their present condition.” Mr. Hunt states that the “above

offer is made without prejudice to the rights of my principals under the
record of this case as filed in the State Department.”
In view of all the circumstances of this case, the difficulties experienced by
the Company in coming to an agreement with the municipalities and with
the Government, the fact that Mr. Hunt has already made three trips to
Santo Domingo and has negotiated a contract for the settlement of the
matter, the Department is not disposed to ask Mr. Hunt to go again to Santo
Domingo to try to make another contract. In view of the attitude which the
Government has apparently taken on the contract of June 15, 1923, there
would appear to be no assurance that a new contract, if made, would be
carried out. The Department feels that the two alternative propositions made
by the Company offer the basis for a fair and equitable settlement and when
it is advised that one of these propositions is accepted it will then be in a
position to inform the Legation regarding the proposed bond issue. The
Department hopes that you will use your influence to have one of these
propositions accepted by the Dominican Government.

HUGHES

[Document 625]
The Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (Welles) to the
Secretary of State
In view of the fact that the more recent developments in this case may not
have been brought to [your?] knowledge and because of my belief that a
basic question is involved affecting the excellent results of the policy
towards this Republic which you have established, I venture to
communicate to you the following considerations with the earnest hope that
the instructions referred to may be modified.

The relation of the facts in this case contained in the Department’s telegram
under reference is incomplete and in part inaccurate. The following is an
outline of the more important points: As a result of constant difficulties
extending over a term of years between the Santo Domingo Water, Light
and Power Company and the municipalities of Santiago and Puerto Plata, to
which municipalities the company was supplying electric light and water
under a concession extended by the two municipal governments, the
company decided in 1921 to abandon the operation of its properties. Upon
ascertaining that the municipalities refused to purchase the properties upon
terms acceptable to it the company endeavored to induce the American
Military Government to purchase the properties on behalf of the
municipalities. This the Military Government refused to do on the ground
that the national Dominican Government had no interest in the question
which in its opinion was a matter which solely concerned the two
municipalities. Early in 1923 as a result of popular agitation in Santiago the
people of which city had been without electric light or running water for
over a year, caused by a shutting down of the company’s plants, the
municipalities of Santiago brought suit to obtain a forced sale of the

company’s properties on the ground that the company had violated the
terms of its concession.

In order to avoid the serious problems which the continuance of this suit
might entail and in order to obtain a settlement of the dispute which would
prove satisfactory to the American interests involved, I had, upon my return
to Santo Domingo in April, 1923, several interviews with the Provisional
President and stated to him that while I realized the dispute was one with
which the National Government was not directly concerned, nevertheless,
the continuance of it would prove detrimental to Dominican credit in the
United States and would tend to promote ill feeling on the part of the
Dominican people against American interests at a time when it was our
common object to remove all causes of friction. The President took that
point of view of the situation and adopted my suggestion that the National
Government agree to lend the municipalities sufficient money to purchase
the properties of the company, the National Government assuring itself that
the interest and sinking fund charges on its loan to the municipalities would
be paid by taking over the collection of a portion of the municipal revenues
of the two cities concerned. It was upon this basis—a basis which the
Military
Government
had
refused
to
consider—that
Mr.

Hunt,
representative of the American interests, negotiated the contract of June 15,
1923, mentioned in the Department’s telegram under reference.

This contract provides that the Government will pay the company in
Dominican Government bonds the equivalent of whatever price might be
fixed as the value of properties specified by an expert selected by common
accord.

Article 4 of said contract reads as follows:
“The expert will make a detailed study of the properties and of
every part of them, determining their actual condition and price
and specifying the cost which the repairs and improvements to
assure good and regular operation may require in toto as well as
in detail, it being understood that the costs of such repairs and
improvements shall not exceed $60,000 American money.”

The amount of $60,000 was set because Mr. Hunt stated to me several times
and stated in my presence to the Minister of the Interior, that the properties
were in such good condition that the necessary repairs could be
accomplished for less than that sum. His statements were confirmed by the
fact that an American engineer under the Military Government the
preceding year had estimated the cost of repairs at $45,000. To be certain,
however, that an appraisal of repairs by the expert a few thousand dollars in
excess of the limit set in the contract would not endanger the execution of
the contract, Mr. Hunt, in accordance with the Government’s request, stated
in a letter to the Minister of the Interior, that should the cost of repairs be
fixed at a sum somewhat in excess of $60,000, he would recommend to his
principals that the necessary sum be advanced by them. The expert set the
value of the properties in their present condition at $533,012 and fixed the
cost of necessary repairs at $323,424. The value of the properties is
$133,012 in excess of the price at which the company was willing to sell to
the municipalities.
2. After some delay the Government, however, would be willing to buy at
this price since this is the price set by the expert in accordance with the
contract were it possible to place the municipalities [properties] in good
condition for a sum within or near the limit set in the same contract. It is
not, however, willing to buy the plant at the price fixed by the expert when
the cost of repairs fixed by the same expert is $263,424 above the limit set
in the contract.

In view of these facts the final sentence of the first paragraph of the
Department’s telegram referred to appears to me misleading since the
Government is entirely willing to carry out its obligations to purchase the
plant at the sum fixed by the expert but is not willing to spend over six
times the amount for repairs when [which] it expressed its willingness to
pay in the contract, which amount as fixed in the contract it was informed
by the representative of the company would be ample to pay for all
necessary repairs.

It is, therefore, my feeling that an attempt on our part to force the
Dominican Government to accept either one of the propositions contained
in the Department’s cable referred to would constitute material injustice; as

regards the first proposition for the reasons above expressed; as regards the
second because it would constitute an effort on the part of our Government
to force the Dominican Government to purchase properties at a price
$50,000 higher than that at which the company was willing to sell two years
ago when the properties have depreciated during those two years and when
the Government would have to spend $300,000 on repairs before the
properties could be profitably operated.

The question of policy is, however, the following: When the Provisional
Government took over from the Military Government it was with the
understanding that the public works program of roads construction
inaugurated in 1922 would be carried on. The funds for carrying out of this
program were obtained by the 1922 loan of $10,000,000 authorized by the
Department of which only $6,700,000 of bonds were actually issued, it
being the understanding that the Department would agree to the issuance of
the remainder whenever the public works program demanded. With this
understanding the Provisional President framed his budget for 1924. He has
repeatedly endeavored since last October to obtain the Department’s
consent to the issuance of a portion of the remainder of the bonds of the
authorized loan, without success. The situation is now such that if
authorization is not granted at once the whole program must cease, when
the present slight improvement in the economic situation here is due
entirely to the opening up of these roads and when such cessation also
means the throwing out of work of thousands of laborers at a time when the
unemployment situation is peculiarly acute.

I am, however, informed by the Department’s telegram under reference that
when the Department is advised that one of the propositions presented by
the Santo Domingo Water, Light and Power Company is accepted by the
Dominican Government, it will then be in a position to reach a decision
regarding the proposed bond issue. In other words, the Department’s
apparent intention is to force the Dominican Government to accept one of
two propositions each of which appears unfair or else resign itself to do
without funds upon the obtaining of which the present tenuous prosperity of
the country actually depends. I cannot help but feel that a policy of this
nature in former years has been directly responsible for the suspicion and ill
will toward the United States which exists in so many of the smaller Latin

American countries. And I cannot in particular reconcile the adoption of the
policy outlined in the Department’s telegram referred to with our
announced intention of assisting the Dominican people in every way
possible to establish a stable government and to increase the prosperity of
the Republic.

It is because of my strong belief in the unwisdom of the policy to be
adopted according to the Department’s telegraphic instructions that I have
ventured to express my views at such length as well as to recommend most
earnestly that the Department grant immediately the necessary authorization
for the issuance of that portion of the remainder of the 1922 loan requested
by the Dominican Government.

The Santo Domingo Water, Light and Power Company will find the
Provisional President disposed to meet it more than half way as he has been
disposed since the original negotiations were initiated in reaching an
agreement which is equitable to both parties and in overcoming the
difficulties which the expert’s report has presented.

WELLES

[Document 626]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Dominican Republic
(Russell)
You will please inform the Dominican Government that this Government
authorizes the issuance of a further issue of $2,000,000 par value of bonds
remaining out of the total issue of $10,000,000 authorized in 1922 provided
that $951,000. par value bonds thereof shall be held in escrow by the Fiscal
Agent of the Dominican Government pending an agreement between the
Government and the Power Company. In this connection consult with Mr.
Welles to whom detailed instructions are being sent today.
HUGHES

[Document 627]
The Secretary of State to the Commissioner in the Dominican
Republic (Welles)
The Department desires to aid so far as it properly can in promoting a
settlement of the difficulty between the Dominican Government and the
Santo Domingo Water, Light and Power Company which will be fair and
just to both sides and acceptable to both. The Department furthermore is
particularly interested in the carrying out of the public works program and
in aiding the Dominican Government in all proper ways in the rehabilitation
of the country.

Three methods of settling the Power Company’s controversy suggest
themselves: 1. The Company and the Government could agree to abide by
the findings of the expert. As you are aware the Company is willing to do
so. It appears that the Government however found the cost of repairs too
high and as they were vastly in excess of the $60,000 mentioned in the
contract it does not wish to do so.
2. In view of the Government’s feeling regarding proposition No. 1 the
Company offered to accept $450,000 gold, or its equivalent in Dominican
5½ per cent bonds at 90 per cent of their par value, in full payment of the
properties which would thereupon be transferred to the order of the
Dominican Government in their present condition. The Company takes the
position that although it was willing to sell this property in 1921 for
$400,000, the sum of $450,000 should not now be regarded as excessive, as
the Company has incurred considerable losses and expenses in the last three
years, such as interest on its investment, the fee of over $10,000 to Dwight

P. Robinson and Company, attorney’s fees, and the cost of the maintenance
of the property, the latter amounting to from $12,000 to $15,000 annually.
In considering this position of the Company the Department cannot
disregard the fact that the expert selected by the Dominican Government
has valued the properties in their present condition at $533,012. If the
matter were to be adjusted on the basis of taking the properties over as they
are without reference to repairs, it would be difficult for the Department, in
the face of the expert’s report, to insist that the Company should take less
than $450,000 which is $83,000 under the valuation.

This proposal, however, would mean that the Government would perhaps
have to make new contracts for the reconditioning of the plant and they may
prefer an arrangement by which the plants would be put in operating
condition by the issuance of Dominican bonds to cover the cost thereof and
thus acquire possession of the plants in working order in one transaction.
The Department would therefore be willing to approve the following
settlement should it meet with the Dominican Government’s approval. The
Department is advised that this would be acceptable to the Company.
3. The Government to buy the plant at the value fixed by the expert, namely
$533,012. The Government would then designate the repairs it desires made
(the Department presumes that the expert’s valuation was based on putting
the plant in an absolutely perfect condition whereas it may be possible to
put it in working condition for very much less and that this is what the
Dominican Government desires). The repairs would then be made by the
Power Company at cost under the supervision of the Dwight P. Robinson
Company, the latter to certify to the cost of the repairs and that they have
been properly carried out. The Company would be given sufficient bonds at
par value to amount to $533,012 at 90 per cent, and a sufficient number of
bonds at par value to cover the cost of repairs at 90 per cent would be held
in escrow by the Fiscal Agent until he is advised by the Robinson Company
that the repairs have been made whereupon he will immediately turn over
bonds to the Power Company to the amount certified by the Robinson
Company. While the Company would prefer to receive immediately the
bonds covering the present value of the property the Department
understands that it would be willing, should the Government prefer, to have

the bonds for that amount also held in escrow by the Fiscal Agent until the
repairs are made.

It is furthermore possible that the Dominican Government may have still
another proposal to make and the Department understands that the
Company would be glad, in that case, to have the Government make their
proposal as soon as possible whereupon the Company will give it careful
consideration.

Your statements in paragraphs eleven and twelve imply that the Department
is attempting to force the Dominican Government to accept one of the
Power Company’s proposals by not authorizing the loan. This is not the
Department’s policy. The Department is constantly solicitous that all
matters should be dealt with on the fairest possible basis and with due
consideration of the exigencies of the Dominican Government. You are
referred to the note from the Minister of Foreign Affairs to Minister Russell
November 2445 ) in paragraph 4 of which it is stated that
“it is estimated that it will be necessary to issue bonds for the
nominal amount of $2,000,000 of the balance of the total not
issued but authorized under Executive Order No. 735 in order to
continue the program of public works; to meet the obligations
assumed by the Government in the contract celebrated between
the Municipalities of Santiago and Puerto Plata and the Water and
Light Company of these cities; and for other purposes.”
This was the first request received by the Department for authorization to
issue the loan and shows that the Dominican Government itself considered
that the two questions of the bond issue and the settlement of the Power
Company’s contract could not be wholly disassociated. The point is that if
the Company is to be paid in bonds there certainly must be bonds to make
the payments, and a reservation should be made sufficient for this purpose.
The Department could not agree to any other course without depriving the
Company of its fair opportunity to be reimbursed in the manner desired by
the Dominican Government. The Department is entirely willing to
authorize, and is instructing the Minister immediately to authorize the

[Document 628]
The Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (Welles) to the
Secretary of State
[Received 9: a.m.]

President and have impressed upon him that the suggestions offered by the
Department for the settlement of the power company’s controversy afforded
the Dominican Government fair and practical opportunities of settling the
difficulty presented by the expert’s report. While the President appreciates
the friendly attitude of the Department as evidenced by your instructions to
me he is unwilling to issue the $2,000,000 of bonds under the conditions
contained in the Department’s authorization. He apparently feels,
notwithstanding my arguments to the contrary, that acceptance by him of
the conditions imposed by the Department would constitute a public
admission by his Government of the fact that the Government of the United
States had no confidence in the willingness of the Provisional Government
to meet its just obligations.

He is, however, exceedingly anxious to reach a definite agreement with the
company immediately in order that issue of the $2,000,000 of bonds may be
made subsequent to the conclusion of such agreement. He is considering
making a proposition to the company on the basis of method number 2
suggested in your instructions to me. To this end he has instructed the
Director of Public Works who is already thoroughly familiar with the
condition of the properties to make a report to him estimating the cost of
placing the properties in working condition. The Director of Public Works
has confidentially informed me that he believes that this can be done
satisfactorily for an amount between $60,000 and $75,000. Once the
President has received this report it is my belief that he will make the
company an offer for the properties in their present condition and thereafter
instruct the Department of Public Works to undertake the necessary repairs

in order to place the properties in operating condition, using Public Works
funds for the cost of such repairs. The President is therefore inclined to the
belief that the properties should be purchased by the National Government
for its own account.

I am making every effort to have the Government make proposition to the
company at the earliest possible moment. The report of the Director of
Public Works will be forwarded by March 31st, and I trust that the
Government will be in a position to make the desired counterproposal
within a week after the reception of the report.

WELLES

[Document 629]
The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Russell) to the
Secretary of State
[Received 6: p.m.]
56. Congress has authorized the purchase by the Government of the plants
of the Santo Domingo Water, Light and Power Company for $400,000;
$100,000 cash and the remainder in two years. I have stated to the President
that if Government’s offer were made there was no doubt but that it would
be accepted by the company and I hope this [there] will be no hitch in the
matter. Minister of Fomento has been very active in Government’s
settlement and has zfulfilled all of his promises to me.
RUSSELL

[Document 630]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Dominican Republic
(Russell)
Department informed by Hunt and Dominican Minister that on September
25, they signed the contract of sale of the Santo Domingo Water, Light &
Power Company’s properties to the Dominican Government. The terms of
this contract are in accordance with statement in your telegram.
HUGHES

[Document 631]
The Secretary of State to the Dominican Minister (Ariza)
WASHINGTON, October 1, 1924.

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note dated
September 25, 1924, in which you inform me that you had on that date
signed on behalf of the Dominican Republic a contract already executed by
the Compañía Anónima Dominicana de Agua y Luz y Fuerza Motriz and
the Liberty Trust Company of Boston, Massachusetts, under which the
property described in this contract is transferred to the Dominican Republic.
The Department acknowledges the receipt of a copy of this document duly
certified by you.

Inasmuch as this contract of sale necessitates an increase in the public debt
of the Dominican Republic to the extent of $300,000, to be represented by
1924, and payable to the order of the Liberty Trust Company on September
1, 1926, you request, on behalf of your Government, that the Government
of the United States give such consent to this increase in its debt as may be
required by Article III of the Convention of 1907, between the United States
and the Dominican Republic. It is noted that Mr. Hunt, in a postscript to
your note under acknowledgment, makes the same request on behalf of the
Compañia Anónima Dominicana de Agua y Luz y Fuerza Motriz and the
Liberty Trust Company of Boston.

In reply, I have the honor to inform you that the Government of the United
States consents to the issuance by the Dominican Government of the
proposed two-year notes to the amount of $300,000 in the amount and upon
the terms described in the contract to which reference has already been
made. This consent is given in accordance with the provisions of Article III
of the Convention of 1907 between the Dominican Republic and the United
States.

Accept [etc. ]

Cuartes E. Hy0cues

[Document 632]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, April 1, 1924.

No. 290
SIR: Under instructions from His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of Slate for
Foreign Affairs, I have the honour to transmit to you herewith a memorial
drawn up by Messrs. Ballantine, Haddow and McLay of 39 Bath Street,
Glasgow, as the legal representatives of Mr. D. McPhail, a British subject
until recently a sugar planter in Santo Domingo. This document sets forth
the circumstances which attended the brutal attack made upon Mr. McPhail
course of which he received such serious injuries that besides being
compelled forthwith to resign from his position as agricultural manager of
the “Angelina” estate, Mr. McPhail has been unable since to perform any
serious work.

Inasmuch as at the time of the outrage referred to above, all foreigners in
Santo Domingo were under the protection of the Armed Forces of the
United States then in occupation of that Republic, Mr. McPhail feels
entitled to seek compensation for his injuries and severe financial losses
from the United States Government and in that connection presents a claim
for twenty-five thousand dollars.

I should be grateful to be informed in due course that this case is receiving
careful consideration at the hands of the appropriate authorities.
I have [etc.]

ESME HOWARD

[Document 633]
The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Brooks)
WASHINGTON, July 7, 1924.
enclosed a memorial of claim prepared by the legal representatives of Mr.
D. McPhail setting forth that he claims indemnity from the Government of
the United States on account of personal injuries and financial losses
suffered by him in the Dominican Republic arising from an attack made
upon him by bandits September 27, 1921, I have the honor to recall to your
attention that this matter has previously formed the subject of
correspondence between the Department and your Embassy, and, as stated
in the Department’s note of July 5, 1922, this Government considers that
Mr. McPhail’s claim, if any, is against the Government of the Dominican
Republic, and cognizable by the courts of that country, and in such
correspondence as the Department conducted relative to the case it acted
merely as the medium of transmission, and at the express request of your
Embassy, in acquainting the Embassy with the views of the Dominican
Foreign Office with regard to the claim.

As further stated in the Department’s note of July 5, 1922, the Dominican
Foreign Office advised the American Legation at Santo Domingo that Mr.
McPhail should submit his claim to the Procurador Fiscal of the Judicial
District of San Pedro de Macoris.

Your Embassy replied August 16, 1922, that Mr. McPhail had been
advised to apply to the authority mentioned, but that your Government
reserved the right to press the claim through diplomatic channels if there
should be a denial of justice in the courts.

It does not appear from the memorial of Mr. McPhail that he acted upon the
advice of your Embassy to resort to his remedies in the Dominican courts,
and it is inferable from statements contained in the memorial that he failed

to take this step. Therefore, it would seem that Mr. McPhail is not at this
time in a position to assert his claim diplomatically since he has not
complied with the generally accepted principle that the legal remedies in the
country against which a claim is made should be exhausted before
diplomatic intervention is resorted to.

The foregoing statements have been based upon the possibility that Mr.
McPhail may have a just claim against the Dominican Republic. So far as
concerns his assertion of a claim against the Government of the United
States, I beg to refer you to the position consistently taken by the
Department in the previous correspondence with your Embassy regarding
this case that Mr. McPhail’s claim, if any, is against the Dominican
Republic.

With respect to the merits of the claim, and as bearing upon statements
contained in Mr. McPhail’s memorial, the following observations may be
made: Mr. McPhail seems to imply that bandit activities in the Dominican
Republic did not exist prior to the time when American troops entered the
Republic, or in 1916. On this point it may be observed that in a letter
addressed to the Department October 3, 1921, by Mr. F. A. Vicini,
President of the company which owned the plantation upon which Mr.
McPhail was employed at the time he suffered the injuries in question, Mr.
Vicini referred to the bandits who committed the outrage, and said: “Bands
of this nature are called in Santo Domingo ‘gavilleros’, and they operated in
the country long before the American occupation and were usually formed
during revolutionary times.”
As you are aware the British subject Thomas J. Steele was kidnapped by
bandits on the occasion when Mr. McPhail was injured, and in a report on
this matter from the American Legation at Santo Domingo dated October 9,
1921, the Legation said: “The Marines had been quite active around the
neighborhood of the sugar estate of which Mr. Steele is manager for several
weeks, and the very night he was taken they caught up with the band that
had him but were unaware of this fact. In the encounter that followed,
several of the bandits were wounded, but all escaped.” Referring to the
leader of the band which committed the outrage in question, the Legation
said: “From the time of the death of ‘Vicentico’, Nateras has been the

acknowledged leader of the bandits in the East. For some time he has been,
apparently, quiet.” The Legation added: “It is a very difficult matter to deal
with this present condition of bandit revolution. Every sugar estate has
amongst its own employees emissaries of the bandits, who are working
peacefully during the day and in connection with the bandits at night. The
bandits are bold and with absolutely no respect for life.”
The Navy Department advised this Department November 21, 1921, that
during the month following the attack upon Mr. McPhail 223 bandits were
captured by the United States military forces in the Dominican Republic, of
whom, at the date of the letter, 105 had already been tried, convicted and
sentenced by Provost Court.

In your Embassy’s note of December 21, 1921, the Embassy submitted
statements by Messrs. Steele and McPhail of the incident in question, and in
Mr. Steele’s statement he referred to the “successful efforts of the United
States troops” as against the bandits, and stated that because of the
information he had given the troops it would be necessary for him to leave
the country, and therefore requested the British Government to support his
claim for $120,000 against the Dominican Government. However, in
neither of the statements is it alleged that the troops of the United States
failed to afford proper protection to the plantation on which Messrs. Steele
and McPhail were employed, or to the officers or employees of that
plantation.

As you were advised in the Department’s note of May 10, 1924, the claim
of Mr. McPhail was referred to the appropriate authority of this
Government. That authority has now replied at length to the statements
contained in the memorial, and I beg to set forth below a synopsis of certain
portions of that reply: The forces of the United States did not proceed to the
were landed in the Republic.

Mr. McPhail’s veiled assertion that banditry did not exist in the Dominican
Republic before the military government was constituted is not only
unfounded but preposterous. Ample evidence exists in the possession of
authorities of the United States to demonstrate that banditry was rife in the

Dominican Republic prior to the constitution of the military government,
and that sugar estates and planters were victims of depredations by bandits.
Indeed, it may be stated that the lawless acts of bandits and the inability of
the Republic to suppress them was one of the main causes for the landing of
naval forces of the United States. Banditry in the Dominican Republic was
closely associated with the political and revolutionary movements, which
perpetually disturbed the Republic, and it was customary for each new
government to grant amnesty to bandits upon the conclusion of a
revolution, thus, not only preventing the suppression of brigandage but
countenancing its existence.

Mr. McPhail’s statement that the Dominican Government afforded
protection to planters in the Republic is hardly conceivable in the light of
Dominican history, since between 1899 and 1916 parts of the Republic
were in almost constant revolution, and thirteen different Presidents
functioned during this time, who, with but one exception, were inaugurated
and deposed by revolutionists. It is unreasonable to believe that a country so
affected by political and revolutionary strife could guarantee protection to
planters, and if such protection were enjoyed it was not afforded by the
Dominican Government but attained by the employment of other means. In
this relation it may be said that a communication in the possession of
authorities of the United States from a manager of one of the large sugar
estates concedes that during the various revolutionary movements the
Dominican Government was unable to afford any relief to the property and
that protection was afforded through the efforts of a notorious bandit chief.
It is common knowledge that when the American forces entered the
Republic a large number of bandit leaders were carrying on operations.
Mr. McPhail’s statements that less, rather than more, protection was
afforded after the advent of the United States forces, and that the estate by
which he was employed was deprived of any protection from such forces,
are misleading and erroneous. United States marines were frequently
stationed on sugar estates between the years 1917 and 1921, and the
properties of the sugar estates were constantly patrolled by the American
forces, which action constituted a greater protection to the estates than
would have been afforded by the posting of fixed guards within the
enclosures of the sugar mill premises. However, the American forces could

not, of course, devote their entire energies to the protection of sugar estates,
and extended their efforts to protect the people of the Republic as a whole,
and to this end were obliged to adopt offensive measures for the
suppression of bandits, the primary necessity of which was to maintain
fresh troops in the field of operation to pursue bandits unceasingly.
The rugged and inaccessible character of the country was a great obstacle to
military operations and largely rendered it difficult to keep in constant
touch with the bandit groups, and this was especially the case in the
Provinces of Seibo and Macoris, the territory of which constituted a
principal field of bandit operations and comprised within its borders the rich
sugar cane belt and other sources of wealth which were tempting to the
bandits.

The military government was not delinquent in affording reasonable
protection, and did not fail in taking adequate measures to suppress
Third Regiment, continuously occupied the Provinces of Macoris and Seibo
and constantly maintained patrols in the field. The record of this Battalion
for the period mentioned shows that its detachments covered thousands of
miles of territory and captured large quantities of firearms, had over a
hundred contacts with the bandit groups, and inflicted losses on them
estimated at 350 killed and wounded.

February 26, 1919, the First Battalion was relieved by the Fifteenth
Regiment, consisting of approximately 800 officers and men, which was
assigned to garrison the Provinces of Macoris and Seibo, and devoted its
entire attention to the suppression of banditry and restoration of peace and
over 600 patrols resulting in about 270 bandit contacts, and losses to the
bandits estimated at 600 killed and wounded. The Regiment maintained
from 10 to 14 permanent outposts within these Provinces, and continuously
sent patrols and detachments from these outposts, keeping the entire
territory under close surveillance.

The forces of the United States in the Dominican Republic never received
repeated requests from the sugar estates for more protection. Such requests
as were received were given every consideration possible under the

circumstances, and every resource at the disposal of the military
government was fully utilized to destroy banditry.

The Guardia Nacional was organized April 17, 1917, and was a variable
quantity fluctuating with the amount of available national funds, but was
not fully established as a definite fixed force until October 20, 1922.
After the abduction of Mr. Steele every means at the disposal of the military
government was set in operation to effect his immediate release, and the
pressure exerted against the bandits became so strong that they were
compelled to release Mr. Steele September 30, 1921, or two and one-half
days after his abduction.

Banditry in the Eastern district was completely suppressed in May 1922,
practically seven months after the abduction of Mr. Steele, and as a result of
the persistent and continuous operations of the Marine forces of the United
States. Since that time the Dominican Republic has enjoyed a state of
tranquillity never before realized, and which is reflected in the improvement
of conditions in general.

Accept [etc.]

CHARLES E. HUGHES
Ecuador:

[Document 634]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ecuador (Boding)
WASHINGTON, June 13, 1924.

No. 377
SIR: There is transmitted to you herewith a copy of a letter dated April 17,
1924, from the Guayaquil and Quito Railway Company, stating that the
Government of Ecuador has failed to live up to its contractual obligations
and that the bondholders of the Railway request their government to use its
good offices in protecting them in their rights to the full amount of the
customs pledged to them.

[Document 635]
The Minister in Ecuador (Bading) to the Secretary of State
QUITO, August 15, 1924.

[Received September 8.]

No. 373
SIR: With reference to the Department’s instructions No. 377 of June 13,
matter of the failure of Ecuador to live up to its contractual obligations to
the bondholders of the Guayaquil and Quito Railway Co., in the matter of
payment of interest on the outstanding indebtedness and the Department’s
request for my personal views as to the desirability of making appropriate
representations to the Ecuadorian Government at this time, I have the honor
to report that I have given this question serious thought and have arrived at
the following conclusion: There is of course no question as to the fact of the
Government of Ecuador failing to live up to her obligations, and as to the
amount of interest and sinking fund due on the outstanding bonded
indebtedness, figures of which are quoted in Mr. T. H. Powers Farr’s letters
there any question as to the fact that the Ecuadorian Government pledged
the income from the customs in guaranteeing the payment of the interest on
these bonds. However, the fact also remains that on numerous occasions in
the past representations in the matter have been made to the Ecuadorian
Government through this Legation, without obtaining any results
whatsoever.

Mr. Powers Farr states in his letter of April 17th that “the ability of the
Ecuadorian Government to pay this obligation is indicated by the recent
contract entered into with the Ethelburga Syndicate for a new loan in which
the Ecuadorian Government agrees to pay twice the amount of interest and
sinking fund called for by the outstanding Guayaquil and Quito Railway
bonds”. As the Department is aware, this Ethelburga Syndicate loan

[Document 636]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ecuador (Bading)
WASHINGTON, September 26, 1924.

No. 396
SIR: The receipt is acknowledged of your despatch No. 373 dated August 15,
1924, with reference to the advisability of making representations to the
Ecuadoran Government for its failure to live up to its contractual
obligations to the bondholders of the Guayaquil and Quito Railway. It is
noted that you have discussed the situation with Mr. Harman, president of
the Railway Company, and that you are both of the opinion that nothing can
be gained and much may be lost by making representations to the
Ecuadoran Government at this time. You request instructions authorizing
you to make representations should it become advisable to do so later.
In reply you are informed that the Department agrees with you that the
present is not a desirable time to make the representations in question.
However, it does not appear necessary to instruct you in advance. If a
situation arises which calls for action on the matter, you should report the
facts at once to the Department by cable together with your
recommendations.

For the Secretary of State:
JOSEPH C. GREW

[Document 637]
The Minister in Ecuador (Bading) to the Secretary of State
QUITO, September 29, 1924.

[Received October 16.]

No. 394
outlined to the Department my reasons for not believing it an opportune
time for calling the Ecuadorian Government’s attention to her obligations as
to the interest and sinking fund due on the outstanding bonded indebtedness
in connection with the Guayaquil and Quito Railway Co., as requested by
Mr. T. H. Powers Farr in the letters addressed to the Department on April
Department to give me instructions enabling me to use my discretion as to
the time representations might be made, I have the honor to report that
while Mr. Hord, the Financial Expert, had informed me that the budget bill
contained provisions for the taking care of Ecuador’s external obligations, it
seems that all reference to the first mortgage bonds of the Guayaquil and
Quito Railway Co., and any provisions for the future payment of interest
and sinking fund on such bonds were eliminated from the budget by the
Permanent Legislative Commission, just prior to the introduction of this
budget bill in Congress.

Lord Hervey, the British Minister, who had come to Quito at the time of the
inauguration of the President and presented his credentials as British
Minister to Ecuador, just prior to his leaving for Peru had an interview with
the Minister of Hacienda on this subject and had been informed by that
official that the Government of Ecuador found itself unable to make any
provision whatsoever for the payment of any interest and sinking fund on
the outstanding bonded indebtedness of the Guayaquil and Quito Railway
Company, but that the Permanent Legislative Commission had decided that
if the financial condition of the country permitted there would be an

endeavor made next year to find ways and means of beginning payments on
the many years’ overdue interest in connection with these bonds.
When, therefore, an editorial appeared in El Comercio, calling attention to
the fact that any budget which did not take into consideration the country’s
external indebtedness was not a budget based on sound principles, I thought
the moment opportune to discuss this entire question with the Minister of
Hacienda and for that purpose secured an interview with him.

I informed the Minister of Hacienda that it was not my purpose at this time
to protest to the Ecuadorian Government against the continued ignoring of
its obligations guaranteed by the customs receipts, but that my only purpose
was to discuss with him the effect such neglect of obligations on its part had
exercised on Ecuador’s credit and further informed him that my conference
with him on this subject was sought merely in order to enable me to
correctly inform my Government as to what were the intentions of the
Government of Ecuador towards satisfying the increasing clamor and
demand on the part of the bondholders for satisfaction; informing him at the
same time that I had had instructions from the Department of State to bring
this matter to the attention of the Ecuadorian Government, that I had,
however, exercised my discretion in withholding action on these
instructions, because I had understood that the budget bill would contain
provisions for meeting the guaranteed obligations of the Ecuadorian
Government in connection with these bonds, but that my attention had been
called by the editorial in El Comercio to the action of the Permanent
Legislative Commission, which had unquestionably acted in harmony with
the ideas of the Minister of Hacienda, in eliminating from the budget all
reference to these obligations, and I asked him for a frank expression of his
opinion as to how the situation was to be met, and what information might
be given the bondholders.

The Minister of Hacienda gave me what was presumably the same answer
he had given to Lord Hervey, that the Permanent Legislative Commission
had decided that the financial situation at the present time did not permit the
payment of any of these external obligations at this time but it was thought
some sort of provision could be made next year.

I thereupon requested the Minister of Finance to permit me to discuss the
entire situation with him in a sincere and frank manner and to permit me to
express to him the opinion I had formed after living in Ecuador for two
years and a half, and after having given careful study to the entire subject of
Ecuador’s credit and economic situation. The Minister not only gave me
permission but invited me openly and frankly to discuss the situation with
him.

I proceeded to outline to him that Ecuador’s failure to take definite action in
connection with her external bonded indebtedness and her failure definitely
to settle the Agriculturists’ Association-Mercantile Bank matter had been
the principal underlying factors in destroying Ecuador’s credit abroad and
had been in the past as it would be in the future the reason for Ecuador’s
failure to secure a loan.

I pointed out that Ecuador invariably had failed to live up to her guarantees
in the matter of the bonded indebtedness and had failed to live up to her
promises in the Mercantile Bank matter; that it was expected of Ecuador
that the new administration, with its intended program of fiscal reform
under the guidance of the financial expert employed, find means to carry
out some action which would at least in part restore confidence in her good
intentions by satisfying to the best of her ability at this time the just
demands of these external creditors; that I had personally had confidence
that such action would be taken until Congress, which up to this time had
apparently completely ignored the recommendations contained in President
Cordova’s inaugural address as well as the recommendations made by Mr.
Hord, the financial expert, has passed a bill which not only called for an
increase in the per diem allowance for each Senator and Congressman but
had also in addition to that passed a bill materially increasing the pay to the
army, the latter increase totaling not less than one million five hundred
thousand sucres per annum; that under such circumstances it would be
exceedingly difficult to persuade the bondholders that the financial situation
of the country and Government was such that it could not at least in part
satisfy demands not only based on justice but secured by the absolute
guarantee of the Government of Ecuador as such an attitude would imply
bad faith and the effect would be disastrous.

I pointed out to him that my personal experience extending over a period of
a considerable number of years of budget making for a city of more than
five hundred thousand population had taught me that the only proper course
to pursue, and the only course which would restore confidence in the
promises of the Ecuadorian Government and thereby have the tendency to
improve her credit situation was to cut to the bone all unnecessary
expenses, such as increase in pay of the army, which at the present time is
better equipped and in every respect on a far greater basis of efficiency than
ever before, and it certainly was no time to provide an increase in the per
diem pay of the members of Congress who were expected to have the
welfare and good name of their country at heart.

I informed him that under the circumstances I hesitated to inform my
Government of the actual state of affairs unless he, as Minister of Finance
assured me that the course adopted so far by the Permanent Legislative
Commission and by Congress met with his approval, and that if he, on the
other hand agreed with me I would withhold a report which necessarily
would come to the knowledge of the external creditors until it had been
demonstrated one way or the other what would be the attitude of the
Government and the final action; that there was now on deposit in the banks
in Guayaquil a sufficient amount of money to enable the Government to
make a part payment on the back interest due on these bonds and that this
money had been accumulated for that purpose but withheld by action of
President Tamayo merely because of the exchange situation.

The Minister was greatly impressed and rather depressed with the manner
in which I presented the entire situation to him. He informed [me] that I was
correct, that Congress had made a mistake and that he would immediately
call a meeting of the Permanent Legislative Commission for the purpose of
trying to induce them to reverse their action and would also discuss the
matter with the President with a view to getting his support.
Late in the afternoon, I was called by phone and informed that the
Legislative Commission had delegated Mr. Hord, the Financial Adviser, and
Mr. Dobbie, the General Manager of the Guayaquil and Quito Railway Co.,
who had been called in by the Permanent Legislative Commission to give

his opinion in the matter, to call upon me to discuss ways and means by
which the situation might be remedied and the bondholders satisfied. In due
course of time these two gentlemen appeared at the Legation both of them
informing me that I had made a profound impression on the Minister of
Finance who had outlined my position to the Permanent Legislative
Commission, informing that body at the same time that he was exceedingly
grateful to me for the courteous, although emphatic manner, in which I had
expressed myself and that he felt convinced that I had the welfare of his
country at heart in the position I had taken.

Mr. Dobbie informed me that if it met with my approval, the Permanent
Legislative Commission had decided to provide, by decree, for the payment
to the bondholders of one coupon either immediately or on the regular
interest day in January and follow that up by the payment of a second
coupon six months later, Mr. Hord having assured them that with the money
now available additional sums could be deposited to secure these two
payments and that he felt confident that he could make the necessary
arrangements to secure by monthly deposits in the banks a sufficient sum of
money to insure regular payments thereafter, providing however, at this
time there would be no demand made for the payment of additional
amounts for sinking fund purposes. Mr. Dobbie communicated by telegram
with Mr. Archer Harman, President of the Guayaquil and Quito Railway
Company, who is now at Huigra, and secured his consent to this
arrangement with also a statement by Mr. Harman. that sinking fund
requirements might be deferred until all back interest payments had been
met. In accordance with the agreement arrived at between myself, Mr.
Archer Harman and Mr. Dobbie, the Permanent Legislative Commission
was notified that we expected the first coupon payment to be made on
January 2nd, the regular interest paying date.
… I am inclined to feel confident that the action I have taken in connection
with this matter was opportune and may, in all probability, result in a
settlement of this old source of irritation and complaint. It is, of course,
understood that the above arrangement, if carried out, will meet with the
entire satisfaction of the bondholders and induce them to withhold further
complaint against the Government of Ecuador.

When the necessary decrees providing for this payment have actually been
issued, I will inform the Department by cable.
I hope that the Department will approve of my attitude and action taken in
the above matter.

I have [etc.]

G. A. BADING

[Document 638]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ecuador (Bading)
WASHINGTON, November 6, 1924.

No. 402
SIR: The receipt is acknowledged of your despatch No. 394 dated September
29, 1924, concerning your conversation with the Minister of Hacienda with
a view to bringing about payments on the Guayaquil and Quito Railway
bonds.

The Department approves of your action and desires to commend you for
the energy and effectiveness with which you have handled this matter.
For the Secretary of State:
JOSEPH C. GREW

[Document 639]
The Minister in Ecuador (Bading) to the Secretary of State
QUITO, December 30, 1924.

[Received January 21, 1925.]

No. 449
which I reported to the Department the Ecuadorian Government’s and Mr.
Dobbie’s efforts to secure the consent of the Bondholders Association of the
Guayaquil and Quito Railway Company to utilize the funds on deposit in
the British Bank of Spanish America for the purpose of paying one of the
long overdue coupons of the 5% bonds, I have the honor to report that I was
notified today that the Minister of Hacienda had cabled to Glynn Mills
Curry & Co., of London, $222,988. with instructions to apply from that
amount about $107,000. for payment of interest and sinking fund on the
prior lien bonds, which amount falls due on January 2nd. He also has cabled
the above mentioned firm that the balance, amounting to $115,988. plus
$8,000. (balance on deposit in London) is to be utilized for the payment of a
coupon of the 5% bonds. As this payment requires a sum of approximately
$270,000. the Minister of Hacienda has instructed the Banco Comercial y
Agricola, in which there is also a certain amount of Government funds on
deposit, to retire from this deposit a sum amounting to $105,000. to be
cabled to London, which leaves a balance of approximately $40,000. which
the Government treasurer in Guayaquil has been instructed to forward to
London. Glynn Mills Curry & Co., have been assured by cable that the
entire amount will be in their possession within a day or two.
Thus it seems that the vigorous representations which I made to the
Minister of Hacienda, as reported in despatch No. 394 of September 24
[29], 1924 have borne fruit, and it is to be hoped that the Ecuadorian
Government will continue in the future to retire the coupons of these 5%
bonds, the last one of which was paid in 1913.

[Document 640]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ecuador (Bading)
14. Department is informed by representative of Mercantile Bank of the
Americas that an article in the Budget Bill recently presented to the
Ecuadoran Senate, authorizes the executive to liquidate the Association of
Agriculturists. The representative of the Bank states that this is contrary to
promises made by the President of Ecuador. If the facts are as stated and
you deem it advisable you are authorized to bring the matter to the attention
of the President, pointing out the injustice of such a measure to the Bank.
Report briefly by cable.

HUGHES

[Document 641]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ecuador (Bading)
Mercantile Bank of the Americas mentioned therein was based on a
mutilated telegram from its representative in Ecuador which was
misconstrued by both the Bank and the Department. The Bank now informs
the Department that the following article, dangerous to its interests, is
proposed in the budget bill recently presented to the Ecuadorean Congress:
“In any event, the subvention of sucres 2,000,000 for year 1925
(amount estimated tax will produce 1925) is the final amount
which the State will deliver to the Association and from
December 31, 1925, all obligation of the State ceases in
conformity with law of 1921 in respect to the Association as well
as to its creditors if such exist.”
If the facts are as stated and you deem it advisable, you are authorized to
bring the matter to the attention of the President, pointing out the injustice
of the measure to the Bank.

You may also refer to former President Tamayo’s letter of February 5, 1922,
to Minister Hartman, a copy of which was enclosed in your Legation’s
If you see no objection you may mention to the President that the Bank
wishes to suggest the convenience of passage by the Senate of last year’s
bill, which provides for liquidation of the Association and extension of the
two sucres tax until debts are paid, as this appears to the Bank to be the only
way the promises of the former Executive can be complied with, and that
bank believes, if situation remains in status quo ante, debts of the

[Document 642]
The Minister in Ecuador (Bading) to the Secretary of State
[Received 9: a.m.]
assurance from the President that the Mercantile Bank matter will be
arranged satisfactorily. The President favors last year’s bill providing for
liquidation of the Association and continuation of tax, and is opposed to
budget article providing for denial of obligation of the state after December
BADING

[Document 643]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ecuador (Bading)
[Paraphrase]
Bank that Mr. Stabler10 has cabled that he has been informed that the
President, despite assurances given you, has definitely instructed his
advisors not to have bill passed as he fears to assume responsibility of
obligating the Government. Foregoing is solely for your information.
You will see President at once and remind him of the assurance mentioned
in your telegram; you will say that the Department confidently expects he
will not delay in having matter arranged satisfactorily. Telegraph brief
report on situation and the result of your interview.

HUGHES

[Document 644]
The Minister in Ecuador (Bading) to the Secretary of State
interview with the President, and his answer submitted in writing absolutely
ignores promises; merely quotes law of 1921 and states he favors strict
compliance therewith.

Recommend immediate instructions by telegraph calling for the fulfillment
of promises without evasion.

BADING

[Document 645]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Ecuador
(Bading)
earnestly with the President at the earliest opportunity, stating that the
Department relies on the assurances given by ex-President Tamayo, who in
1925 the credit of the Mercantile Bank of the Americas has not been
extinguished the tax will be extended until its cancellation.
You should impress upon the President the importance which the
Department attaches to the matter and reiterate that the Department relies
Department therefore confidently expects that he will use his influence to
have a law passed extending the tax until the debt is paid.
You may also point out the decidedly adverse effect upon the credit of

[Document 646]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ecuador (Bading)
19. Department has been informed that the Association of Agriculturists has
made full payment on its debts to local banks and holders of “vales”.
Endeavor to confirm and cable the facts to the Department as soon as
possible.

Department has also been informed that Article 4 of the Law of
Centralization of Revenues provides that the fiscal officials collect all
revenues which are not directly provided for in the budget. Cable promptly
exact text of Article 4 of this law, or any portion thereof which relates to
this matter. Send complete copy of the law by mail.

HUGHES

[Document 647]
The Minister in Ecuador (Bading) to the Secretary of State
QUITO, November 29, 1924.

[Received December 29.]

No. 433
P.M., concerning the matter of the indebtedness of the Asociación de
Agricultores del Ecuador to the Mercantile Bank of the Americas, the
partial answer to which was cabled in my telegram No. 18 of November
the Department’s cable we secured the copy of the law of centralisacion de
las rentas and subjected it to a careful study which convinced me that the
law does not in any way apply to the law of October 15, 1921, by which
was established the tax of three sucres per quintel on cacao for the benefit
of the Asociación de Agricultores del Ecuador.

I called Mr. Hord, the financial adviser of the Ecuadorian Government, into
conference, and he concurred with me in this opinion.

In order to ascertain the opinion of the Ecuadorian Government on this
question, the matter was referred to Sr. Albornoz, the Minister of Hacienda,
and both he and his Undersecretary, Mr. Rivas, expressed the opinion that in
view of the fact that the Asociación is a “private institution” the law of
centralization is not applicable, and this is further borne out by the fact that
the funds derived from this three sucre tax never have been for the benefit
of the Ecuadorian Government and that the tax always has been collected
by the treasurer of the Asociación and never by officials of the Government.
Furthermore, we have ascertained that the three Sucre tax is being collected
and deposited for the benefit of the Asociación as heretofore.

[Document 648]
The Minister in Ecuador (Bading) to the Secretary of State
be reliable it is learned that all debts to local banks and vale holders have
been paid except one vale in litigation.

BADING

[Document 649]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ecuador (Bading)
21. You will please deliver the following note to the Ecuadorean
Government:
“I have the honor to inform you that I am instructed by my
Government to state that it has given very careful consideration to
the question of the debt of the Association of Agriculturists of
Ecuador to the Mercantile Bank of the Americas and desires to
make known to the Ecuadorean Government its position as
follows:
His Excellency President Cordova assured the American Minister
that this matter could be arranged satisfactorily and expressed his
concurrence with a bill introduced into the Ecuadorean Congress
in 1923 providing for the continuation of the export tax on cacao
until the liquidation of this indebtedness. The Government of the
United States confidently expects the President to comply with
the promises mentioned by urging passage of the necessary
legislation in the next session, either ordinary or extraordinary, of
the Ecuadorean Congress. In this connection it is pertinent to
point out that the President of Ecuador on February 5, 1922
formally promised the American Minister in Quito:
1. That if in 1925 the debt to the Mercantile Bank of the
Americas shall not have been extinguished the export
tax on cacao will be extended until its cancellation;
2. That the Association will apply to the debt of the
Mercantile Bank, in addition to 22 per cent of the tax,

any other balance left after carrying out its operations
according to the Decree creating said tax;
3. That if the Government obtains a foreign loan it will
immediately pay half of the debt due to the above
mentioned Bank.

The Government of the United States has learned with profound
surprise that not only has the 22 per cent of the tax
aforementioned not been devoted to the cancellation of the
Mercantile Bank debt but that there has been actual
discrimination against the Bank in favor of Ecuadorean nationals
as evidenced by the payment by the Agricultural Association of
all its debts to the banks in Guayaquil and to all the holders of
“vales” with the exception of one “vale” now in litigation. The
United States Government consequently expects that the 22 per
cent of the tax allocated to the Mercantile Bank which has been
withheld up to now will immediately be paid to the Bank and that
the full 66 per cent of the tax allocated for the payment of the
debts of the Association will, now that the other debts have been
paid with the exception indicated, be paid to the Mercantile Bank
in the future or else that the Government of Ecuador will oblige
the Association to deposit in a bank acceptable to both parties all
the funds now on hand and regularly in the future those to be
collected, to be held in escrow until a settlement of the accounts
has been reached. In furtherance of this proposal the Government
of the United States must express its expectation that there will be
immediate compliance with the provisions of the law of 1921 and
the appointment of a comptroller or interventor for the
Association to assure that the latter will make a just settlement of
its debts to the American creditors.

The Government of the United States is constrained to consider
the Government of Ecuador responsible for the discrimination
mentioned in the preceding paragraph as, according to the
aforementioned Ecuadorean law of 1921, the Government of
Ecuador appears obligated to control the activities of the

Association and moreover it is understood that the President of
Ecuador assigned, as stated above, a certain portion of the
proceeds of the tax which should be paid to the Mercantile Bank
at the same time that another portion of the proceeds of the tax
was allocated to the remaining creditors.

The Government of the United States furthermore confidently
expects that the export tax on cacao will be continued after its
expiration December 31, 1925, until the debt is fully satisfied as
was promised by the President of Ecuador in the note above
referred to.

The question of the debt of the Association of Agriculturists to the
Mercantile Bank of the Americas has been pending for a number
of years without any efficacious action on the part of the
Ecuadorean Government and the Government of the United
States feels that it must now ask for a prompt settlement and
desires to be informed without delay of the steps contemplated by
the Ecuadorean Government to bring the matter to a satisfactory
conclusion.”
A copy of the above note has been handed to the Ecuadorean Minister in
Washington and he has been informed that this Government is wholly
dissatisfied with the attitude and action of the Ecuadorean authorities in the
premises and that this Government feels that a settlement of the matter
cannot well be prolonged and it expects to be advised without delay of the
intentions of the Ecuadorean Government in the premises.
HUGHES

[Document 650]
The Minister in Egypt (Howell) to the Secretary of State
CAIRO, November 3, 1923.

[Received November 23.]

No. 415
SIR: I have the honor to call the Department’s attention to the subject of
taxation as applied to Egypt, same known as Gaffir Tax, a police provision
respecting which there has recently arisen, by reason of suspension of
Martial Law, not a little agitation. While Egypt was under Martial Law in
[Enclosure—Translation]
NOTE ON THE GAFFIR TAX
[CAIRO, September 1923.]

The Gaffir Tax was established by a Decree of November 10, 1884, as a
police regulation for the security of rural property, and as a true
complement of the land tax. Article 49 of this Decree provides in intent that
“collectors of taxes are also charged with the collection of the Gaffir Tax
and that the Sarrafs of the villages shall inform the authorities of the names
of persons who refuse to pay their quota, in order that they may be treated
as those who are in arrears with their taxes.”
Subsequently the Gaffir Tax was extended to cities by a Decree of February
17, 1896, which, at the same time established “joint and separate liability
between proprietors and tenants of each house for the payment of his quota
as a contribution to the Gaffir Tax.”
In taking this position the Egyptian Government has kept within the limits
which were imposed upon it by international agreements concerning real
property of foreigners. Article 2 of the Ottoman Law of the 7th of Safar,
1284, specifies in intent that “foreign proprietors of landed property, city or
rural, are likened to Ottoman subjects in all that concerns their real property,
and that this assimilation is for legal effect:
“1st. It binds them to conform to all laws, and to all
police or municipal regulations which govern at the
present time, or will govern in the future, the
possession, transmission, legal conveyance of property
to another, and the mortgaging of landed property.

“2nd. To pay all charges and taxes, under whatever
denomination they are levied, or shall hereafter be
levied, on city or rural property.”
Now it is manifest that all this taxation applies as well to the owner as to the
tenant of city or rural property, and that, therefore, it is perfectly right that
the Government address the tenants as well as the proprietors for payment.
To insure the collection of this tax, the Egyptian Government orders the
seizure and administrative sale against the tax-payer. But these methods of
procedure are necessarily slow, and in order to avoid all difficulty or delay
during the war, the General Commander-in-Chief of the forces of His

Britannic Majesty in Egypt, responsible for order and security, thought it
necessary to support, by proclamation these means of coercion respecting
tax-payers. Under these conditions the said proclamations were not able to
be considered as having established the Gaffir Tax since it already existed
and was perfectly legal, but simply as having been used as a mode of
additional coercion, for its collection. Consequently the abolishment of
Martial Law would not have any effect upon the legality of the tax which
continues to be due from all the inhabitants of the territory.

[Document 651]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Howell)
WASHINGTON, January 23, 1924.

No. 141
SIR: The Department has received your despatch No. 415 dated November 3,
1923, with reference to the “Gaffir Tax” which the Egyptian Government
appears to be desirous of collecting from foreigners in Egypt. …
While under the Real Estate Protocol of 1874 between the United States
and the Ottoman Empire,1a American citizens may be required to pay taxes
levied upon real property, owned by them, under the reserve of the
immunities attached to their persons and their movable goods according to
the Treaties (Article II), it does not appear that the tax here in question is
properly to be considered a real property tax. On the contrary it is
understood to be in addition to such tax, and is assessed against the
occupants of property without regard to the ownership thereof.
This Government has not given its consent to the collection of taxes of this
kind from American citizens, and it does not appear that the tax has been
assented to by other Capitulatory Powers, or that it can be justified under
the real estate protocol of 1874. In so far as regards American citizens it is
not perceived that the law can have any application. …
It has not been the practice of this Government to withhold assent to the
collection of taxes from its nationals and ressortissants in countries where it
enjoys capitulatory privileges when such assent is requested and it is shown
that the taxes are intended for the benefit of the community as a whole, and
are reasonable in amount and apply alike to all nationals. The assent of this
Government does not appear to have been requested in this case nor has
there been any showing that the tax and the method of assessment are
reasonable, or that it is imposed for the benefit of the community at large.

Under these circumstances and in view of the fact that other capitulatory
powers in Egypt have not given their assent to the collection of the tax from
their nationals, the Department cannot admit the application of it to
American nationals.

Should occasion arise you may inform the Egyptian Government of this
Government’s views on the subject.

The Department will be pleased to receive for possible future use a copy of
the law.

For the Secretary of State:
LELAND HARRISON

[Document 652]
The Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs (Boutros) to the
American Minister (Howell)
[Translation]
CAIRO, March 20, 1924.

Circular
MR. MINISTER: Permit me to remind you that the Gaffir Tax was established by a
Decree of November 10, 1884, and that the Egyptian Government has
always considered this tax as applicable to foreign citizens, as it constitutes
a police law for the security of land owners, and as a complement of the
land tax to which foreigners are subject.

However, certain Consular Authorities have raised objections against this
interpretation and the question had not been definitely settled when by the
Proclamation of September 23, 1915, of the British Military Authorities, the
payment of the Gaffir Tax was declared obligatory for all persons residing
in Egypt of whatever nationality they might be.

Now the effect of the Proclamation of September 23, 1915, having ended,
the question is in the same state it formerly was, that is to say, that it gives
occasion for a divergence of views between the Egyptian authorities and the
Representatives of Foreign Countries, and under these conditions it
becomes necessary to avoid all controversy on this subject in the future.
I should state that the Gaffir Service is of a general utility character, since
its aim is essentially to guarantee the security of real estate for the benefit of
all the inhabitants of the country without distinction, and, moreover, that it
can only function efficiently if sufficient resources are obtained by the

participation of all persons who profit by it. It would then be quite unjust
that one category of beneficiaries be able to avoid their duty of paying the
tax above mentioned, and the Egyptian Government is right in expecting
that Capitulatory citizens continue to pay this tax as they have already done
for many years.

Consequently I have the honor to transmit herewith the text of a Decree
rendered February 16th, last, on the subject of the payment of Gaffir Tax
throughout the whole territory of Egypt, and I have recourse to your kind
intervention with your Government to the end that it kindly give its assent
to the provisions of this Decree in respect of American citizens, from the
date above mentioned.

[Document 653]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Howell)
WASHINGTON, May 5, 1924.

No. 156
SIR: The Department acknowledges the receipt of your despatch No. 470 of
request on the part of the Egyptian Government that this Government
consent to the collection of this tax from American nationals in Egypt.
If the other Powers enjoying capitulatory rights in Egypt consent to the
collection of this tax from their nationals in the cities of Cairo, Alexandria,
Port Said, Ismalia and Suez, you may inform the Egyptian Government that
this Government has no objection to the collection of the Gaffir Tax from its
nationals resident in the cities above mentioned.

Until some system of collecting the Gaffir Tax outside of the cities above
mentioned is devised so as thoroughly to safeguard the tax payers from
unreasonable assessment, this Government cannot admit the application of
the Gaffir Tax to American citizens resident outside of these cities.
The Department will be pleased to have you keep it informed of the
progress made towards devising a method of collection of the Gaffir Tax,
outside the cities referred to above, so as to avoid the present difficulties.
For the Secretary of State:
LELAND HARRISON

[Document 654]
The Chargé in Egypt (Johnson) to the Secretary of State
CAIRO, June 13, 1924.

[Received June 30.]

No. 499
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s
foreigners enjoying capitulatory rights of the Gaffir Tax under the decree of
Feb. 16, 1924, and to the request on the part of the Egyptian Government
that the American Government consent to the collection of this tax from
American nationals in Egypt.

Just prior to the receipt of the Department’s instruction, under reply, a
further inquiry was received from the Ministry for Foreign Affairs with
regard to the views of the Government of the United States. A copy and
translation of the note of inquiry referred to is enclosed.

The Department states that if the other Powers enjoying capitulatory rights
in Egypt consent to the collection of this tax from their nationals in the
cities of Cairo, Alexandria, Port Said, Ismalia and Suez, the Legation may
inform the Egyptian Government that this Government has no objection to
the collection of the Gaffir Tax from its nationals resident in the cities above
mentioned. I accordingly made inquiry and ascertained that, pending the
establishment of an equable system of collecting the Gaffir Tax outside of
the cities mentioned, the British Government, for one, have withheld their
consent to the collection of the tax, even in the cities. As long as one
important Power has thus made its consent conditional upon the devising of
the system referred to, it was obvious under the instruction that the
Department would not desire the Legation to give as yet the formal consent
of the United States to the collection of this tax, even in the cities
mentioned. I am very reliably informed that all the other Powers have

adopted the same attitude. The British High Commissioner very kindly
furnished me with a copy of the formal reply of his Government, a copy and
translation of which I transmit herewith. I also enclose a copy of the
Legation’s Note Verbale of today adopting the same attitude.
I have [etc.]

STEWART JOHNSON
[Enclosure]
The American Legation to the Egyptian Ministry for Foreign Affairs
No. 168
The Legation of the United States of America presents its compliments to
the Royal Egyptian Ministry for Foreign Affairs, and has the honor to
the application of the decree of Feb. 16th last, relative to the recovery of the
Gaffir Tax from foreigners resident in Egypt, and requesting the reply of the
Government of the United States on this subject.

The Legation has now received the views of the Government of the United
States which are to the effect that in principle it has no objection to the
collection of the Gaffir Tax from its nationals resident in the cities of Cairo,
Alexandria, Port Said, Ismalia and Suez. However, until some system of
collecting the Gaffir Tax outside of the cities above mentioned is devised so
as thoroughly to safeguard the tax payers from unreasonable assessment,
the American Government cannot admit the application of the Gaffir Tax to
American citizens resident outside of the cities.

The Department of State would be pleased to have the Legation keep it
informed of the progress made towards devising a method of collection of
the Gaffir Tax outside of the cities referred to above, in order to avoid
present difficulties, before pronouncing itself definitely upon the question
of the application to its nationals, whether resident within or outside of the
cities mentioned, of the provisions of the decree of February 16th last. The

[Document 655]
The President of the Metropolitan Museum of Art (De Forest) to
the Secretary of State
NEW YORK, January 15, 1923.

[Received January 20.]

SIR: In behalf of the Metropolitan Museum of Art I transmit to you the
following resolutions unanimously adopted by our Board of Trustees today,
and trust that in so far as it properly comes within your powers you will
seek to obtain, in behalf of the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the other
art museums of the country, the desired action.

WHEREAS: The Trustees of the Metropolitan Museum of Art have
received formal notification from the Service des Antiquités of
the Egyptian Government that at the end of the season of 1922–23
the said Government intends to modify article 11 of the Law No.
14 of 1912 relating to the division of antiquities unearthed in
Egypt by foreign excavators. The purpose of this modification, as
set forth in the communication of the Service, is to revoke the
provision under which the Metropolitan Museum of Art, in
common with all other organizations excavating in Egypt, has for
many years been entitled to and has received one half of the
objects found in its excavations, and to give the said Service full
power to retain everything thus found that it may desire for its
own collections, without any obligatory division whatever, this
new arrangement to become operative for the season of 1923–24,
and
WHEREAS: The Trustees of the Metropolitan Museum of Art would
not be justified in using its funds for work in Egypt under
conditions of such uncertainty as regards results of direct benefit
to the Museum, be it

RESOLVED: That the Director of the Museum be and hereby is
instructed to see that the work of its Expedition in Egypt is
brought to an end as soon after the new ruling of the Service des
Antiquites goes into effect as can be done consistently with the
interests of the Museum.

RESOLVED: That a copy of these preambles and resolutions, with the
seal of the Museum affixed, be forwarded to the Director-General
of the Service des Antiquités through Mr. Lythgoe.
Yours respectfully,
ROBERT W. DE FOREST

[Document 656]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Howell)
WASHINGTON, January 29, 1923.

SIR: There is enclosed herewith for your information copies of letters dated
January 15 from the Metropolitan Museum of Art and from the American
Federation of Arts9 with regard to the modification of the provisions of
Egyptian law relating to the division of antiquities unearthed in Egypt by
foreign excavators. You will note that The Metropolitan Museum of Art and
The American Federation of Arts have reached the conclusion that, if the
proposed changes are put into effect and foreign excavators deprived of the
right to share in the results of their excavations, the trust funds of the
interested American societies could no longer be applied to excavation
work in Egypt and that all such work on the part of American institutions!
or individuals would necessarily be brought to an end. A copy of the
Department’s reply to these communications is enclosed herewith.
It is desired that you consult with your British, French and Italian
colleagues in order to ascertain what steps, if any, they may contemplate on
behalf of their nationals. If you deem it appropriate you may act with your
colleagues, who, in the opinion of the Department, may be equally
interested, in presenting this matter in an appropriate and tactful manner to
the Egyptian Government. You may indicate that you presume it is not the
desire of that government to take action which would eliminate American
enterprise from a share in the excavation work in Egypt as such a step
would not appear to be in the interest of either American or Egyptian
nationals and that you hope some arrangement may be made for a
satisfactory adjustment of the question.

In case you should ascertain that no representations are contemplated by
either the British, French, or Italian Governments or that special
arrangements may have been reached by these governments to protect the

[Document 657]
The Minister in Egypt (Howell) to the Secretary of State
CAIRO, March 5, 1923.

[Received March 28.]

No. 284
SIR: I have the honor to advise that in an interview with Lord Allenby11 held
this morning at the Residency touching the proposed Egyptian law, with
regard to the modification of same which affects the Division of Antiquities
un-earthed in Egypt by foreign excavators, his Lordship stated after a brief
review of the measure or law now in vogue: that the law giving to foreign
excavators substantially onehalf of the antiquities un-earthed would expire
with the season of 1923, and that it was true that there was a proposition
made, as he understood it, from the Director of Antiquities in Egypt, M.
Lacau, to modify this law so that all antiquities unearthed in Egypt would
remain the property of the Egyptian Government and that under this
provision it would be wholly optional with the Egyptian Government as to
whether or not any such findings would be turned over to foreign
excavators. His Lordship further said that many protests had been filed with
him by societies in the British Empire interested in these antiquities, against
this proposed law. That he had also received like protests from various
societies in the same category from the United States; that there was no
question but what this proposition by M. Lacau was supported by the late
Egyptian Ministry, but as indicated, this was only a proposed law, that the
Ministry, which had indicated its desire to support the proposition of M.
Lacau was a thing of the past, and that he had a letter (and at the same time
read the letter to me) from Soliman Pasha, the Undersecretary of Public
Works of Egypt, to the effect that no law touching this matter would be
promulgated until after a very careful consideration of the protests of the
various governments interested, had been very carefully considered.

[Document 658]
The Minister in Egypt (Howell) to the Secretary of State
9. Officially informed that antiquities law now prevailing will continue
season of 1923–24 permitting our museums to continue their work.
HOWELL

[Document 659]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Howell)
[Paraphrase]
question of a further extension of its right to excavate and to keep half of
the antiquities discovered has recently been taken up with the Department
by the Metropolitan Museum of Art. The Department desires telegraphic
report as to whether the Egyptian Government has recently arrived at any
decision in this matter affecting the rights held by American archeological
institutions under article 12 of the Egyptian law of 1912.
The difficulties respecting the tomb of Tutankhamen reported between
Howard Carter13 and the Egyptian Government lead the Department to
believe that this may not be the best time to make representations in behalf
of American institutions. Pending further instructions, therefore, you should
not make formal representations. A telegraphic report on the situation is
desired, however, to enable the Department to take the most timely and
effective action in behalf of American institutions of learning which are
interested in archeological enterprise in Egypt.

HUGHES

[Document 660]
The Minister in Egypt (Howell) to the Secretary of State
decision affecting the right of American archaeological institutions under
by it March 1923.
of Antiquities, failed in his alleged attempt since this decision was reached
to have the American excavators sign an agreement. Representatives of
American interests informed M. Lacau that they wanted a decision which
would extend the old law through 1924. The present is not an opportune

[Document 661]
The Director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art (Robinson) to
the Secretary of State
NEW YORK, May 20, 1924.

[Received May 21.]

MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: In conformity with my agreement to keep your
Department closely in touch with the progress of events concerning the
endeavors of this Museum to prevent a change in, the antiquity laws of
Egypt which would affect the rights we have hitherto enjoyed, especially
that entitling us to one half of the portable antiquities discovered in our
excavations, I beg to inform you of the following developments which have
occurred since my return from Washington on May 15.

On May 17 a cablegram was received at this Museum from Mr. Ambrose
Lansing, a member of our expedition who still remains in Egypt, which
decoded reads as follows:
Old antiquities law will not be changed, but permits will include
Lacau’s proposed basis of division which will be interpreted
liberally, the Egyptian Government not desiring cessation of
work. Howell’s sailing delayed.

As you will observe, in spite of the statement that the law will not be
changed, the words which I have underscored do constitute a very
important change, and one which affects most seriously the conditions
under which we should be allowed to work. Indeed it embodies the very
project which M. Lacau has been trying to enforce for the last two years,
and which we have been doing our utmost to prevent. It will bring about a
situation in which this, Museum cannot continue its work of excavation in
Egypt, as it gives us no rights or assurances whatever on the point at issue.
Consequently, at a meeting of our Board of Trustees yesterday afternoon the
following vote was unanimously passed:

RESOLVED: That the Director be instructed to forward the following
cablegram to Mr. Lansing:
Yours received. Inform Dr. Howell that Trustees
positively decline to resume excavations under
conditions proposed or under any permit which
threatens or infringes upon the eminently fair and
equitable arrangement under which Metmusart has
hitherto excavated.

This vote was transmitted to Mr. Lansing by cable immediately after the
meeting.

In sending you this information, and in behalf of the Trustees of the
Museum, I beg to express the hope that we may continue to count upon the
sympathy of the State Department in our position, and the continuance of
the support which has been so very helpful to us in the past towards
maintaining the rights and privileges which we, in common with all other
foreign excavators in Egypt, have enjoyed for many years past. The
situation appears to be critical and to call for immediate action.
Very respectfully yours
EDWARD ROBINSON

[Document 662]
The Minister in Egypt (Howell) to the Secretary of State
CAIRO, May 27, 1924.

[Received June 17.]

No. 495
to herewith enclose a copy of the full text of the decision rendered in regard
to the Antiquities Law. I am at the same time enclosing a copy of my Aide-
I may state that on April 26th, I saw the Minister of Public Works who
controls for the time being this matter, and made a strenuous effort to have
this question remain exactly as it was during the year 1922–1923, but I was
unable to do so. It will be seen, however, that no reference is made to the
Lacau proposition, that is to say, leaving the decision wholly in the hands of
Lacau to say whether or not there shall be a division of any of the articles
found.

I shall be glad to discuss this question further with the Department and with
the Metropolitan Museum when I am in the States.
I have [etc.]

J. MORTON HOWELL
[Enclosure 1]
The American Legation to the Egyptian Ministry for Foreign Affairs
CAIRO, April 22, 1924.

AIDE MÉMOIRE
The American Minister in a conversation with His Excellency the Royal
Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs this morning, briefly outlined the
situation as he understood it, with regard to the proposed change in the
Antiquities Law (adopted 1912).

The American Minister observed that this measure was proposed and its
passage was insisted upon by M. Lacau, Director of Antiquities, one year
ago and that those engaged in the work of excavation, holding concessions
from the Egyptian Government representing various museums in other
countries, had found the proposed law so out of keeping or conformity with
the provisions which had hitherto obtained (in the Law of 1912), and at the
same time prejudicial to the interests of these various museums, as to
positively preclude the possibility of further work being carried on by these
museums if this contemplated change was made effective.

It was held by them, and especially by the Metropolitan Museum of New
York, that the work carried on by them, was wholly dependent upon
voluntary subscriptions by individuals interested in archaeology and in the
securement of these institutions of objects of historical interest discovered
in the excavations being made here.

It was pointed out by the Minister that as he understood it, these various
museums had not and would not, be technical in the division of articles
found as the result of excavations; that only such articles as were, perhaps,
found to be duplicates of those already possessed by the Royal Egyptian
Government would be available for foreign museums; and such other
objects as might be agreed upon within keeping of the Law on the fifty-fifty
percent basis.

The Minister further called attention to the fact that during the course of a
conversation with His Excellency the Minister of Public Works, Morcos
Hanna Pasha, on or about March 25, 1924, he alluded to this proposed
change in the Law of 1912, and observed that the various museums of the
United States had the impression, probably derived from the agitation as to

this proposed change in the law, together with the feeling which had gone
forth in America regarding the Carter controversy, that work of these
various museums in America was at an end. The Minister referred to a
newspaper clipping of April 1, 1924, which showed that already one of the
large museums in Pennsylvania, had decided to withdraw all forces from
Egypt engaged in this line of work.

It was further pointed out, that as noted above, this proposed measure
whereby it was left entirely optional with the Egyptian Government as to
whether any articles found by those engaged in excavation work in Egypt
would be subject to division, would positively put a stop to all work by
other museums in America, and especially was this true of the Metropolitan
Museum of New York.

His Excellency, the Minister of Public Works in his reply stated
substantially, that: the Egyptian Government appreciated the work which
had been done by Americans in this country and when the proper time
arrived this matter referred to would be adjusted to the satisfaction of the
American people and American museums. Later on, however, the Minister
in question observed: “that all modification of the laws, depends upon
Parliament.”
The American Minister, wishes finally to observe, with respect to this
question, in speaking particularly of the Metropolitan Museum of New
York, that its budget is made up for the year’s work, for work of this kind in
Egypt, about May 15th, and it is most solicitous with respect as to what it
may depend upon for the coming year; indeed, it is incumbent upon it to
know upon what it may depend, if work this coming year and in future
years be continued.

[Enclosure 2—Translation]
The Egyptian Ministry for Foreign Affairs to the American Legation
CAIRO, May 27, 1924.

NOTE
By an aide mémoire, dated April 22nd, last, the American Legation
informed this Ministry of the fears of American Museums and especially
those of the Metropolitan Museum of New York concerning the matter of
the modifications which the Egyptian Government proposes to make in the
Law of 1912 concerning antiquities.

The competent Department, which the Ministry for Foreign Affairs has not
failed to address on this subject, has just advised that it cannot abandon the
plan of modifying the law in question in so far as it concerns the division of
antiquities found. However, it adds that it is not accurate that the Egyptian
Government does not wish to give any of the objects found. It desires only
not to be bound by the word “half” at the time of the division, so as to
establish easily and in conformity with general scientific interests, complete
and logical series of documents representing the continuity of Egyptian
civilisation. This duty fulfilled regarding science, the Egyptian Government
will be pleased to give foreign museums objects of equal importance which
will be sufficiently representative in their collections. It desires in that way
to thank and to encourage the excavators and to facilitate the study of
ancient Egypt in foreign university centers.

This change may, in fact, momentarily embarrass some scientific
institutions from a financial point of view, but this embarrassment should
not permit the sacrifice of scientific interests.

Besides, it should not be a matter of surprise, the Egyptian Government
having informed all those interested by a circular letter dated October 10,
system of division by halves would be applied for the last time during the
season of 1922–1923.

In bringing the foregoing to the attention of the American Legation, the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs seizes this occasion to renew to it the assurance
of its high consideration.

[Document 663]
Treaty between the United States of America and Finland, Signed
at Helsingfors, August 1, 19241
The United States of America and Finland desiring to promote the cause of
justice, have resolved to conclude a treaty for the extradition of fugitives
from justice between the two countries and have appointed for that purpose
the following Plenipotentiaries:
The President of the United States of America, Charles L. Kagey,
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the United
States of America to Finland, and
the President of the Republic of Finland, Hj. J. Procopé, Minister
of Foreign Affairs of Finland.

Who, after having communicated to each other their respective full powers,
found to be in good and due form, have agreed upon and concluded the
following articles: ARTICLE I
It is agreed that the Government of the United States and the Government
of Finland shall, upon requisition duly made as herein provided, deliver up
to justice any person, who may be charged with, or may have been
convicted of, any of the crimes specified in Article II of the present Treaty
committed within the jurisdiction of one of the High Contracting Parties,
and who shall seek an asylum or shall be found within the territories of the
other; provided that such surrender shall take place only upon such
evidence of criminality, as according to the laws of the place where the
fugitive or person so charged shall be found, would justify his apprehension
and commitment for trial if the crime or offence had been there committed.

ARTICLE II

Persons shall be delivered up according to the provisions of the present
Treaty, who shall have been charged with or convicted of any of the
following crimes:
1. Murder, comprehending the crimes designated by the terms
parricide, assassination, nianslaughter when voluntary, poisoning
or infanticide.
2. The attempt to commit murder.
3. Rape, abortion, and the carnal knowledge of a girl under the
age of twelve years.
4. Abduction or detention of women or girls for immoral
purposes.
5. Bigamy.
6. Arson.
7. Wilful and unlawful destruction or obstruction of railroads,
which endangers human life.
8. Crimes committed at sea:
(a) Piracy, as commonly known and defined by the law
of nations, or by statute;
(b) Wrongfully sinking or destroying a vessel at sea or
attempting to do so;
(c) Mutiny or conspiracy by two or more members of
the crew or other persons on board of a vessel on the
high seas, for the purpose of rebelling against the
authority of the Captain or Commander of such vessel,
or by fraud or violence taking possession of such
vessel;

(d) Assault on board ship upon the high seas with intent
to do actual bodily harm.
9. Burglary, robbery with violence, and larceny when the amount
stolen exceeds two hundred dollars or Finnish equivalent.
10. Forgery or the utterance of forged papers and including the
forgery or falsification of the official acts of the Government or
public authority, including Courts of Justice, or the uttering or
fraudulent use of any of the same.
11. The fabrication of counterfeit money, whether coin or paper,
counterfeit titles or coupons of public debt, created by National,
State, Provincial, Territorial, Local or Municipal Governments,
bank notes or other instruments of public credit, counterfeit seals,
stamps, dies and marks of State or public administrations, and the
utterance, circulation or fraudulent use of the above mentioned
objects.
12. Embezzlement committed within the jurisdiction of one or the
other party by public officers or depositaries, and embezzlement
by any person or persons hired, salaried or employed, to the
detriment of their employers or principals, where, in either case,
the amount embezzled exceeds two hundred dollars or Finnish
equivalent.
13. Kidnapping of minors or adults, defined to be the abduction or
detention of a person or persons, in order to exact money from
them, their families or any other person or persons, or for any
other unlawful end.
14. Obtaining money, valuable securities or other property by
false pretences or receiving any money, valuable securities or
other property knowing the same to have been unlawfully
obtained through theft, robbery or extortion, where the amount of
money or the value of the property so obtained or received
exceeds two hundred dollars or Finnish equivalent.

15. Perjury or subornation of perjury.
16. Crimes and offences against the laws of both countries for the
suppression of slavery and slave trading.
17. Extradition shall also take place for participation in any of the
crimes before mentioned as an accessory before the fact; provided
such participation be punishable by the laws of both the High
Contracting Parties.

ARTICLE III
The provisions of the present Treaty shall not import a claim of extradition
for any crime or offence of a political character, nor for acts connected with
such crimes or offences; and no person surrendered by or to either of the
High Contracting Parties in virtue of this Treaty shall be tried or punished
for a political crime or offence. When the offence charged comprises the act
either of murder or assassination or of poisoning, either consummated or
attempted, the fact that the offence was committed or attempted against the
life of the Head of a foreign State or against the life of any member of his
family, shall not be deemed sufficient to sustain that such crime or offence
was of a political character: or was an act connected with crimes or offences
of a political character.

ARTICLE IV
No person shall be tried for any crime or offence other than that for which
he was surrendered.

ARTICLE V
A fugitive criminal shall not be surrendered under the provisions hereof,
when, from lapse of time or other lawful cause, according to the laws of the
place within the jurisdiction of which the crime was committed, the
criminal is exempt from prosecution or punishment for the offence for
which the surrender is asked.

ARTICLE VI
If a fugitive criminal whose surrender may be claimed pursuant to the
stipulations hereof, be actually under prosecution, out on bail or in custody,
for a crime or offence committed in the country where he has sought
asylum, or shall have been convicted thereof, his extradition may be
deferred until such proceedings be determined, and until he shall have been
set at liberty in due course of law.

ARTICLE VII
If a fugitive criminal claimed by one of the parties hereto, shall be also
claimed by one or more powers pursuant to treaty provisions, on account of
crimes committed within their jurisdiction, such criminal shall be delivered
to that State whose demand is first received.

ARTICLE VIII
Under the stipulations of this Treaty, neither of the High Contracting Parties
shall be bound to deliver up its own citizens.

ARTICLE IX
The expense of arrest, detention, examination and transportation of the
accused shall be paid by the Government which has preferred the demand
for extradition.

ARTICLE X
Everything found in the possession of the fugitive criminal at the time of his
arrest, whether being the proceeds of the crime or offence, or which may be
material as evidence in making proof of the crime, shall so far as
practicable, according to the laws of either of the High Contracting Parties,
be delivered up with his person at the time of surrender. Nevertheless, the
rights of a third party with regard to the articles referred to, shall be duly
respected.

ARTICLE XI

The stipulations of the present Treaty shall be applicable to all territory
wherever situated, belonging to either of the High Contracting Parties or in
the occupancy and under the control of either of them, during such
occupancy or control.

Requisitions for the surrender of fugitives from justice shall be made by the
respective diplomatic agents of the High Contracting Parties. In the event of
the absence of such agents from the country or its seat of Government, or
where extradition is sought from territory included in the preceding
paragraphs, other than the United States or Finland, requisitions may be
made by superior consular officers. It shall be competent for such
diplomatic or superior consular officers to ask and obtain a mandate or
preliminary warrant of arrest for the person whose surrender is sought,
whereupon the judges and magistrates of the two Governments shall
respectively have power and authority, upon complaint made under oath, to
issue a warrant for the apprehension of the person charged, in order that he
or she may be brought before such judge or magistrate, that the evidence of
criminality may be heard and considered and if, on such hearing, the
evidence be deemed sufficient to sustain the charge, it shall be the duty of
the examining judge or magistrate to certify it to the proper executive
authority, that a warrant may issue for the surrender of the fugitive.
In case of urgency, the application for arrest and detention may be
addressed directly to the competent magistrate in conformity to the statutes
in force.

The person provisionally arrested shall be released, unless within two
months from the date of arrest in Finland, or from the date of commitment
in the United States, the formal requisition for surrender with the
documentary proofs hereinafter prescribed be made as aforesaid by the
diplomatic agent of the demanding Government, or, in his absence, by a
consular officer thereof.

If the fugitive criminal shall have been convicted of the crime for which his
surrender is asked, a copy of the sentence of the court before which such
conviction took place, duly authenticated, shall be produced. If, however,
the fugitive is merely charged with crime, a duly authenticated copy of the
warrant of arrest in the country where the crime was committed, and of the

depositions upon which such warrant may have been issued, shall be
produced, with such other evidence or proof as may be deemed competent
in the case.

ARTICLE XII
In every case of a request made by either of the High Contracting Parties
for the arrest, detention or extradition of fugitive criminals, the appropriate
legal officers of the country where the proceedings of extradition are had,
shall assist the officers of the Government demanding the extradition before
the respective judges and magistrates, by every legal means within their
power; and no claim whatever for compensation for any of the services so
rendered shall be made against the Government demanding the extradition;
provided, however, that any officer or officers of the surrendering
Government so giving assistance, who shall, in the usual course of their
duty, receive no salary or compensation other than specific fees for services
performed, shall be entitled to receive from the Government demanding the
extradition the customary fees for the acts or services performed by them, in
the same manner and to the same amount as though such acts or services
had been performed in ordinary criminal proceedings under the laws of the
country of which they are officers.

ARTICLE XIII
The present Treaty shall be ratified by the High Contracting Parties in
accordance with their respective constitutional methods and shall take effect
on the date of the exchange of ratifications which shall take place at
Helsingfors as soon as possible.

ARTICLE XIV
The present Treaty shall remain in force for a period of ten years, and in
case neither of the High Contracting Parties shall have given notice one
year before the expiration of that period of its intention to terminate the
Treaty, it shall continue in force until the expiration of one year from the
date on which such notice of termination shall be given by either of the
High Contracting Parties.

In witness whereof the above-named Plenipotentiaries have signed the
present Treaty and have hereunto affixed their seals.
Done in duplicate at Helsingfors this 1st day of August nineteen hundred
and twenty-four.

[SEAL] CHARLES L. KAGEY
[SEAL] HJ. J. PROCOPÉ
exchanged at Helsingfors, Mar. 23, 1925; proclaimed by the President, Mar.

France:

[Document 664]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PARIS, January 4, 1924—noon.
3. The French Foreign Office does not want to insert in mandate convention
mention of our extradition treaty of 19092 … The Foreign Office states that
we are fully protected by article 7 of the mandate3 …
Study is being made of the question of consular conventions. I do not
expect there will be any opposition unless there is some special privilege
granted in our consular convention of 18534 which the French might have
to extend to everyone else if it was mentioned in our convention. I was
questioned by Fromageot5 about our convention regarding Palestine and
replied that I was uninformed. Fromageot is going to confer with Hurst
who is coming Sunday for the Claims Commission. I anticipate that I will
be informed afterwards that the French are ready to sign our convention.
Do you accept French view on extradition? To me it appears reasonable.
HERRICK

[Document 665]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
new extradition treaty with France but of extending the present treaty as
provided by article 7 of the mandate. The Department understands that
under article II of the proposed convention and under article 7 of the
mandate it would be the duty of France to extradite to the United States
from Syria. It is doubtful, however, whether there would be a reciprocal
obligation for the United States, to extradite to Syria. Under the laws of the
United States this Government would not have the power to extradite in the
absence of suck an obligation. (See Moore, J. B.: Digest of International
Law, vol IV, pp. 246–253.) A special provision extending the extradition
treaty to Syria should be included in the convention in order to meet this
The Department believes that the insertion in the convention of a provision
for reciprocal extradition, as indicated in the new article VII proposed in
our telegram 466, would be in the interest of France, but it is ready to
proceed to the signing of the convention with the reference to extradition
omitted if the Foreign Office prefers that procedure after you have orally
presented these considerations.

You may inform the Foreign Office that a further communication regarding
the Palestine convention has been received from the British Government
and that the Department plans to take up negotiations with that Government
for an early conclusion of a convention regarding Palestine similar to the
one concerning Syria. The Department in 1922 made the same proposals,
mutatis mutandis, as you doubtless know, regarding Syria and Palestine.

Hocues

[Document 666]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PARIS, January 16, 1924—noon.

[Received 3: p.m.]

Office that by the terms of the Syrian mandate any provisions in our
convention relative to Syria must be applied to the benefit of all other
countries. … Your attitude is thoroughly understood by the French and they
appreciate your notifying them that unless our extradition treaty is
mentioned in the convention its benefits will only be unilateral. The French,
however, believe that the advantage of not having to give such privileges …
greatly outweighs this disadvantage, and for this reason they do not wish to
have our extradition treaty mentioned.

The only point in our consular convention which raises any difficulty is the
right of either Government to appoint consuls to any place that it sees fit.
The French fear that … might take advantage of this to appoint consuls in
all the little frontier towns, where they might foment trouble. It is therefore
proposed by the Foreign Office that the convention remain as at present but
that in an official note the French will agree that all the advantages
mentioned in your telegram 466 of December 178 will be granted to the
United States. The note would mention the rights derived under our
consular convention and particular mention would be made of our right to
appoint consuls at any place we wish.

Fromageot and Bargeton9 have talked the whole matter over with me and
should the suggestion of a covering note from the Foreign Office for any
reason not be acceptable to you I am sure they will be glad to adopt any
other plan which you might prefer which would meet their objections …

HERRICK

[Document 667]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
(1) On understanding outlined in your telegram Department is
willing to proceed to signing of convention regarding mandate for
Syria and Lebanon. We understand the proposal to be as follows:
The French will write a note confirming the understanding
most-favored-nation treatment and agreeing to grant to the United
States the other advantages in Syria and Lebanon mentioned in
that telegram with particular respect to consular rights and
extradition.

(2) In order to eliminate unnecessary correspondence, as
substantial agreement has now been reached, it would facilitate
matters if the French would submit to you tentatively in draft
form the communication mentioned above for you to telegraph to
the Department. In this way the Department could ascertain
whether the points which it desires to safeguard are covered
satisfactorily.

(3) The Department will promptly send you full powers to sign if
the communication from the Foreign Office is satisfactory.
HUGHES

[Document 668]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
PARIS, February 1, 1924.

[Received February 14.]

No. 3908
translation in triplicate of the draft note which is to be written by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs on the occasion of the signing of the Franco-
American Convention relative to Syria and the Lebanon.
This note was sent to me by the Foreign Office with the statement that they
only desire to meet your wishes and are prepared to conclude matters as
soon as you have either signified your approval or indicated any
modifications in the text of the note which you may desire.
I have [etc.]

MYRON T. HERRICK
[Enclosure—Translation]
Draft of Note To Be Sent by the French Minister for Foreign Affairs (Poincaré) to the American
Ambassador (Herrick)
MR. AMBASSADOR: By your letter of December 18th last, Your Excellency was
good enough to make known the points which your Government would like
to have defined in view of the conclusion of the convention relative to the
Mandate of France in Syria and the Lebanon.

The Federal Government would like to receive the assurance that its
nationals, as well as itself, will benefit in these countries by the most
favorable treatment resulting not only from the Agreement recently
concluded between France and Italy, but by all other agreements or
conventions which may be concluded between the French Government and
other governments concerning Syria and the Lebanon. The French
Government willingly gives this assurance to the Government of the United
States of America.

In the second place, the Federal Government desires that it should be agreed
that the extradition treaties concluded between the United States and France
should be applicable to the Syrian and Lebanon territories. I have the honor
to point out to Your Excellency that Article 7 of the Mandate provides that:
“while awaiting the conclusion of special extradition conventions, the
extradition treaties in force between foreign Powers and the Mandatory
shall be applied in the territories of Syria and the Lebanon”. On this
account, the extradition treaties between the United States and France are
already applicable and would only cease to be so if the Federal Government
should desire to have substituted therefor a convention applying especially
to the mandated countries.

Lastly, the Federal Government expresses the desire that the Consular
Convention in force between the United States and France may also be
applicable in Syria and the Lebanon and especially those of its provisions
which refer to the immunities and privileges of consuls. The French
Government would very willingly introduce a clause on this subject into the
draft convention to be concluded with the United States of America if, on
account of the peculiar regime of the mandated countries, the insertion of
this clause in a convention might not cause reactions, as regards a still
undetermined number of other states, whose bearing it is difficult to
foresee. Therefore, the French Government thinks it preferable to give in
the present letter to the Federal Government the assurance that it will see no
objection to the establishment, in any part of Syria and the Lebanon where
the Federal Government might deem it useful, of consuls, vice-consuls and
consular agents of the United States who will enjoy the treatment accorded

by international custom. It also gives the assurance that as far as the
privileges and immunities attached to their duties are concerned, the consuls
and vice-consuls of the United States will benefit by all the provisions of
the Franco American Convention of 1853, it being understood that the said
consuls and vice-consuls shall be citizens of the United States.
The French Government having agreed, at the request of the Federal
Government, not to maintain in favor of consuls of both countries the right
stipulated in the Convention of 1853 to request the arrest in the United
States and in France of deserters from war and merchant ships, it is
understood, on the other hand, that this right will not be exercised by the
consuls of France with regard to Syrian and Lebanon sailors in the United
States.

I would be much obliged if Your Excellency would be good enough to
inform me if these assurances give satisfaction to the Federal Government
and allow it to proceed to the signature of the draft convention drawn up on
July 13, 1922, with the sole changes in drafting proposed by Your
Excellency and recalled in the enclosure herewith.

Please accept, Mr. Ambassador, the assurances of my very high
consideration.

[Document 669]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
(1) Paragraph 5 of French draft note refers to agreement of French
Government “not to maintain in favor of consuls of both countries
the rights stipulated in the Convention of 1853 to request the
arrest in the United States and in France of deserters from war
and merchant ships, etc., etc.” The United States considers that
which deal with this matter, were abrogated on July 1, 1916, by
notice given in pursuance of the La Follette Act of March 14 [4],
1915. In this connection it is noted that in the previous sentence
of the draft note (i. e. last sentence, paragraph four) the French
Foreign Office gives assurances that so far as the privileges and
immunities attached to their duties are concerned the consuls and
vice consuls of the United States will benefit by “all the
provisions of the Franco-American Convention of 1853”. The
statement in the French note might be taken to imply that Articles
8 and 9 are not abrogated but that there is an understanding not to
exercise the rights conferred thereby. In order not to bring into
question the position of the United States that Articles 8 and 9 of
the Convention are abrogated, it is desired that the statement last
quoted should be amended to read “all the existing provisions of
the Franco-American Consular Convention of 1853”.

(2) For the reasons hereafter set forth, Paragraph five of the
French draft note should be omitted. The reference in that
paragraph to rights not to be exercised by consuls of France with
regard to Syrian and Lebanon sailors in the United States carries
the inference that the application of the Consular Convention of

1853 would be reciprocal, i. e., apply to nationals of Syria and the
Lebanon in the United States as well as to American nationals in
the mandate territory. This is not the correct view. The same
principles apply to the Consular Convention as in the case of the
p.m.) In the case of the Consular Convention it is even clearer
that its provisions cannot be made applicable to nationals of Syria
and the Lebanon in the United States, since there is no provision
in the Mandate extending the application of Consular
Conventions between France and other countries such as is found
in Article 7 of the Mandate with respect to extradition
conventions. The extension of treaty rights enjoyed by French
nationals under the Consular Convention to nationals of Syria and
the Lebanon in the United States could only be effected by Treaty.
An appropriate Article in the proposed Convention was
accordingly suggested by this Government. If France, for reasons
which she deems satisfactory, does not desire to have such an
Article incorporated in the Convention, the Department will not
press the matter, since the French Government states that it is
prepared to extend to the United States and its nationals in Syria
the benefits of the provisions of the Extradition Treaty and the
Consular Convention. It is believed, however, in order that the
record may be entirely clear, that the Department’s view in this
matter should be communicated in writing to the French
Government along the following lines, with appropriate reference
to your previous written and oral representations.

(3)
“In previous communications and conversations (here
make appropriate reference by date) I have had the
honor to bring to Your Excellency’s attention the desire
of my Government that the existing provisions of the
Extradition Treaty of 1909 and Consular Convention of
1853 between the United States and France should be
reciprocally extended to the United States and to Syria
and the Lebanon by an appropriate provision to this

effect in the proposed Convention with regard to the
Mandate. It is my understanding that for reasons which
have already been explained it is not the desire of your
Government to include such a provision but that the
French Government is prepared to assure to the United
States and to American nationals in the mandated
territory the rights and privileges provided under the
Treaty and Convention respectively.

I am instructed by my Government to express its
appreciation
of
the
assurances
of
the
French
Government in this respect and to state that on the basis
of this understanding, and of the assurances which you
have embodied in your communication of November 2,
1923, and of this date (here insert date of French draft
note as finally communicated) is prepared to proceed to
the signature of the Convention.

In
order,
however,
that
there
may
be
no
misunderstanding with regard to the position of
nationals of Syria and the Lebanon in the United States,
my Government desires me to state that the provisions
of the Consular Convention of 1853 would not be
applicable with respect to such nationals in the absence
of a treaty provision specifically providing for such
application, and that, furthermore, the Government of
the United States could not assure the application to
such nationals in the United States of the provisions of
the Extradition Treaty of 1909, in the absence of a
treaty provision so providing. At the same time, I take
pleasure in informing you that upon the conclusion and
ratification of the Mandate Convention my Government
will raise no objection to the assumption by the
diplomatic and consular officers of France of the
protection of the interests of the nationals of Syria and
the Lebanon in the United States.”

(4) You may show above note to the French Foreign Office in
draft form and in case the latter is prepared to omit paragraph five
of their draft note and to make the slight amendments suggested
in paragraph one of this telegram and in the paragraph next below
numbered (5) and thoroughly appreciates the position of this
Government with regard to the non-reciprocal character of the
Consular and Extradition Treaties, the Department is prepared to
proceed to the immediate signature of the Mandate Convention as
with the slight modifications indicated in enclosure to your 3908,
together with Department’s draft communication quoted above
should be exchanged at the time of and just prior to the signature
of the Convention.
enclosed with your 3645, November 7, contains important
assurances which supplement the draft note enclosed with your
3908, Department desires that latter French note should refer to
the former. Such reference could appropriately be inserted in the
concluding paragraph of draft note, after “these assurances” and
before “give satisfaction”, as follows: “as well as the assurances
contained in the communication of November 2, 1923”.
(6) Telegraph promptly whether agreement can be reached on this
basis and full powers will be immediately sent you for signature.
HUGHES

[Document 670]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PARIS, March 7, 1924—noon.
propose in draft note are accepted by the Foreign Office which much
appreciates the attitude of the American Government with respect to the
nonreciprocal character of the extradition and consular treaties. However,
the Foreign Office would like to eliminate the reference to conversations in
the first line of your draft note. These conversations were between Bargeton
and Whitehouse17 and everything in them is already expressed in the notes
or the convention. In the opinion of the Foreign Office, while it would be
harmless at the time to refer to oral conversations it might bring up the
impression at a late date that some agreement was made not included in the
written documents.

HERRICK

[Document 671]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Extract]
Department concurs in omission of reference to “conversations” in first line
proceed to immediate signature of convention in English and in French and
to exchange of communications as heretofore outlined. President has issued
full power reading as follows: . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
HUGHES

[Document 672]
The French President of the Council (Poincaré) to the American
Ambassador (Herrick)
[Translation]
PARIS, April 4, 1924.

MR. AMBASSADOR: By your letter of December 18th, last, Your Excellency was
good enough to make known the points which your Government would like
to have defined in view of the conclusion of the convention relative to the
Mandate of France in Syria and the Lebanon.

The Federal Government would like to receive the assurance that its
nationals, as well as itself, will benefit in these countries by the most
favorable treatment resulting not only from the Agreement recently
concluded between France and Italy, but by all other agreements or
conventions which may be concluded between the French Government and
other governments concerning Syria and the Lebanon. The French
Government willingly gives this assurance to the Government of the United
States of America.

In the second place, the Federal Government desires that it should he agreed
that the extradition treaties concluded between the United States and France
should be applicable to the Syrian and Lebanon territories. I have the honor
to point out to Your Excellency that Article 7 of the Mandate provides that:
“while awaiting the conclusion of special extradition conventions, the
extradition treaties in force between foreign Powers and the Mandatory
shall be applied in the territories of Syria and the Lebanon”. On this
account, the extradition treaties between the United States and France are
already applicable and would only cease to be so if the Federal Government
should desire to have substituted therefor a convention applying especially
to the mandated countries.

[Document 673]
The American Ambassador (Herrick) to the French President of
the Council (Poincaré)
PARIS, April 4, 1924.

No. 2675
MONSIEUR LE PRÉSIDENT DU CONSEIL: In previous communications dated October 24th
and December 18th, 1923, I have had the honor to bring to Your
Excellency’s attention the desire of my Government that the existing
provisions of the Extradition Treaty of 1909 and the Consular Convention
of 1853 between the United States and France should be reciprocally
extended to the United States and to Syria and the Lebanon by an
appropriate provision to this effect in the proposed convention. With regard
to the Mandate, it is my understanding that, for reasons which have already
been explained, it is not the desire of your Government to include such a
proposal, but that the French Government is prepared to assure to the
United States and to American nationals in the mandated territory the rights
and privileges provided under the Treaty and Convention respectively.
I am instructed by my Government to express its appreciation of the
assurances of the French Government in this respect and to state that, on the
basis of this understanding and of the assurances which you have embodied
prepared to proceed to the signature of the convention.

In order, however, that there may be no misunderstanding with regard to the
position of nationals of Syria and the Lebanon in the United States, my
Government desires me to state that the provisions of the Consular
Convention of 1853 would not be applicable with respect to such nationals
in the absence of a treaty provision specifically providing for such
application, and that, furthermore, the Government of the United States

[Document 674]
Convention between the United States of America and France,
Signed at Paris, April 4, 192425
THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND THE PRESIDENT OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC, Whereas by the
Treaty of Peace concluded with the Allied Powers, Turkey renounces all her
rights and titles over Syria and the Lebanon, and, Whereas Article 22 of the
Covenant of the League of Nations in the Treaty of Versailles provides that
in the case of certain territories which as a consequence of the late war
ceased to be under? the sovereignty of the states which formerly governed
them, mandates should be issued and that the terms of the mandate should
be explicitly defined in each case by the Council of the League, and,
Whereas the Principal Allied Powers have agreed to entrust the mandate for
Syria and the Lebanon to France, and, Whereas the terms of the said
mandate have been defined by the Council of the League of Nations as
follows: ARTICLE 1.—The Mandatory shall frame, within a period of three
years from the coming into force of this mandate, an organic law for Syria
and the Lebanon.

This organic law shall be framed in agreement with the native authorities
and shall take into account the rights, interests, and wishes of all the
population inhabiting the said territory. The Mandatory shall further enact
measures to facilitate the progressive development of Syria and the
Lebanon as independent States. Pending the coming into effect of the
organic law, the government of Syria and the Lebanon shall be conducted in
accordance with the spirit of this mandate.

The Mandatory shall, as far as circumstances permit, encourage local
autonomy.

ARTICLE 2.—The Mandatory may maintain its troops in the said territory for its
defence. It shall further be empowered, until the entry into force of the
organic law and the re-establishment of public security, to organise such

local militia as may be necessary for the defence of the territory, and to
employ this militia for defence and also for the maintenance of order. These
local forces may only be recruited from the inhabitants of the said territory.
The said militia shall thereafter be under the local authorities, subject to the
authority and the control which the Mandatory shall retain over these
forces. It shall not be used for purposes other than those above specified
save with the consent of the Mandatory.

Nothing shall preclude Syria and the Lebanon from contributing to the cost
of the maintenance of the forces of the Mandatory stationed in the territory.

The Mandatory shall at all times possess the right to make use of the ports,
railways and means of communication of Syria and the Lebanon for the
passage of its troops and of all materials, supplies and fuel.
ARTICLE 3.—The Mandatory shall be entrusted with the exclusive control of
the foreign relations of Syria and the Lebanon and with the right to issue
exequaturs to the consuls appointed by foreign Powers. Nationals of Syria
and the Lebanon living outside the limits of the territory shall be under the
diplomatic and consular protection of the Mandatory.

ARTICLE 4.—The Mandatory shall be responsible for seeing that no part of the
territory of Syria and the Lebanon is ceded or leased or in any way placed
under the control of a foreign Power.

ARTICLE 5.—The privileges and immunities of foreigners, including the
benefits of consular jurisdiction and protection as formerly enjoyed by
Capitulation or usage in the Ottoman Empire, shall not be applicable in
Syria and the Lebanon. Foreign consular tribunals shall, however, continue
to perform their duties until the coming into force of the new legal
organisation provided for in Article 6.

Unless the Powers whose nationals enjoyed the afore-mentioned privileges
and immunities on August 1st, 1914, shall have previously renounced the
right to their re-establishment, or shall have agreed to their non-application

during a specified period, these privileges and immunities shall at the
expiration of the mandate be immediately reestablished in their entirety or
with such modifications as may have been agreed upon between the Powers
concerned.

ARTICLE 6.—The Mandatory shall establish in Syria and the Lebanon a judicial
system which shall assure to natives as well as to foreigners a complete
guarantee of their rights.

Respect for the personal status of the various peoples and for their religious
interests shall be fully guaranteed. In particular, the control and
administration of Wakfs shall be exercised in complete accordance with
religious law and the dispositions of the founders.

ARTICLE 7.—Pending the conclusion of special extradition agreements, the
extradition treaties at present in force between foreign Powers and the
Mandatory shall apply within the territory of Syria and the Lebanon.
ARTICLE 8.—The Mandatory shall ensure to all complete freedom of
conscience and the free exercise of all forms of worship which are
consonant with public order and morality. No discrimination of any kind
shall be made between the inhabitants of Syria and the Lebanon on the
ground of differences in race, religion or language.

The Mandatory shall encourage public instruction, which shall be given
through the medium of the native languages in use in the territory of Syria
and the Lebanon.

The right of each community to maintain its own schools for the instruction
and education of its own members in its own language, while conforming to
such educational requirements of a general nature as the administration may
impose, shall not be denied or impaired.

ARTICLE 9.—The Mandatory shall refrain from all interference in the
administration of the Councils of management (Conseils de fabrique) or in
the management of religious communities and sacred shrines belonging to
the various religions, the immunity of which has been expressly guaranteed.

ARTICLE 10.—The supervision exercised by the Mandatory over the religious
missions in Syria and the Lebanon shall be limited to the maintenance of
public order and good government; the activities of these religious missions
shall in no way be restricted, nor shall their members be subjected to any
restrictive measures on the ground of nationality, provided that their
activities are confined to the domain of religion.

The religious missions may also concern themselves with education and
relief, subject to the general right of regulation and control by the
Mandatory or of the local government, in regard to education, public
instruction and charitable relief.

ARTICLE 11.—The Mandatory shall see that there is no discrimination in Syria
or the Lebanon against the nationals, including societies and associations,
of any State Member of the League of Nations as compared with its own
nationals, including societies and associations, or with the nationals of any
other foreign State in matters concerning taxation or commerce, the
exercise of professions or industries, or navigation, or in the treatment of
ships or aircraft. Similarly, there shall be no discrimination in Syria or the
Lebanon against goods originating in or destined for any of the said States;
there shall be freedom of transit, under equitable conditions, across the said
territory.

Subject to the above, the Mandatory may impose or cause to be imposed by
the local governments such taxes and customs duties as it may consider
necessary. The Mandatory, or the local governments acting under its advice,
may also conclude on grounds of contiguity any special customs
arrangements with an adjoining country.

The Mandatory may take or cause to be taken, subject to the provisions of
paragraph 1 of this article, such steps as it may think best to ensure the
development of the natural resources of the said territory and to safeguard
the interests of the local population.

Concessions for the development of these natural resources shall be granted
without distinction of nationality between the nationals of all States
Members of the League of Nations, but on condition that they do not
infringe upon the authority of the local Government. Concessions in the

nature of a general monopoly shall not be granted. This clause shall in no
way limit the right of the Mandatory to create monopolies of a purely fiscal
character in the interest of the territory of Syria and the Lebanon, and with a
view to assuring to the territory the fiscal resources which would appear
best adapted to the local needs, or, in certain cases, with a view to
developing the natural resources either directly by the State or through an
organisation under its control, provided that this does not involve either
directly or indirectly the creation of a monopoly of the natural resources in
favour of the Mandatory or its nationals, nor involve any preferential
treatment which would be incompatible with the economic, commercial and
industrial equality guaranteed above.

ARTICLE 12.—The Mandatory shall adhere, on behalf of Syria and the
Lebanon, to any general international agreements already existing, or which
may be concluded hereafter with the approval of the League of Nations, in
respect of the following: the slave trade, the traffic in drugs, the traffic in
arms and ammunition, commercial equality, freedom of transit and
navigation,
aerial
navigation,
postal,
telegraphic
or
wireless
communications, and measures for the protection of literature, art or
industries.

ARTICLE 13.—The Mandatory shall secure the adhesion of Syria and the
Lebanon, so far as social, religious and other conditions permit, to such
measures of common utility as may be adopted by the League of Nations
for preventing and combating disease, including diseases of animals and
plants.

ARTICLE 14.—The Mandatory shall draw up and put into force within twelve
months from this date a law of antiquities in conformity with the following
provisions. This law shall ensure equality of treatment in the matter of
excavations and archaeological research to the nationals of all States
Members of the League of Nations.
1° “Antiquity” means any construction or any product of human
activity earlier than the year 1700 A. D.
2° The law for the protection of antiquities shall proceed by
encouragement rather than by threat.

Any person who, having discovered an antiquity without being
furnished with the authorisation referred to in paragraph 5, reports
the same to an official of the competent Department, shall be
rewarded according to the value of the discovery.
3° No antiquity may be disposed of except to the competent
Department, unless this Department renounces the acquisition of
any such antiquity.

No antiquity may leave the country without an export license
from the said Department.
4° Any person who maliciously or negligently destroys or
damages an antiquity shall be liable to a penalty to be fixed.
5° No clearing of ground or digging with the object of finding
antiquities shall be permitted, under penalty of fine, except to
persons authorised by the competent Department.
6° Equitable terms shall be fixed for expropriation, temporary or
permanent, of lands which might be of historical or archæological
interest.
7° Authorisation to excavate shall only be granted to persons who
show sufficient guarantees of archaeological experience. The
Mandatory shall not, in granting these authorisations act in such a
way as to exclude scholars of any nation without good grounds.
8° The proceeds of excavations may be divided between the
excavator and the competent Department in a proportion fixed by
that Department. If division seems impossible for scientific
reasons, the excavator shall receive a fair indemnity in lieu of a
part of the find.

ARTICLE 15.—Upon the coming into force of the organic law referred to in
article 1, an arrangement shall be made between the Mandatory and the
local governments for reimbursement by the latter of all expenses incurred
by the Mandatory in organising the administration, developing local

resources, and carrying out permanent public works, of which the country
retains the benefit. Such arrangement shall be communicated to the Council
of the League of Nations.

ARTICLE 16.—French and Arabic shall be the official languages of Syria and
the Lebanon,
ARTICLE 17.—The Mandatory shall make to the Council of the League of
Nations an annual report to the satisfaction of the Council as to the
measures taken during the year to carry out the provisions of this mandate.
Copies of all laws and regulations promulgated during the year shall be
attached to the said report.

ARTICLE 18.—The consent of the Council of the League of Nations is required
for any modification of the terms of this mandate.

ARTICLE 19.—On the termination of the mandate, the Council of the League of
Nations shall use its influence to safeguard for the future the fulfilment by
the Government of Syria and the Lebanon of the financial obligations,
including pensions and allowances, regularly assumed by the administration
of Syria or of the Lebanon during the period of the mandate.

ARTICLE 20.—The Mandatory agrees that if any dispute whatever should arise
between the Mandatory and another Member of the League of Nations
relating to the interpretation or the application of the provisions of the
mandate, such dispute, if it cannot be settled by negotiation, shall be
submitted to the Permanent Court of International Justice provided for by
Article 14 of the Covenant of the League of Nations.

Whereas the mandate in the above terms came into force on September 29,
1923, and, Whereas the United States of America by participating in the war
against Germany contributed to her defeat and the defeat of her allies and to
the renunciation of the rights and titles of her allies in the territory
transferred by them, but has not ratified the Covenant of the League of
Nations embodied in the Treaty of Versailles, and, Whereas the Government
of the United States and the Government of France desire to reach a definite
understanding with respect to the rights of the two Governments and their
respective nationals in Syria and the Lebanon; The President of the United

States of America and the President of the French Republic have decided to
conclude a convention to this effect and have nominated as their
Plenipotentiaries:
THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

His Excellency Mr. Myron T. Herrick, Ambassador Extraordinary
and Plenipotentiary of the United States of America to France,
AND THE PRESIDENT OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC:
M. Raymond Poincaré, Senator, President of the Council,
Minister of Foreign Affairs,
WHO after communicating to each other their respective full powers found in
good and due form, have agreed as follows: ARTICLE 1
Subject to the provisions of the present convention the United States
consents to the administration by the French Republic, pursuant to the
aforesaid mandate, of Syria and the Lebanon.

ARTICLE 2
The United States and its nationals shall have and enjoy all the rights and
benefits secured under the terms of the mandate to members of the League
of Nations and their nationals, notwithstanding the fact that the United
States is not a member of the League of Nations.
ARTICLE 3
Vested American property rights in the mandated territories shall be
respected and in no way impaired.

ARTICLE 4
A duplicate of the annual report to be made by the mandatory under Article
17 of the mandate shall be furnished to the United States.

ARTICLE 5
Subject to the provisions of any local laws for the maintenance of public
order and public morals, the nationals of the United States will be permitted
freely to establish and maintain educational, philantropic [sic] and religious
institutions in the mandated territory, to receive voluntary applicants and to
teach in the English language.

ARTICLE 6
Nothing contained in the present convention shall be affected by any
modification which may be made in the terms of the mandate as recited
above unless such modification shall have been assented to by the United
States.

ARTICLE 7
The present convention shall be ratified in accordance with the respective
constitutional methods of the High Contracting Parties. The ratifications
shall be exchanged at Paris as soon as practicable. The present convention
shall take effect on the date of the exchange of ratifications.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed this Convention
and have affixed thereto their seals.

DONE in duplicate at Paris, the 4 day of April, in the year 1924.
[SEAL] MYRON T. HERRICK
[SEAL] R POINCARÉ

[Document 675]
The Consul at Beirut (Knabenshue) to the Secretary of State
[Received 2 p.m.]

Pending conclusion convention between the United States and France in
regard to mandate, French High Commission requests consent of the United
States to increase customs duty on alcohol to approximately 50 percent in
order to protect the local wine industry which is being injured by spurious
concoctions fabricated from imported alcohol. In view of the American
regulations governing export of alcohol, I recommend Department accord
consent requested. Please reply by telegraph.

KNABENSHUE

[Document 676]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Beirut (Knabenshue)
Before taking action on your telegram of March 20, 11 a.m., concerning
increase in customs duty on alcohol, Department desires information
regarding provisions of the law in question and the attitude of nationals of
other countries.

HUGHES

[Document 677]
The Consul at Beirut (Knabenshue) to the Secretary of State
Commission is now formulating new law increasing customs duties in
general to 15 percent with few exceptions, such as certain luxuries and
particularly alcohol, the latter to be approximately 50 percent. French
willing fix duty on denatured alcohol at 15 percent which can only be used
for medicinal purposes and not for beverages.

Other powers having accepted French mandate need not be consulted.
KNABENSHUE

[Document 678]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Beirut (Knabenshue)
Your telegram of March 31, 4 p.m. concerning increase in customs duty on
alcohol. You may inform the French authorities that this Government
consents to making effective with respect to American citizens the increased
duty on alcohol for beverage purposes with the reservation of the
jurisdiction of the American Consular Court in cases arising under this
provision in which American citizens are concerned as of the date that this
Government’s consent is brought to the attention of the French authorities.
HUGHES

[Document 679]
The Consul at Beirut (Knabenshue) to the Secretary of State
[Received 6: p.m.]

French High Commissioner informs me that accord between the United
States and France has been signed and pending ratification requests consent
to new customs duties as follows: Duty to be raised from 11 percent as
formerly to 15 percent on all articles with the exception of live animals,
cereals, flour, rice, coffee, sugar, preserves, butter, milk, cheese, mineral
water, lumber and chemical manures, the duty on all of which will remain at
11 percent. The duty on alcohol to be more than 15 percent but the exact
amount not yet fixed. The above customs duties are applicable to all goods
from States which are members of League of Nations and from the United
States,’ while goods from other sources will pay 30 percent.
Please telegraph consent to new tariff as applicable to American goods.
KNABENSHUE

[Document 680]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Beirut (Knabenshue)
Your telegram of April 9, 5 p.m. concerning increase of customs duties from
11 to 15 per cent. You may inform the French authorities that this
Government consents to making effective, with respect to American
citizens, the increased customs duties with the reservations that there shall
be no discrimination against American citizens or products and that pending
ratification of Syrian Mandate Treaty the Consular Court shall have
jurisdiction in cases arising under this provision in which American citizens
are concerned. This consent shall be as of the date on which it is brought to
the attention of the French authorities and on the understanding that other
interested powers acquiesce in proposed increase.

HUGHES

[Document 681]
The Consul at Beirut (Knabenshue) to the Secretary of State
BEIRUT, February 4, 1924.

[Received March 1.]

No. 1297
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s
reference to a suit brought in the local courts in Syria against Mr. Joe
Abraham, an American citizen now residing in the United States. I am
directed to make inquiry concerning this matter and to report thereon to the
Department.

It appears from the dossier of this case that one Michel Zoghzoghy, a local
subject, has brought action in the local Syrian courts against Mr. Joe
Abraham, an American citizen, for alleged breach of contract. The question
at issue which is of chief interest to the United States Government is, first,
whether an American citizen residing in the United States can be prosecuted
in the local Syrian courts for an alleged breach of contract, irrespective of
whether the said breach took place in Syria, by correspondence, or in the
United States; and, secondly, whether service upon the American citizen in
question was effected legally in accordance with treaties, custom or usage.
In order that the situation may be made clear, it is well to review briefly the
entire question of jurisdiction under the Capitulations in Syria. There are
three courts in Syria which have, under varying conditions, jurisdiction in
cases wherein an American citizen is either the defendant or the plaintiff:
First.—a) The American Consular Court in criminal cases when the
defendant is an American citizen, irrespective of the nationality of the
complainant.

b) The American Consular Court in civil cases when both parties to the suit
are American citizens.
c) The American Consular Court in civil cases between American citizens
and the citizens or subjects of other Powers enjoying capitulatory
privileges, when the American is the defendant.

Second.—a) The Consular Court of another capitulatory Power in criminal
cases wherein the defendant is a subject of that Power and the complainant
an American citizen.
b) The Consular Court of another capitulatory Power in civil cases wherein
the defendant is a subject of that Power and the complainant an American
citizen.

Third.—a) Local Tribunal (the Mixed Commercial Court) in civil cases (not
arising out of landed property interests) wherein one of the parties is an
American citizen and the other a local subject. Cases so heard in this Court
are attended by a Dragoman of this Consulate General and two American
citizens appointed by the Consulate General sit as associates with the native
judges. Judgments rendered in this Court against American citizens must be
referred to the Consulate General for execution. If, in the opinion of the
Dragoman and the American associates, justice has not been rendered in
accordance with the applicable law, the Dragoman refuses to sign the
judgment and it is consequently not executed by the Consulate General, in
which case a new hearing may be demanded.
b) The local tribunals, without the assistance of American associates or the
presence of a dragoman, in cases arising out of landed property interests, in
accordance with the Turkish law of 1867, accepted by the United States on
c) Local tribunals, in criminal cases wherein the defendant is a local subject
and the complainant an American. These cases are attended by a dragoman
of the Consulate General.

It should be noted that in all cases in the local tribunals attended by the
Dragoman of the Consulate General, the judgment must be signed by the
Dragoman to make it effective. If the Dragoman refuses to sign the
judgment a new case may be commenced. If the native Judge insists upon
the execution of the judgment, even though the Dragoman refused to sign it,
the case must be settled administratively between the French High
Commission and the Consulate General.

All services in connection with cases in any of the above mentioned courts
should be made upon American citizens through the intermediary of the
American Consulate General.

It is my opinion that the case between Mr. Zoghzoghy and Mr. Abraham,
being, as it is, an alleged breach of contract not involving real estate, should
come properly in the Mixed Commercial Tribunal, and service could only
be made upon Mr. Abraham through this Consulate General, irrespective of
whether he resides in Syria or the United States.

Mr. Abraham has given a power-of-attorney to Mr. Kaleel Muallem to act
for him and defend his interests before the local tribunal. The case has been
set for hearing on February 11, 1924. It appears that the plaintiff in his
action has caused the defendant’s property in Syria to be attached.
Inasmuch as an attachment in a case of this kind constitutes more or less an
act of execution of a judgment, which can only be effected against
American citizens by the Consulate General, and inasmuch as the Consulate
General was not notified by the Court in this regard, Mr. Abraham’s lawyer
and the Dragoman of this Consulate General will protest against the
judgment at the next hearing of the case. If their protest is unsuccessful, the
matter will be taken up administratively between the Consulate General and
the French High Commission.

There is one more point in connection with this case and any similar cases
which will be of interest to the Department. By despatch No. 1120 of
August 18, 1923, this office transmitted to the Department a summons for
service upon Salim Ibrahim Nihra, the name by which Mr. Joe Abraham is
known in Syria. In its reply of September 24, 1923 (File No.

[Document 682]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Beirut (Knabenshue)
WASHINGTON, March 14, 1924.

SIR: The Department acknowledges the receipt of your despatch No. 1297
dated February 4, 1924, with reference to the case of Mr. Joe Abraham, an
American citizen now residing in the United States, who has been sued in
the local courts of Syria for an alleged breach of contract.

The Department has noted your statements concerning the rights which
American citizens have in respect of legal cases under the Capitulations,
and particularly your statement with reference to the fact that the
attachment sued out in the case of Mr. Joe Abraham constitutes, more or
less, an act of execution of a judgment.

The Department is in agreement with you that, if the act of attachment is in
the nature of an execution of a judgment, you should protest against the
attachment and endeavor to protect Mr. Abraham’s interest as an American
citizen.

With reference to the question which you raised in the last paragraph of
your despatch, concerning the service of summons in the United States
which have been issued by local courts in Syria for service through the
American Consulate, the Department may observe that it has no authority to
serve judicial processes in the United States. Further, it may be stated that
the general rule in the United States is that “valid service of process cannot
be made upon a defendant outside the territorial jurisdiction of the court so
as to confer jurisdiction over a person.” (Vol. 32, Cyc. of Law, p. 455.) In
considering the question of service upon a person without the jurisdiction of
the court, the United States Circuit Court of Appeals stated, in the case of
express statutory authority, there is no power in a court to order actual

personal service of process upon a defendant beyond its territorial
jurisdiction.”
In view of these statements of law, it would appear that processes which, by
reason of extraterritorial privileges, must be served through the American
Consulate Court, may not be served outside of the jurisdiction of the
Consular Court, which obviously does not extend to the United States.
For the Secretary of State:
WILLIAM PHILLIPS

[Document 683]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith)
WASHINGTON, February 26, 1924.

No. 80
enclosed for your information a copy of a letter received by the Department
from the President of the Archaeological Institute of America33 in which he
protests on behalf of the Institute and of several of the larger museums of
the country against the reported monopolistic concession for archaeological
exploration granted by the Albanian Government to France. A copy of the
Department’s reply is likewise enclosed.

It is desired that you bring the point of view of the Archaeological Institute
of America to the attention of the Albanian Foreign Office, stating that this
Government is opposed to the granting of privileges connected with
permission to conduct archaeological explorations which would tend to
exclude interested American individuals or societies who might wish to
participate in the work.

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 684]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
WASHINGTON, February 26, 1924.

No. 869
SIR: With reference to the Department’s instruction No. 792 of December 31,
192333 and to previous correspondence in regard to a monopolistic
concession for archaeological exploration in Afghanistan reported to have
been granted to Professor Auguste Foucher by the Afghan Government,
there is enclosed for your information a copy of a letter received by the
Department from the President of the Archaeological Institute of America
in which he protests on behalf of the Institute and of several of the larger
museums of this country against this concession and against a concession
for archaeological excavation granted by Albania. A copy of the
Department’s reply is likewise enclosed.

It is desired that you bring the point of view of the Archaeological Institute
of America appropriately to the attention of the French Foreign Office,
stating that this Government is opposed to the granting of privileges
connected with permission to conduct archaeological explorations which
would tend to exclude American individuals or societies.

CHARLES E. HUGHES

[Document 685]
The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
TIRANA, March 31, 1924.

[Received April 23.]

No. 241
SIR: Referring to your instruction of February 26 last, No. 80, I have the
honor to report that I did not fail to bring to the attention of the Albanian
Minister for Foreign Affairs the point of view of the Archaeological
Institute of America and to state that the Government of the United States
was opposed to the granting of privileges in concessions with the
permission to conduct archaeological explorations which would tend to
exclude American individuals and societies who might wish to participate
in the work.

Ilias Bey Vrioni took note of my representations in this regard and replied
that, in view of the fact that the concession to the French Government,
which had been negotiated to gratify M. Godart who had rendered many
services to Albania, had been ratified by the National Assembly on
February [September] 22, 1923 (as reported in the Legation’s despatch No.
modify it.

It is cause for regret that the Archaeological Institute of America did not
make application for a concession in Albania early in 1923 when, there is
reason to believe, it would not have been difficult to have arrived at an
amicable arrangement with both the Albanian and French Governments.
I have [etc.]

U. GRANT-SMITH

[Document 686]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
PARIS, April 2, 1924.

[Received April 12.]

No. 4078
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s Instruction No. 869 of
regard to a monopolistic concession for archaeological exploration in
Afghanistan reported to have been granted to Professor Auguste Foucher by
the Afghan Government, to the protest made by the President of the
Archaeological Institute of America on behalf of the Institute and of several
of the larger museums of the United States against this concession and
against a concession for archaeological excavation granted by Albania.
In reply, I beg leave to inform the Department that I did not fail to address
myself to the Ministry for Foreign Affairs on the subject. In reply, I am in
receipt of two Notes, one dated March 27th in regard to the concession for
archaeological exploration in Afghanistan35 and one dated March 28th in
regard to the concession granted to the French Government by Albania.
It will be noted that the French Government is in agreement with the United
States on the question of the concession in Afghanistan, but that, owing to
the difficulty in amending or changing the agreement, it is considered
advisable to leave the concession as it is. It is stated that the French
Government is anxious for American archaeologists to make excavations in
those localities where the French will not have explored.

In regard to the concession granted by Albania, the statement of the Foreign
Office will be noted that exclusive privileges have been granted only in
certain districts which are very few and closely defined.

[Document 687]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
WASHINGTON, June 2, 1924.

No. 1000
SIR: The Department encloses copies of letters dated May 13 and May 14,
1924, from the President of the American Bureau of Shipping, protesting
in regard to the discrimination made by the French Government against

[Document 688]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France
(Herrick)
If you have not received favorable reply from Foreign Office, you are
instructed to present the following note forthwith:
“Under instructions from my Government I have the honor to
refer to my previous communications concerning the attitude of
the authorities of the French Government in the matter of the
recognition of the American Bureau of Shipping, and to draw
your attention once more to the importance attached by my
Government to an early favorable decision in the matter.
It is the view of the Government of the United States that the
American Bureau of Shipping is entitled to full recognition by the
French authorities on an equal footing with Lloyd’s or any other
foreign classification society. This Bureau is designated by the
laws of the United States (Section 25, Merchant Marine Act 1920)
as an official classification society for the classification of vessels
and for other functions in connection therewith and two members
of the executive committee are designated by my Government.
The inspection and certification of the Bureau are regarded by my
Government as efficient and trustworthy. The high standing of the
Bureau is further indicated by the fact that the London Institute of
Underwriters recognizes its classification on a parity with
Lloyd’s. My Government, therefore, is confident that on having
the facts regarding the Bureau brought to your attention your
Government will accord it the recognition to which it is entitled.”

For your information and guidance. Please reinforce the foregoing note with
vigorous oral representations and endeavor in all proper ways to obtain
prompt favorable decision. The essential fact is that France recognizes
Lloyds but not the American Bureau. The refusal to recognize latter is not
only important to vessels immediately affected, but has broader significance
to American shipping inasmuch as greater part of American merchant
marine is registered in American Bureau and any action that might be
construed as reflection upon the standing of the Bureau would tend to
weaken position of vessels registered therein.

The Shipping Board adopted a resolution on May 15, 1924, to the effect
that the action of the French Government in this case presents a situation
contemplated by Section 26 of the Shipping Act 1916 whereby it is
authorized in cases of discrimination against American shipping to propose
remedial measures to the President, and by Section 19 (b) of the Merchant
Marine Act 1920 under which the Board is authorized “to make rules and
regulations affecting shipping in the foreign trade not in conflict with law in
order to adjust or meet general or special conditions unfavorable to shipping
in the foreign trade.” The resolution called upon the Department to
communicate with the French Government, preliminary to final action by
the Board, with a view to causing that Government to accept as sufficient
classifications by the American Bureau of Shipping of vessels documented
under the American flag in cases in which, under similar circumstances,
classifications by other foreign societies are accepted.

You may informally advise the Foreign Office of the purport of the
resolution at the same time furnishing it with copies of Section 26 of the
and Section 19, Paragraph B of the Merchant Marine Act approved June 5,
course, that a serious controversy possibly even involving consideration of
recourse to retaliatory measures may be avoided.

Advise Department by telegraph of important developments.

GREW

[Document 689]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France
(Herrick)
and July 24, 6 p.m.

(1) Please again call attention of Foreign Office to question of
inspection of Dollar Line Steamers and, in view of urgency of
situation arising from call of Steamer President Adams at
Marseilles (now reported to arrive August 27), if you have not
received reply make protest against further delay and urge early
favorable action. The matter should not be allowed to drag along
until the President Adams reaches Marseilles.

(2) Department notes statements in correspondence between
Embassy and Consulate Marseilles transmitted with Consulate’s
despatch 974, July. 11, of which presumably Embassy has copy,
to the effect that the United States does not recognize certificates
issued by the French Government though most other leading
countries do recognize them. The Department is advised by the
Steamboat Inspection Service that the United States recognizes
certificates of inspection issued by the French Government to
French passenger vessels under reciprocal agreement with the
Government of the United States.

(3) In view of paragraph 2 above, and in view of French
recognition of Lloyds but not American Bureau (see Department’s
French authorities undertake to require Dollar Line vessels, which
hold United States Government inspection certificates, to undergo
inspection by French maritime officials.

Please endeavor to ascertain the grounds on which French Government
requires inspection of Dollar Line vessels, consulting Consul at Marseilles
if necessary, and report to Department by telegraph all particulars
obtainable concerning reasons for attitude of French Government in this
matter, giving references to laws and decrees on which French position is
based and mailing copies if not already forwarded Suggest you
communicate with agent of Dollar Line, Paris, which is understood to be
United States Lines, 1 Rue Auber, which may know or which may be able
to ascertain informally from Ministry Marine precise nature of inspection in
question.

Transmit copy hereof and copies of other correspondence with Department
on this subject to Consul at Marseilles for his information.
GREW

[Document 690]
The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State
PARIS, August 23, 1924—noon.
officially that pending recognition by the French Government of the
American Bureau of Shipping, American vessels calling at French ports will
in no way be interfered with.

WHITEHOUSE

[Document 691]
The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State
PARIS, August 26, 1924—noon.
informed that the formalities to which American vessels in French ports are
not as a result of the nonrecognition of the American Bureau of Shipping.
The formalities can be waived if an agreement is concluded between the
United States and France recognizing the equivalence of French and
American legislation on the subject and the note concludes with a request to
be informed whether the United States Government would enter into such
an agreement.

I understand that the agreement can be concluded by an exchange of notes
after examination by each Government of the legislation of the other on the
subject.

I am transmitting by pouch a copy of the law above referred to.
WHITEHOUSE
