828  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
without a drastic change in our current approach. Indeed, without such 
a change, it is probable that START will not be completed until spring 
1991 or later, casting doubt on our ability to complete ratification before 
the middle of a Presidential election year. Failure to complete START 
in the next few months could also mean that the window for ever com-
pleting the Treaty will disappear, either due to accelerating changes in 
the Soviet Union or to the growing (but erroneous) perception that a 
START Treaty has been overtaken by events and is no longer important.
Even with a dramatic change in approach, completion in 1990 is 
far from certain. This paper documents the problem and offers a com-
prehensive set of possible changes. It does not repeat the well known 
arguments on why we should finish in 1990, but simply sets forth some 
of the reasons why we probably won’t finish and what we need to do 
to get the job done.
How much is left? An internal Negotiating Group review reveals 
a simple, but stark fact: There are well over a hundred significant issues 
left to resolve before a Treaty can be signed. A list is attached. Many sin-
gle items actually reflect several contested issues. For example, there 
are 22 disputed notifications treated as a single issue. Similarly ALCM 
inspections are treated as a single issue, although they consume several 
pages of treaty text. Thus the list of remaining issues can probably be 
expanded to include several hundred individual decisions of the type 
that traditionally rate a paragraph in a guidance cable. With 153 days 
(including Sundays and holidays) to resolve over a hundred issues 
and record the results in the treaty by December 31, it is clear that the 
chances of finishing START in 1990 are slim. Our problems, however, 
run far deeper than this.
Why are we in trouble? It is important to recognize that there is no 
single solution because there is no single problem. We have a series of 
problems, any one of which, could preclude completion. Some are beyond 
our control; the Soviets are distracted at home and the Soviet military 
is reasserting itself. As a result, the Soviets are taking excessively long 
to respond and are often putting forth unhelpful positions. In addition, 
the Soviet delegation often appears slow to implement agreements and 
sometimes seeks to walk them back. These problems can only be solved 
in Moscow. Thus, no matter what we do it may not be enough.
But the problems are not only in Moscow. In my view there are a num-
ber of problems on our side, problems we can and must do something 
about. Indeed, if we do not solve some of them soon, the problem will not 
be completing a treaty in 1990, it will be completing a treaty in 1991.
Our most significant problems include:
1. We aren’t closing out ministerial level issues. Meetings between 
Secretary Baker and Foreign Minister Shevardnadze have been effec-
tive in resolving issues. Unfortunately, we are identifying ministerial
