Afghanistan
363
no safer in our absence. But we should also start planning for a more
ambitious option of inserting the necessary land, air, and naval forces
into Saudi Arabia and the Gulf to protect Gulf oil against direct attack
or stoppage of oil flow through political side effects of events elsewhere.
All this, incidentally, calls for the prompt creation of the greater Middle
East command we have talked about. (S)
Another element of this second layer of policy we must examine
carefully, but not necessarily decide as yet is: under what conditions
of Soviet involvement in Iran would we be prepared to put US forces
into Iran? (S)
The third echelon of policy should be a composite of actions to
increase the level and tempo of our overall defense effort in the context
of more active measures to restore national economic health. It is prob-
ably not necessary to revisit the President’s FY81 defense budget deci-
sions now. But against the likely picture of the 1980s, the President’s
conception of adequate spending levels in the out years is almost
certainly too low. Instead of 4.5–5.0% annual increases, we shall be
forced into something like 6.0–7.0% rates or even higher. What we
need now is a major (not a back room, or one-man) planning effort on
how to accomplish this acceleration. Undoubtedly other dimensions
of this “quasi-mobilization” policy will involve stiff oil import taxes,
tax changes to stimulate investment, somewhat looser monetary policy,
and perhaps price controls to manage inflation. (S)
The fourth echelon of policy will involve political efforts on a broad
front to get our NATO allies and Japan to do likewise in defense. (S)
The fifth policy echelon will involve the way we manage our direct
relationship with the USSR. The foregoing may suggest that we will
have foresworn any semblance of detente for the next decade. Quite
the contrary is the case. If we move swiftly to create the necessary
echelons of containment, we may preserve the basis for a balanced
policy toward the USSR in bilateral relations and in Europe. (S)
US resolve and effectiveness in the East-West competition will
actually restore in Moscow an incentive to try to deflect us by political
means, an incentive that has obviously declined in recent years. We
must move to place issues of regional stability at the center of our
bilateral relationship where the Soviets will be forced to deal with
them. Faced with the certainty of stiff competition on all fronts the
Soviets will, in time, at least show an interest in damping that competi-
tion in some regions. In the meantime, there is no reason why the
dialogue on strategic arms stabilization cannot in due course resume.
The Soviets will probably have an interest in it. The main obstacle to
our pursuing a nuanced or balanced policy now is the lack of confidence
at home, e.g., in the Senate, that we are adequately postured for the
competitive side of the relationship. (S)
