Afghanistan 87 Tab A Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency6 Washington, undated SUBJECT Some Covert Action Options in Afghanistan Background: On 27 April 1978 leftist military forces staged a successful coup in Afghanistan, replacing the government of President Daoud with a Soviet-oriented “Democratic Republic”. Prime Minister Taraki and other government leaders all are members of the “People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan”, which is Soviet-style communist party in a Stalinist mode. The new regime has placed a high priority on consolidating its control of government organizations and the armed forces, and has had considerable success in this. It has been greatly aided by an influx of Soviet advisors who have been placed in almost all departments of the government and throughout the armed forces. The situation in the countryside is different. Afghan governments traditionally have had little control in the rural, tribal areas; this government is no exception. Its problems stem particularly from its pro-Soviet, communist orientation, which offends many deeply religious, conservative Afghans. Afghans tend to be nationalistic, and many are conscious of, and resent, the growing dominance of the USSR in their affairs. A tribal rebellion has been underway for several months in Afghanistan’s eastern provinces, and the government is finding it increasingly difficult to maintain public order in other outlying areas of the country. Outside Afghanistan, emigre dissidents claim to have several thousand trained fighters, including a few hundred former military officers, in and around Peshawar and the Pakistan frontier. The principal Afghan rebel group in this area is the Afghan National Liberation Front (ANLF), although there also are other significant groups which rival the ANLF. Thus far the Government of Pakistan (GOP) has turned a blind eye to this Afghan dissident activity. The rebels are reported to be receiving support from individual Afghans living abroad, and also from Saudi Arabian sources (The latter is not confirmed nor whether the alleged support comes from private or official sources.). 6 Secret.
