Chapter 6, June–December 1990 805 ‘weapon-­delivery vehicle’ means, when used in connection with ballistic or cruise missiles, any ballistic or cruise missile that has been flight-­tested or deployed to carry or be used as a weapon, that is, any mechanism or device that, when directed against any target, is designed to damage or destroy it.” This is a sensitive subject because of the fuss which took place during INF ratification. Unanimous opinion here is that this is the correct solution. Future Negotiations 5. The Soviets tabled on June 25 a poorly done and selective summary of the summit statement on future negotiations as article XIV. We have rejected the idea of any such article, making some strange arguments in the process. The Soviets say it is very important to them to have some commitment to further negotiations in the treaty. I believe an article with a short bland commitment to further START negotiations would be a good outcome. Since one of our best arguments in ratification will be that the shortcomings of START (if any) will be corrected in START II, a commitment to START II in the treaty itself could be helpful. Road-­mobile ICBMs 6. In an effort to break the impasse on how to deal with verification of routine movements of road-­mobiles, we have proposed a 3-­part ad ref solution: — All routine movements from RAS to maintenance facilities and return, and all routine movements from RAS to conduct a launch from the field and return, would be pre-­ and post-­notified. — In a variation of the call-­back option proposed earlier by the Soviets, all launchers in a DA, except those already notified as noted above, could be called back to their RAS for a short-­notice inspection. The inspecting side would then actually go to one RA and inspect the launchers and missiles there. Any which did not make it back could be inspected in the field. — A side would have to tell the other side upon demand 2–3 times per month how many launchers/missiles were out of a specified RA at a specified earlier time. Nazarkin’s reaction was basically positive to these ideas. He is awaiting Moscow’s reaction and I am optimistic that some variation of these ideas will finally resolve this difficult issue. OSI of Heavy Bombers/ALCMs/Airbases 7. The Soviets are just beginning to understand our convoluted proposals in this area. I am pessimistic on this one. Even our military people here admit that our position is a mish mash with a lot of inconsistencies and no chance of being negotiated. The final solution will have to involve more intrusiveness in the OSI allowed for heavy
