Bolivia 175 BL–16. Letter from the Ambassador in Bolivia (Bonsal) to the Director of the Office of West Coast Affairs, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs (Siracusa)1  La Paz, January 6, 1959. Dear Mr. Siracusa: I have your letter of December 30.2 My letter of December 193 was written on the assumption that Messrs. Dillon, Rubottom, Mann, and others had taken a clear-­cut affirmative position on the YPFB loan matter, and that Secretary Anderson had decisively vetoed this position. Since neither of these assumptions now appears wholly correct, I will have to leave to you whatever use, if any, you make of my letter of December 19. If the situation reverts to what I thought it was when I wrote the letter, I should certainly want it shown to Messrs. Rubottom, Mann, and Dillon. There is a lot of dynamite in this whole situation, both as it relates to U.S. relations with Bolivia and, consequently, with the hemisphere as a whole, and also as it relates to the respective leadership positions of the U.S. Government and of certain American oil interests in relations to our foreign policy. But I realize that my view of the situation probably does not take into account all of the factors with which you in Washington are confronted. It is interesting to note Mr. Whiteford’s position to the effect that if YPFB were able to increase its oil production, it would probably not be able to market it abroad. On the other hand, Gulf, Chaco, Shell, Andes and others are making extensive investments in Bolivia on the assumptions that if they find oil they will be able to market it abroad, since they certainly will not find a market for it in Bolivia which already produces more than its domestic requirements. If such a position were, in effect, to develop, i.e., YPFB unable to sell while the foreign oil companies were marketing their output, the position here of the foreign companies 1 Source: Department of State, ARA/WST Files, Lot 62 D 429, “Bonsal Letters.” Secret. The source text bears Ambassador Bonsal’s typed name. 2 Not printed; ARA/WST Files, Lot 62 D 429, “Bonsal Letters.” 3 The referenced letter, from La Paz, stated that the Ambassador found “most distressing” the information that the $3–4 million proposed loan to YPFB had been cancelled because of a veto by Secretary of Treasury Anderson. Bonsal further stated, “Favorable action on our part would have had an extremely favorable effect politically and economically on the situation here. The prospects over the next few weeks are, as we have reported, very dark indeed. We may well have adopted a position which will insure the failure of our entire enterprise. It is certainly one which may postpone the day when the Bolivian burden on the American taxpayer can be lightened.” (ARA/WST Files, Lot 62 D 429, “Bonsal Letters”)
