1955 221 while he is extremely useful in giving me a channel twice a week from you, for practical purposes I have a channel only once a week to you. I greatly appreciated your letter of September 2 which expanded on the second paragraph of the Department’s 677. I thought I knew what the paragraph meant, but I wished to be absolutely sure. I am sorry that I bothered you by sending a telegram over the Labor Day weekend. Before going on with anything else, I would greatly appreciate your having someone look into the situation in our code room staff here to see if something can’t be done. Gowen has sent many tele­ grams on the subject and I have sent one, but apparently all he gets back are repeats to other posts asking them whether they can spare anybody and, of course, they never can. While our traffic is lighter than it was, it still comes in big bunches and it is very important that it move promptly. The Department’s telegram to me last weekend on my din­ ner with Wang is a good example. They were short-handed, no one was on duty to decode it, and, as a result, I did not receive it. No great harm was done, but this well could happen in much more important matters. Going back to the talks, I know that you all must have been as disappointed as I was that I was unable to sew-up the announcement at yesterday’s meeting. I have a feeling that Wang had probably gone somewhat farther than Peiping approved at our last meeting, and he had received instructions to back-up. However, I am very hopeful that if you agree with me upon the “now” question that I will be able to tie it up at Saturday’s meeting. I do not know quite how to interpret the release of the nine. I must confess that it came as a complete surprise to me although I have always recognized that this was a possibility. Of course, it was designed to put public pressure on us—they first released the flyers, now they release the nine—probably the reaction of most people is the same that I found even among friendly newsmen; that is, what are we now going to do. I am impressed by the success that the Communists have had in building up the issue of the Chinese in the United States. Last night Wolf and de Traz of the ICRC were in to see me (I am sending a separate memorandum of conversation), and it was quite clear that even they thought that there was a problem with respect to Chinese departing from the United States. I, of course, gave them the facts, but believe that as soon as the agreed announcement is released we should do a much better job then we have in the past of telling this story. I presume that you are reconciled, and prepared for Wang scream­ ing loud and hard when I refuse to go on immediately to item two fol­ lowing the announcement. I hope we will be successful in our tactic but believe we must recognize that the July 25th announcement does not in any way imply that we would not talk about other practical matters until all the Americans were released. In fact, if they had not released
