800.51 W 89Belgium/41: Telegram [Document 62] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) [Paraphrase] WASHINGTON, June 3, 1925—7 p.m. 35. Your 65, June 2, 6 p.m. (1) Belgian note is unsatisfactory. On our proposition (a), it leaves the matter in doubt whether the present Government unconditionally accepts it. Article 232, Treaty of Versailles only requires that Germany reimburse Belgium for money borrowed from Allied and Associated Governments and does not in any way relieve Belgium of her primary obligation, and our right to reimbursement from her does not depend, therefore, upon either ratification of or failure to ratify that treaty. In regard to our proposition (b), the Belgian note does not pledge that Government to negotiate on that basis; it simply says that credits must be submitted to Parliament. All that we ask is that negotiations should be conducted on basis of the three principles set forth in Department’s 32, May 29, 4 p.m. Department presumes that any settlement recommended by the negotiators will have to be submitted to Belgian Parliament for ratification as recommendations of our World War Foreign Debt Commission will have to be submitted to Congress. (2) Subject to paragraph (3) below, you will make following communication to Belgian Government:4 “The Government of the United States has received the communication of blank concerning the indebtedness of Belgium to the United States. It is noted that although the Government of the King adheres in principle to the contents of the memorandum of May 31, nevertheless attention is drawn to the pre-armistice advances made by the Government of the United States to Belgium and it is stated that the conversations which are about to commence should take into account the position set forth in paragraph one of the communication under acknowledgment concerning this matter. It is further noted that, although the Belgian Government does not consider that it can legally make a point of Article 232 vis-a-vis the United States, the contention is advanced that Belgium has ‘a right which continues to exist whatever may have been the fate of Article 232.’
