878 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII had no impact on the level of resistance in any part of the countryside. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified]) Fear of Soviet reprisals has made some Afghans reluctant to shelter insurgents, but this has been a problem only for the few bands that operate outside their home areas, particularly some based in Pakistan. Most Afghan villagers still support the locally based insurgents who make up the bulk of the resistance. ([classification marking not declassified]) Prospects The Soviets have helped give the Babrak government time to try to consolidate politically. The insurgents cannot bring down the government by military means, and they recognize that it will be a long war. Although some exile groups seeking outside support have claimed that insurgent morale is declining, there are no signs that this is the case. ([classification marking not declassified]) Over the next year or so, some tribesmen probably will begin to lose confidence that they can overthrow the Babrak government. Although many others will continue fighting, the level of insurgency nevertheless may gradually begin to decrease. ([classification marking not declassified]) The erosion of tribal determination would be abetted if Kabul were to appear to be avoiding radical social changes and were seen as trying to exercise only nominal authority in the countryside, in the manner of traditional Afghan governments. The government’s identification with the Soviets, however, makes its prospects for winning the acceptance of the Afghan peoples extremely remote. ([classification marking not declassified]) If Pakistan continues to provide aid and a safehaven, the insurgency will continue at a level that will require the Soviets to keep a large military force in Afghanistan for the foreseeable future. The survival of the Babrak government could depend on the presence of at least some Soviet combat forces for years. ([classification marking not declassified]) [Omitted here is a map of Afghanistan.]
