184  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
should not go ahead immediately and announce independently that 
we were prepared to give the Indian Embassy this role, without refer­
ence to any “agreed announcement” at Geneva. It was remarked that 
our moral and psychological position before the world would certainly 
be very strong if some such offer were freely made, with no strings 
attached. We would then wait to see what the Chinese Communists 
were prepared to offer on their own initiative. It was felt that the intan­
gible pressures on the Chinese to make a corresponding gesture might 
be considerable. While it was decided not to do this, at least for the 
present, the basic concept is still influencing the thinking here, as you 
will have perceived from various of our telegrams during the week. We 
think it important for it to be apparent to all that whatever we are doing 
in regard to Chinese in this country who wish to return to the mainland 
is our own free act, taken because it is right and just, and not because 
the Chinese Communists have intervened as the pretended champions 
of the rights of Chinese individuals.
This makes it important for you to avoid implying in the talks that 
any Indian Embassy role permitted by us would have to be part of an 
understanding with the Chinese Communists (paragraph 24 of your 
624 [625]). Of course, you will not suggest the opposite either. It is sim­
ply an aspect to steer clear of at this juncture.
This thinking on the prospective Indian role has also influenced 
the attitude toward the essential character of the Indian Government 
responsibility. Herman Phleger feels that we must be very careful to 
refrain from according even by implication the status of “protecting 
power” to India, even in a narrowly defined field. We do not recognize 
that Communist China has any Governmental interests in this country 
which are entitled to protection by a third power. The Indian Embassy 
would be acting essentially in behalf of the interests of the individual 
travelers who want to return to the mainland rather that in the interest 
of the Chinese Communists as a Government. And it would be serving 
to verify the truth of our statement on Chinese aliens in this country. 
This means that the Indian Government would be selected primarily 
by us, rather than by the Chinese Communists, for its special function. 
It would be filling a humanitarian role in reference to certain individ­
uals, just as say the Red Cross might have been asked to do. It would 
not have in any sense the traditional role of a “protecting power” for 
an established Government when diplomatic relations are severed. So 
its role would be in no sense comparable to that of the Swiss when they 
acted on behalf of our nationals in Japanese-occupied territories during 
World War II. It is believed important to maintain this principle, and 
it will affect the tenor of our reply to the Indian Government note on 
representation of August 18.
