March 1952–February 1953 (b) A coup d’e´tat using the army and led either by a military or a National Front leader. There is little sign that any such leader can be found at present. (c) A tribal outbreak (like that in 1946) in opposition to growing Communist influence in Tehran. II. Possible Courses of Action. 4. (a) Whatever course is chosen absolute Anglo-United States solidarity is essential. (b) The Western Powers could support and encourage a dictator, but no suitable figure has yet appeared. (c) They could bring pressure to bear on the Shah but this is unlikely to be effective. (d) They could encourage a tribal revolt. This would run counter to a policy of re-establishing the Government’s authority. (e) They could launch a campaign of covert propaganda etc. aimed at stiffening the Government and increasing its anti-Tudeh activities. (f) They could bring economic pressure, (since whatever the present state of Persia’s finances, she will certainly eventually need external help) in the following ways:— i) By negotiating an oil settlement, ii) By arranging financial assistance. For either i) or ii) it is essential that there should be complete Anglo-United States solidarity. Otherwise the Persians will continue to attempt playing off one power against another, with loss of precious time. Conclusion Our most useful means of pressure is financial, (but depends on complete Anglo-United States solidarity and on making no offer of help in haste or without exacting conditions) accompanied by covert propaganda. 5. Persian-Soviet Relations. (a) The Russians have shown no signs of wishing to intervene in the Persian crisis. Nevertheless they are vitally interested in the outcome and dispose a powerful instrument in the Tudeh party. (b) In an attempt to prevent their intervening by force it might be desirable to reiterate the Western interest in Persia’s independence. (c) Alternatively it might be possible to ‘neutralise’ Persia. This might weaken Russian support for the Tudeh, on the assumption that the prime Soviet interest in Persia is to prevent the spread of what is seen as aggressive western influence.
