Honduras 809 wanted to return from Nicaragua. The President said he planned to make an earnest request of the emigres to return to Honduras and that he would arrange for air and truck transportation. However, Dávila indicated that Villeda would not make the call until the Nicaraguans expelled Colonel Velasquez.5 I told Dávila that I thought the Hondurans should live up to their word even though the other side might delay in taking action against Velasquez and his co-­conspirators. I informed Dávila that we had received reports that broadcasts from the clandestine radio had ceased. 5 On March 13, the Department of State informed the Embassies in Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Panama, and Honduras that Col. Velasquez had departed Nicaragua on March 6 for Panama via Costa Rica. (Telegram 213 to Managua, telegram 278 to San Jose, telegram 358 to Guatemala, telegram 299 to Panama City, and telegram 278 to Tegucigalpa; 715.00/3–1359) HO–7. Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Honduras1 Washington, May 16, 1959, 10:58 a.m. 362. Sevilla-Sacasa saw Rubottom May 14 and revealed Nicaragua firmly convinced Villeda holding up ratification of Nicaraguan- Honduran agreement because does not want to be held responsible for airborne revolutionaries from Cuba who he said planned land in disputed territory and be transshipped from there to Bonanza and La Luz areas in interior Nicaragua where U.S. has extensive mining interests.2 Sevilla expressed belief Villeda playing part of fool in permitting himself being used as tool for alleged invasion since Nicaragua will take vigorous retaliatory action against Honduras if territory it nominally controls pending settlement of dispute is used for staging ground. Sevilla said Nicaragua has called upon mixed military commission to investigate rumored plan of invasion force to use vaguely defined air fields in Gracias a Dios Department. Department fully aware of numerous approaches made by Ambassador to Villeda in effort obtain ratification Honduras-Nicaraguan Agreement signed FEB 26 1959. In view of recurrent reports that 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 615.173/5–1659. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Stewart, cleared with Dreier, and initialled by Rubottom. The telegram was also repeated for information to Managua and Habana. 2 On May 31–June 1, a group of revolutionary exiles living in Costa Rica invaded Nicaragua. For additional information on the attempted invasion, see the compilation on United States relations with Nicaragua.
