548  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
at the level of January 1,1991, if the US side were to decide not to deploy 
the MX missiles in a mobile mode. An understanding to this effect 
could be formalized through an exchange of political declarations. This 
would, without doubt, impart additional momentum to the process of 
real nuclear disarmament.
Concerning the other of your proposals - on considering the ques-
tion of fixed MIRVed ICBMs in subsequent negotiations. This is a ques-
tion that has a bearing on the entire range of further strategic offensive 
arms reductions. We have more than once spoken in favor of starting 
negotiations on second-­phase reductions right after the conclusion of 
the treaty now being prepared. I regard positively the fact that discus-
sions, for the time being informal, of the tasks of future negotiations are 
already underway in Geneva. I think that at our meeting in Washington 
we could adopt a declaration of intent regarding future talks on further 
reductions in US and Soviet strategic offensive arms and agree on when 
they should begin. A draft such statement could be worked out by our 
foreign ministers during their forthcoming meetings.
It appears that even now we could record a common view which 
has emerged in the exchanges between the two of us, i.e. that future 
negotiations should provide for reductions in quantitative levels of all 
strategic arms and help to attain a mix and structure of arms that would 
be consistent with the goal of strengthening strategic stability.
In this context I would like to emphasize that, as before, we regard 
observance by the USSR and the USA of the ABM Treaty as the basis for 
maintaining and strengthening strategic stability.
I also wrote to you about the problem arising from significant dif-
ferences in the structures of Soviet and US strategic offensive arms. 
Logic prompts that in the future, too, this objective factor will have to 
be considered by us in further arms reductions. Accordingly, all our 
steps should be extremely prudent and cautious. Reducing one compo-
nent of the strategic triad should not lead to a general destabilization of 
the strategic situation as a result of the two other components remain-
ing intact.
In the context of these talks the whole range of issues, considered 
by each side to be important for attaining the final objective of the nego-
tiations, could be examined. In particular, we believe it is possible to 
consider the question of significantly reducing the concentration of 
warheads on all ballistic missiles (ICBMs and SLBMs) and of ALCMs 
on heavy bombers, and the number of their delivery vehicles as well.
In our view, the situation now evolving in the world and in 
Soviet-US relations augurs well for negotiations on follow-­on strategic 
arms reductions to proceed at a good pace and productively.
We even do not rule out the possibility that a new agreement could 
be concluded earlier than reductions would actually be completed
