893.00/6464 [Document 624] The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Secretary of State CANTON, June 26, 1925. [Received August 1.] No. 336 SIR: I have the honor to refer to my telegram of June 24, 12 o’clock noon, to the Department and to the Legation concerning the brief but sharp firing that occurred on the afternoon of June 23rd between Chinese troops on one side and British and French bluejackets on the other. Revised figures show that forty-three Chinese were killed and about seventy wounded, including soldiers, students, and several women. On the British-French side the casualties were one killed (a French merchant) and five wounded including the Commissioner of the Chinese Maritime Customs, Mr. Edwards, as well as a Japanese merchant and several British bluejackets. As the Department will recall from my telegrams to the Legation the Chinese announced a demonstration against “unequal treaties”, foreign concessions, et cetera, for June 23. It was known that this demonstration would pass partly around Shameen, and that it would probably consist of soldiers as well as students and laborers. For these reasons the British and French authorities, as well as other foreigners residing in the Shameen concessions, naturally became apprehensive for their safety. It was realized that the Chinese were greatly excited because of anti-foreign propaganda and that the procession might easily develop into a mob and attack Shameen. Warnings were addressed to the local authorities by the British and French consuls urging that the procession not be permitted to pass near Shameen and that the Chinese Government take every possible precaution to prevent an outbreak. This Consulate General also addressed a communication to the authorities calling attention to anti-foreign propaganda and asking for an assurance that American lives and property would be protected. No reply was received by this office from the Civil Governor, but on the afternoon of June 22 a personal letter came from the Chief of Police to the effect that he was doing everything he could to prevent an outbreak and did not think there would be any disorders. Mr. C. C. Wu, I am informed, gave verbal assurances to the British Consul General that order would be maintained, but as the British and French consuls did not feel that the
