First Responses
19
Dr. Brzezinski wondered if we could look at the punitive options.
Secretary Brown referring to the earlier discussion noted that we
could defend the compound for an hour.
Hamilton Jordan noted that the press would not keep quiet on this
end and that was the biggest risk to warning them we were up to
something.
The President said the Iranians were not idiots. They would not be
sitting and waiting for us to take them out. They would move the
hostages out of the Embassy to other locations. He wondered whether
the civilians were in fact coming out.
Secretary Vance said we don’t know at this point. We have no one
to talk to, however, normal scheduled airline flights are continuing.
The President wondered if the British could pass word to our people.
Dr. Brzezinski wondered if we could ask the companies to tell their
people to get out.
Secretary Vance said he would check. He thought that that had been
done but he was not sure.
General Jones noted that for a retaliatory attack Kharg Island was
probably the most critical facility in Iran. Originally they thought it
would require very little to seize the island. Later today however they
had discovered that there were about 250 soldiers, another 250 air
defense personnel, and several hundred (up to 500) military personnel
involved in a hover craft program there. Our tactics could be to either
seize the island or to impose a blockade. We cannot effectively block
the entire Persian Gulf since it is impossible to discriminate between
ships and their destinations. Moreover, Kharg Island is not so easy to
blockade; it is very close to the coast and there are many aircraft.
Secretary Brown noted that Kharg Island provided a bargaining
lever. We could show the Iranians that if they take our oil we can
block theirs. This is a very dangerous process, however. He wondered
whether it would not shut off other oil in the Gulf. How would the
Soviets react.
Dr. Brzezinski said the reaction would depend on circumstances.
If we did something like this right now, it would be extremely bad
and the reaction around the world would be extremely critical. How-
ever, later if killings occur they might possibly consider it alright partic-
ularly if they saw Iran disintegrating.
The President wondered about an aerial attack on the island.
Secretary Brown said that would be more permanent since it would
destroy the installation.
Dr. Brzezinski noted that seizing the island provided a bargaining
lever. We would have land and people in our own custody which
permits us to bargain.
