United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 63 On the other hand Brazilian indicated some disappointment and stated would have to cable home for instructions End FYI. Requested Action You are requested discuss this proposal ASAP at highest appropriate levels host government and urge government to instruct its delegation to Specialized Committee to accept and support this new U.S. proposal in order we may successfully establish and begin operation this institution we all so much desire at earliest practicable moment. You should stress U.S. has made strongest effort meet position Latin American delegations and these very real concessions were very difficult to make in light pending and accomplished increases in IBRD, IMF and Eximbank resources. Reiterate U.S. proposal is an integral one cleared at highest level repeat highest level U.S. Government and early action essential. Treasury Secretary Anderson and Rubottom personally spoke to Latin leaders prior presentation in Specialized Committee. Please report host government reaction soonest. Herter Acting ETA–22. Editorial Note On March 24, 1959, Acting Secretary Dillon approved a recommendation contained in a memorandum from Wilson T. M. Beale, Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (initialled by Assistant Secretary Mann), to authorize Assistant Secretary of the Treasury Upton to sign the Final Act incorporating the articles of agreement for an Inter-American Economic Development Banking Institution prepared by the Socialized Committee of the Organization of American States. The memorandum reads in part as follows: “Initialling the Final Act of the Specialized Committee will constitute in effect a commitment on the part of the United States not to propose any alteration in the draft charter since we have so proposed to the other countries. Subsequent signing of the Final Act will signify in effect United States agreement to accept or reject the draft charter in toto, without reservations, after customary legislative action.” (810.10/1–559)
