684
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
Schmidt: Number One. I would like to thank you for your talk with
Berlin Mayor Stobbe.2 I have seen his report; I have not seen him in
person so far and would also especially thank you for the very clear
statements about the United States and its support for Berlin. I would
connect this with my repeated expressions of thanks for our ongoing
talks a month ago at your place in Washington.3 I have not seen your
television talk with the European editors, but there has been some
confusion in the West European press about a deadline or a specific
date.4 I am not aware of any such deadline and it makes me ask you
what is it you mean by that?
President: Well there was no deadline to Allies. I did ask you all
to help us with action either two weeks after the Majles is convened
or the middle part of May, and we would hope that all of our concerted
efforts would have success by then.
Schmidt: Well, I fully understand it. This was my belief that this
was what you had in mind.
President: Yes, that is exactly what I had in mind.
Schmidt: It was my speculation. Let me please say that some people
of course, in the French, British, German press, I don’t know what the
other Europeans have said, are speculating whether the Heads of State
or Heads of Governments in Europe and in America are communicating
over the media with the other leaders. This is certainly not the case
and I think we shall take the opportunity within the next couple of
days to make it clear that we are in necessary and close personal contact.
I just talked to Valery, and he told me that you had been in contact
with him, a couple of days ago.5
President: Yes, that’s true. And that’s the only reference I made,
and it was completely distorted in some of the European press as an
ultimatum or a demand for action and so forth. What I said in the
interview was that there was an expectation of success and that we
did have a target date, but what I was referring to is the one I have
just described to you.
Schmidt: Let me tell you that on Sunday, the day before yesterday,
I had a couple of hours with the leading members of the Cabinet,
2 See footnote 2, Document 251.
3 Schmidt visited Washington March 4–6.
4 During the April 12 interview, Carter told four European journalists that the
deadline in question was in his March 25 message to Ohira, Giscard, Thatcher, Schmidt,
Cossiga, and Trudeau (see Document 223), in which he asked European nations to make
clear to Iranian authorities that they would break relations with Iran if the U.S. steps
did not lead to the release of the hostages by mid-May. For the full text of the wide-
ranging interview, see Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pp. 668–682.
5 See Document 247.
