784 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement on the Offshore Islands and the deteriorating international position of the GRC as the de jure government of China, further to isolate the United States in its position with respect to the GRC. 3. Contingent Press Release in Event of Break-­Off. I think that the Department’s statement is excellent and it well avoids the danger of slamming doors and accentuating any crisis atmosphere that may be created. I have no suggestions. In this regard I am enclosing a copy of the contingent break-­off statement which I drafted prior to the February 9 meeting on the basis of the Department’s 1591. I am keeping this in the brief case for use, if necessary, and would appreciate any comments or suggestions the Department may have. Of course, both of these statements may require some modification to fit them to the situation. As far as my statement is concerned, for maximum effectiveness, it would have to be given out as I left the meeting room and would have to appear largely extempora­ neous. In any event I suggest that you keep the text handy on meeting days so that if a break does unexpectedly come, it can be used as a basis for a telephone call from me letting you know exactly what I have said. 4. White Paper Summarizing Talks. Both Dave and I have carefully gone over the Historical Division’s draft paper summarizing the talks to date. Our intention was to transmit our detailed suggestions as with Lindbeck’s paper. However, we both found that this was not practical as, frankly, we feel the paper is in need of complete rewriting. I do not feel that it effectively presents our case, and its shifting back and forth between the chronological and subject approach can only leave the reader very confused. I certainly would not want it to represent the offi­ cial summary of our talks. Dave is starting to work on an entirely new draft which we will go over together and try to get to you as quickly as possible. I particularly appreciated the memorandum on the China portion of the discussions with the British as well as Robertson’s conversa­ tion with Koo. I especially felt that Robertson’s comments to Koo on ­Chiang’s recent statements were very well taken and I was glad to see this said. I will, of course, be glad to go over to Paris if it is thought that it would be useful and I would hope to hear one way or another as soon as possible in order that I nay make my plans. I have made an engage­ ment in Prague for Sunday, March 4, which I would be loath to break but could fit in almost any other time. I should have previously called your attention to the “question” Wang asked me at the last meeting (paragraph 11 mytel 1513). This is the best and frankest thumbnail summary of their position that he has given to date.
