686
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
215.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Romania1
Washington, July 2, 1979, 2326Z
171577. Moscow for DAS Robert Barry. Subject: MFN for Romania:
Nimetz’ Meeting With Bogdan; Bogdan’s Meeting With Jewish Repre-
sentatives, July 2. Ref: State 168581.2
1. (C-entire text)
2. Counselor Nimetz met July 2 with visiting MFA Counselor for
North America Bogdan and Romanian Ambassador Ionescu (who can-
celled planned return to Bucharest). Nimetz described the concerns of
American Jewish organizations over declining emigration and urged
the Romanian Government to face this as a practical problem. Nimetz
said that Jewish organizations are concerned that Jackson-Vanik is
not working.3 Trade has increased but the kind of emigration which
interests them is not going up. Jewish groups believe that the problem
is intimidation in the application procedures. Having raised these con-
cerns, they are in a position where they cannot easily back off without
some tangible results. Nimetz noted that he had told representatives
of the Jewish groups that distribution of applications by the Joint Distri-
bution Committee would prove very difficult for the Romanian Gov-
ernment. He asked Bogdan whether a Romanian could be at the JDC
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Office of
Analysis for the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Office Subject Files, 1965–1980,
Lot 92D412, Box 3, MFN Waiver/Controversy 1979–80. Confidential; Immediate; Exdis.
Sent for information Priority to Budapest and Moscow. Drafted by Bradtke; cleared by
Schmidt, Vest, and Larrabee, and in S/S; approved by Nimetz.
2 In telegram 168581 to Bucharest, June 29, the Department reported Nimetz’s
conversation with representatives from several Jewish organizations. Nimetz emphasized
that the “administration views possible failure to renew MFN as very serious matter
which would undermine a decade of effort to build up U.S.-Romanian relations.” He
also stressed that failure would “mean that no other country would be willing to submit
itself to uncertainties of waiver process.” Noting that “continued MFN for Romania is
in grave danger unless the GOR is prepared to be cooperative,” the Department instructed
Aggrey to seek an appointment at the earliest opportunity with Romanian officials, and
“make clear that loss of MFN is now real possibility. Romanians should harbor no doubts
that if Jewish organizations in the U.S. oppose MFN for Romania, there will be insufficient
support left in Congress to prevent passage of Schulze’s disapproval recommenda-
tion.” (Ibid.)
3 Nimetz was informed of Jewish-American concerns with the extension of MFN
to Romania as early as June 7. Representatives of the American-Jewish Committee, the
Anti-Defamation League, the B’nai B’rith and the National Jewish Community Relations
Advisory Council, were particularly alarmed by what they saw as a cumbersome pre-
screening process that led to intimidation of applicants. In telegram 147765 to Bucharest,
June 9, the Department instructed Aggrey to meet with Pacoste and stress U.S. concerns
regarding Jewish emigration. (Ibid.)
