774
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
touch with the Germans, French and others in this regard to see what
they might be able to do.
3. In the previous phase we concentrated our attention heavily on
Ghotbzadeh, and we continue to assume he will be one of the key
actors. We believe, however, we must give increased attention to Bani-
Sadr for it will presumably be his responsibility to guide the hostage
issue through the new parliament. If he does not undertake the task,
then his yet to be appointed prime minister will be responsible. We
would like to continue to rely on you as our channel to official Iranians,
i.e. Bani-Sadr, Ghotbzadeh, the new prime minister if and when he is
appointed, and others you consider appropriate. Obviously any contri-
bution you can make to the persuasive effort with the clerics or any
advice you have on that subject would also be welcomed but we recog-
nize that you and your government may well feel it is wise for you to
leave that group to others.
4. Bourguet and Villalon will continue to be helpful in a variety of
ways. We assume their primary contact will continue to be Ghotbzadeh.
5. There may be other intermediaries involved and we will try
to keep you fully informed on these developments. We would be
particularly interested in ideas on ways to get to the group working
directly with Khomeini.
6. Parallel to our intensified diplomatic effort will be augmented
pressure in the form of sanctions from our allies and friends. We believe
these measures are having some political and psychological effect but
are aware that the economic effects will take some time.
7. It is plain that this crisis will be resolved and the hostages
released when Iran’s leadership decides that it serves their interest and
the interest of the Revolution to do so. There are a variety of arguments
and actions that we will put forward to bring these points home to
key figures, and we will welcome your insights and suggestions for
this process.
8. We believe it would be useful at this stage if you could arrange
a tour d’horizon with Bani-Sadr to review the present situation, prospects
for favorable parliamentary action, the state of planning for such action,
and international initiatives that might usefully contribute to that proc-
ess, especially initiatives by the U.S. We would like to develop as
frank an exchange with Bani-Sadr as possible and believe a matching
exchange might usefully be held with Ghotbzadeh. We would appreci-
ate your assessment after these conversations so that we can refine
our planning.
9. One other issue concerns us. We have heard increasing talk from
Tehran again about trial of the hostages. Do you believe this is again
becoming a real threat? If so, do you have thoughts about how to turn
it aside?
