1058
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
A World Health Strategy Group was established under Peter
Bourne with four agency-led working groups.
I. Initiatives for the Developing Countries (AID-chaired)
II. Scientific and Manpower Development (HEW)
III. Multilateral Agencies (State)
IV. U.S. Commerce in International Health5
The goal, originally, was to achieve a single draft document by July
14 with a final report to the President by August 25. A short draft
over-view and outline for the health strategy report has been circulated
along with a list of key issues and revised work schedule. (See Tab D.)6
These latter documents assume an increase in foreign aid and es-
pecially health as a part of our BHN strategy. No dollar figures have yet
been set for the specific initiatives to our knowledge.
The main initiatives proposed include:
—Support of “Integral Health Services Systems” including Pri-
mary Health Care, prevention, health, nutrition and family planning
and paramedical training;
—Action against disease control—infectious diseases, blindness,
mental health;
—Support for water and sanitation efforts;
—NGO involvement in bilateral assistance programs;
—Helping LDC resource and institutional capacities;
—Establishing foreign centers for research and training;
—Assistance in “Leadership Manpower Development”;
—An “International Health Service Corps”;
—Extension to present ACTION authority to provide assistance to
“Domestic Development Service Programs” in LDCs;
—Have UNDP earmark funds for special health programs of
multilateral agencies with “minimal growth in regular budget”;
—Increase in USG agency staff responsible for health activities of
multilateral agencies;
5 An unknown hand placed a question mark at the end of this point.
6 Attached but not printed is a June 29 memorandum from Lowrance to the
members of the White House Review of International Health Working Group III on Mul-
tilateral Health Organizations. Lowrance indicated that Bourne had met with the Consol-
idation Group, comprised of members from AID, HEW, and the Departments of State
and Treasury, which had assumed responsibility for budgetary, organizational, and leg-
islative matters and for drafting an overall international health strategy report. In addi-
tion to the draft overview and outline, list of key issues, and revised work plan, Lowrance
also included a 9-page strategy and initiatives paper. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, P780120–2028)
