Venezuela  1273
treatment for Canadian oil imported into District II. It is not expected 
that increase in Canadian oil imported into District V as result proposed 
exemption will substantially exceed present level. Nevertheless if con-
trary to our expectations any substantial displacement of Venezuelan 
oil should occur as result exemption U.S. is prepared consult with 
Venezuela and Canada to adjust situation.
6. We regard amended program as consistent with our joint 
interest in common with Canada and the other American Republics 
in defense and security of hemisphere. We therefore hope that 
Venezuela will not/repeat not consider our action as discriminatory 
but as necessary initial step toward possible broader hemisphere 
approach to problem.
7. We have Venezuela’s interests very much in mind and will in 
future give full and sympathetic consideration to views of GOV. We are 
mindful of understanding and cooperation displayed by present GOV 
on oil imports problem in the past and hope that bilateral talks seek-
ing broader solution may be resumed near future. FYI Perez Alfonso 
is close adviser to Venezuelan President on petroleum matters and is 
understood have President’s complete confidence and support. In past 
he has shown sympathetic and cooperative attitude toward restrictions 
U.S. has imposed on oil imports. Present Venezuelan Government took 
the initiative in preparing Venezuelan public opinion for imposition 
March 10 of mandatory oil import program and President Betancourt 
apparently hopes do so in regard Canadian exemption from program. 
President and Minister of Mines have particularly emphasized inter-
est in maintaining Venezuela’s share of U.S. market and stabilizing oil 
prices at high level. They recognize that U.S. restrictions have contrib-
uted to market stability. Since action we are about to take applies only 
to Canadian oil it introduces new feature in U.S. oil import program 
to which GOV objects in principle on grounds it discriminates against 
Venezuela in favor Canada.
END FYI
Cable Department and repeat Caracas report conversation with 
Perez Alfonso.2
Dillon
2 Pérez did not arrive in Great Britain until May 1, 1959, and because of his lim-
ited stay in London, the general purport of the message, as given in telegram 9575, was 
reported to him by Venezuelan Embassy officials. (033.3141/5–259)
