German Democratic Republic
375
Secretary Derian meet with her counterpart in the GDR. In this regard,
the Secretary noted that Derian would soon be in Europe and that such
a meeting would be helpful. Fischer said that he had absolutely nothing
against such a meeting and was, in fact, for it. Fischer allowed that he
was not a consular officer and was only interested in divided family
cases to the extent they cause “problems.” So far, he said, these cases
had “lacked sufficient mass” to attract his attention. His consular offi-
cers are addressing and solving these cases and, he added, “work on
the basis of binding political decisions.” In closing, Fischer noted that
the Secretary had raised only two names.
Returning to the consular convention Fischer said that he is against
linkages that “bind our legs so that we can not walk.” He was mention-
ing this, he said, in relation to the consular convention, since, if we were
linking problems, he would hope that the Secretary would carefully
examine his “compromise” proposal on this problem. Saying that he
owed it to himself and to the Secretary, he added that he had the
feeling that their talk in September had not been understood by their
staffs. He had, he said, left in September with the feeling that they had
“found a solution that would not involve one party expecting the other
party to do something it could not do.” That solution, which he termed
“a face saving solution,” would have involved both sides doing what
was “feasible.” Unfortunately, he said, things had then broken down.
The Secretary said that he, too, had thought they had a solution, accord-
ing to which each side would state its position on nationality. He hoped
that, after examining Fischer’s compromise proposal, we would put
“this matter aside once and for all,” to which Fischer replied: “We are
not treading on your feet, please don’t tread on ours.”
In response to the Secretary’s question as to whether he had any
other issues to raise, Fischer brought up the matter of a cultural agree-
ment. In the cultural area, he said, we have a “vivid exchange.” He
asked why this could not be carried forward on a “contractual basis.”
The volume of our trade compared to our overall relations, Fischer
said, is almost negligible. In the trade area, he claimed, there were
lost opportunities. Foreign Trade State Secretary Beil, he said, had
confirmed to him there are great opportunities not only in grain sales
but in general. There were, however, some barriers, namely MFN,
credits and the GDR’s fishing quota. That quota Fischer noted was
“zero point zero.” Removal of such barriers and expansion of trade
would have good effects on our bilateral relations and in the European
context. We had to consider, he concluded, not only our bilateral
relations but the “radiance” of those relations in Europe where we
have “greater responsibilities than normal.” “Frankly,” Fischer said,
“you could get along without relations with us and so could we. But
that would be irresponsible because of the impact on the European
