Chapter 2, January–June 1989  69
START: Depressed-Trajectory SLBMs, SLCMs
The Secretary said he wanted first to comment on an item 
Shevardnadze had put on the table at the end of their previous meet-
ing, namely, limits on depressed-­trajectory SLBMs. This subject had 
received a fair amount of attention recently in the United States and 
we were examining it as well. We thought it should more properly be 
called short-­time-­of-­flight missiles. We saw this as a complex prob-
lem and were investigating whether there were meaningful limits that 
could be effectively verified. Until then we should keep the item on the 
agenda for future discussions.
Shevardnadze said this was fine; he agreed. He had raised the idea 
in the same sense.
The Secretary said Shevardnadze had also mentioned sea-launched 
cruise missiles. Throughout START the U.S. believed that a sound treaty 
could be achieved without formal limits on SLCMs. SLCMs posed 
extraordinary verification problems. They had long flight times and 
thus were not suitable for a first strike. Unlike other strategic systems 
SLCMs were located on naval platforms with non-­strategic missions. 
As a maritime power, the U.S. needed non-­strategic SLCMs. We rec-
ognized that at the Washington summit we had agreed to see whether 
numerical ceilings could be developed and verified. We had looked at 
Soviet proposals, however, and found them technically unworkable. 
We had not found any other technically workable solutions that did not 
conflict with our naval operational requirements. Therefore we contin-
ued to favor a declaratory approach. We realized this posed a problem 
for the Soviet side and would continue to study the problem internally. 
We would be glad to consider any new Soviet proposals that might 
be presented. In short, we recognized that this remained a major dif-
ference between us in START, but we could not go beyond this at the 
current meeting.
Shevardnadze replied that in the course of the negotiations the U.S. 
would need to take a closer look at the verification measures suggested 
by the Soviets. They believed that verification was quite feasible and 
the U.S. needed to take a closer substantive look.
[Omitted here are discussions not related to START.]
