810 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I dozen countries; in a number of cases, torture of prisoners has been reduced; trials opened to the public. —Spotlight of international attention has been focused on those governments which consistently violate human rights, as our efforts are joined by other nations, individuals, regional and international organizations. —Have taken a leadership role in resettlement of refugees from Indochina and the Caribbean; and in international relief effort for people of Kampuchea. 163. Farewell Address by President Carter to the Nation1 Washington, January 14, 1981 Good evening. In a few days I will lay down my official responsibilities in this office, to take up once more the only title in our democracy superior to that of President, the title of citizen. Of Vice President Mondale, my Cabinet, and the hundreds of others who have served with me during the last 4 years, I wish to say now publicly what I have said in private: I thank them for the dedication and competence they’ve brought to the service of our country. But I owe my deepest thanks to you, to the American people, because you gave me this extraordinary opportunity to serve. We’ve faced great challenges together, and we know that future problems will also be difficult. But I’m now more convinced than ever that the United States, better than any other country, can meet successfully whatever the future might bring. These last 4 years have made me more certain than ever of the inner strength of our country, the unchanging value of our principles and ideals, the stability of our political system, the ingenuity and the decency of our people. 1 Source: Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book III, pp. 2890–2893. The President spoke at 9 p.m. from the Oval Office at the White House. His remarks were broadcast live on radio and television. In his diary entry for January 14, the President wrote: “I delivered the farewell address, and the response was good. I described the pressure of special interest groups, how they fragment the country. Primarily I emphasized, however, the threat of nuclear destruction, environmental issues, and consideration for human rights. These are the same themes I used in my acceptance speech in 1976, my inaugural address four years ago, and that I pursued when I was president.” (White House Diary, p. 507)
