810
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
dozen countries; in a number of cases, torture of prisoners has been re-
duced; trials opened to the public.
—Spotlight of international attention has been focused on those gov-
ernments which consistently violate human rights, as our efforts are
joined by other nations, individuals, regional and international
organizations.
—Have taken a leadership role in resettlement of refugees from In-
dochina and the Caribbean; and in international relief effort for people
of Kampuchea.
163.
Farewell Address by President Carter to the Nation1
Washington, January 14, 1981
Good evening.
In a few days I will lay down my official responsibilities in this of-
fice, to take up once more the only title in our democracy superior to
that of President, the title of citizen.
Of Vice President Mondale, my Cabinet, and the hundreds of
others who have served with me during the last 4 years, I wish to say
now publicly what I have said in private: I thank them for the dedica-
tion and competence they’ve brought to the service of our country. But
I owe my deepest thanks to you, to the American people, because you
gave me this extraordinary opportunity to serve.
We’ve faced great challenges together, and we know that future
problems will also be difficult. But I’m now more convinced than ever
that the United States, better than any other country, can meet success-
fully whatever the future might bring. These last 4 years have made me
more certain than ever of the inner strength of our country, the un-
changing value of our principles and ideals, the stability of our political
system, the ingenuity and the decency of our people.
1 Source: Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book III, pp. 2890–2893. The President spoke
at 9 p.m. from the Oval Office at the White House. His remarks were broadcast live on
radio and television. In his diary entry for January 14, the President wrote: “I delivered
the farewell address, and the response was good. I described the pressure of special in-
terest groups, how they fragment the country. Primarily I emphasized, however, the
threat of nuclear destruction, environmental issues, and consideration for human rights.
These are the same themes I used in my acceptance speech in 1976, my inaugural address
four years ago, and that I pursued when I was president.” (White House Diary, p. 507)
