300  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
and absolute form of Communism, while China was still more closely 
tied to doctrinaire Marxist and Leninist teachings. I also remarked that 
whatever adjustments might at some time be possible in U.S. policy, 
that a relaxation of tension required a willingness on both sides and 
that from all the information that had come to my attention there was 
no indication whatsoever that Communist China was seeking either 
a relaxation of tension with the United States or a less dominant role 
throughout Asia.
The conversation closed with the President once more expressing 
his appreciation for the message from President Eisenhower and saying 
that while he could add no suggestions that could be helpful as to the 
current difficulties with Russia, be fully shared the hopes and objec-
tives of President Eisenhower.
CH–37.	
Memorandum from the Under Secretary of State (Dillon) 
to the President1
Washington, June 2, 1960.
MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT
SUBJECT
Disaster Assistance to Chile2
With your encouragement, the United States Government has 
undertaken a major foreign disaster relief operation in Chile. We have 
airlifted from the U.S. two Army field hospitals, each with 400 beds and 
210 Army personnel. We have also airlifted ten helicopters to operate 
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series.
2 Commencing May 21, Chile was struck by a series of earthquakes accompanied by 
tidal waves, avalanches, and floods, which caused more than 5,000 deaths and property 
damage estimated between $350 and $400 million.
On May 24, President Eisenhower sent a message to President Alessandri, transmit-
ted in Department telegram 869 to Santiago, which read as follows:
“Dear Mr. President:
“The news of the disasters in southern Chile has come as a personal shock to me. 
Through you, I convey to the Chilean people the profound sympathy of the United States 
Government and people.
“With assurance of my continuing regard.
Sincerely,
(signed) Dwight D. Eisenhower”
(Eisenhower Library, Project Clean Up, “Chile”)
