3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
52
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
the far end of that bazaar someone was giving away pillows free of
charge. As people heard him, they began running toward that part of
the bazaar, until the man was left all alone. At that moment he began to
wonder whether there might not be something to the rumor that he
himself had started, and he thought that, just in case, he, too, should
start running; who knows, maybe they were indeed giving out free
pillows. Brezhnev said he knew that Americans liked anecdotes, and
that is why he told this story by way of an analogy to those who started
rumors about Soviet-war-like intentions.
The Secretary continued by saying that recently, Brezhnev had
noted that there were objective possibilities for developing equal and
mutually advantageous cooperation in various spheres for the good of
both countries and universal peace. He heartily agreed with such a
view of the situation.
Brezhnev had further said that the question was how soon such a
development would begin. He was firmly convinced that we could
begin that process now. We had an unparalleled opportunity to set our
relations on a fresh course.
At Tula Brezhnev had also said that detente meant an ability to
take into consideration each other’s legitimate interests. The two sides
were realistic enough to know that we would have differences. But we
shared a fundamental interest in improving our mutual under-
standing. Our differences must not distract us from working for peace.
They also must not divide us.
The Secretary wanted to give Brezhnev a sense of developments in
our country which had affected our national outlook. We have come
through a hotly contested national election which was a process of re-
newal and of developing a new policy consensus in the country. Now a
new government had taken office in Washington, but we were dealing
with the same currents of opinion that had shaped our election debates.
There was support for detente among the American people, but there
were also concerns and apprehensions which had to be overcome.
At this point Brezhnev interrupted again and recalled how at the
very beginning of the “Great Patriotic War”, at the time Hitler had at-
tacked Czechoslovakia and had allied himself with Mussolini, he had
come home from work one day to the place where he lived in rather
humble conditions together with his father. His father was a simple
man, a steel worker, and this story, which Brezhnev was sure his col-
leagues on the Politburo had heard more than once, was well-suited to
illustrate a simple working man’s approach to the psychological ques-
tions of war. His father had asked him “Lyonya, which is the highest
mountain in the world”? He had responded that it was Mt. Everest. His
father then asked how tall was the Eiffel Tower in Paris? He had replied
that it was some 300 meters tall. His father then said that if he and his
