1977 113 3. These notes will be kept on file at the NSC for review when required. 4. In the event of decisions or directions for follow-­on work, the notes will be disaggregated and each of the principals will be given that part of the record on those decisions that affect him. Mr. Gelb commented that his experience as a reporter suggested that leaks will not be stopped by these procedures. Because of these procedures we will pay a very high price: people with legitimate access to this information will not be able to get it; and the people who have been on top of the problem with the real technical expertise will be cut out of the meetings. This was a problem under which the Nixon Administration suffered. Secretary Brown indicated that this was a reasonable step and that in fact we had no choice in the matter. Admiral Turner asked Mr. Gelb how, given his experience, he would suggest we cut down on leaks. Mr. Gelb said that in 3½ years as a reporter he never had any trouble getting any information. Thus, there is no need for extensive restrictions. In response, Dr. Brzezinski agreed that the price could be high, but that it is very important that the leaks be stopped; and experience to date suggests that the probability of leaks is correlated with the size of the meeting. Dr. Brzezinski then stated that the purpose of the meeting was to agree on the basic findings of the PRM–10 study, and on the guidelines and objectives that it supports. These agreements will form the basis for a Presidential Directive on PRM–10. Dr. Brzezinski asked for comments on Section I of the August 2, 1977 Agenda Paper (attached)—Findings. Mr. Keeny felt that the word “many” in the third tic overstated the trends, and he also wondered what the word “areas” meant. Secretary Brown indicated that the word “areas” meant both geographical and military spheres. After some discussion, Mr. Christopher proposed that the word “many” be replaced by the word “several.” This was agreed. General Smith indicated that the Joint Chiefs of Staff were concerned that the statement in the third tic that adverse trends “can be halted in Europe in the early 80’s if the appropriate programs are carried out” was probably too strong. Dr. Brzezinski then turned the discussion to Section II of the Agenda Paper—Guidelines. Secretary Brown felt that use of the word “overriding” to modify US interests in Guideline 2 confused the sentence and gave it an interventionist flavor. Dr. Huntington indicated that, to the contrary, “overriding” was intended to qualify the statement not make it an open-­ended advocation of intervention. After some discussion the guideline was altered to read: To prevent or counter Soviet use of military force to gain influence over other societies where US interest dictate.
