Chapter 4, February–April 1990 551 that Shevardnadze is not thinking along the lines of a trade-­off of range for nuclear-­conventional.5 • Future Negotiations—Nazarkin said Shevardnadze wants to agree on a statement on START II at this meeting. However, Nazarkin said that speaking personally he hoped we would have a draft statement to propose because the Soviet statement was “empty” and “not very good”. He said he still hoped to persuade Shevardnadze not to table it.6 Those were Nazarkin’s main messages. But he also said that Shevardnadze would propose ideas on other START issues: • Verification of road mobile missiles—He said the Shevardnadze would have new ideas on this tricky technical issue. • Perimeter portal monitoring—The Soviets will be ready to work this question, but he emphasized that the Soviets want reciprocity in any deal. • Noncircumvention—Nazarkin said they will be ready to reach agreement on this, as well as the related subject of third country basing. • Backfire—Interestingly, the Soviets want to solve the Backfire question sooner rather than later. He said their preferred course was to put it in CFE but he seemed to hint that if this approach was not good enough then they might be prepared to do something in START. Finally, Nazarkin said Shevardnadze was bringing along some technical experts and that they would be ready to meet with our experts on the issues of R & D boosters, suspect site inspections, throw-­weight, and phasing of reductions. Nazarkin stressed that Shevardnadze wants to get START finished, as quickly as possible. Along these lines, I asked him if Shevardnadze would be attracted to the idea of assigning the Geneva delegations a list of issues to resolve by the next Ministerial. Nazarkin reacted very enthusiastically and said he thought his boss would love the idea. 5 Zoellick wrote in the left hand margin beside this point: “DR—This could be tricky. May reflect Soviet unease with Moscow outcome.” 6 Zoellick wrote in the left-­hand margin beside this point: “Apparently, their draft avoids specific categories.”
