Non-Proliferation
933
its numerous conditions precedent.2 He asked me to tell you of his full
support for your nonproliferation policy.
5. Conversation with the Argentine Governor at IAEA indicates
that they are not about to fulfill the agreement reached last November
with Secretary Vance to ratify Tlatelolco.
Respectfully,
Gerard Smith3
2 Not found.
3 Smith signed the memorandum “Gerry Smith.”
366.
Editorial Note
On March 10, 1978, President Jimmy Carter signed the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Act of 1978 (NNPA) during a White House cere-
mony. In his remarks, Carter said that “This legislation takes a major
step forward in clarifying our Nation’s policy. I think it would be a
much more predictable factor in the decisions made by foreign nations.
It will give guidance to me, to the Congress, to the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission, and to the Department of Energy and other agencies in
our Federal Government who deal with this sensitive subject.” He also
noted that “with the assistance of our European allies,” an International
Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation study had been created “to inventory
existing nuclear fuels in the form of ore, both uranium, thorium, and
others, to assess the quality and capability of enrichment facilities and
to deal with the proper distribution of nuclear fuels to those who don’t
have supplies in their own country—-with international safeguards
and constraints being adequate; and at the same time, to deal with the
unsolved question of the disposition of spent nuclear fuels. This is one
of the most complicated questions that presents itself to the interna-
tional community. I think it is accurate to say that some of our friends
abroad will have to readjust their policy.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1978,
pp. 498–500)
In his memoirs, the President’s Assistant for National Security Af-
fairs, Zbigniew Brzezinski, recalled that Congress had grown increas-
ingly concerned with the proliferation of nuclear materials after India’s
1974 explosion of a nuclear weapon. The Carter administration, how-
ever, worried that various draft bills “were excessively tough. To head
them off and to prevent further legislative initiatives, we introduced
