Panama 913 With respect to sovereignty it is clear that residual sovereignty still rests with Panama, but actually the Panamanians had not mentioned this problem to him, their principal complaints being the points listed above. Secretary Brucker stated that the sovereignty problem did not seem to be too serious to him. Secretary Herter raised the question of the “security” jobs which are held exclusively by Americans and which is a serious point at issue there. Secretary Brucker replied that they were reviewing these assignments now, that all teachers had now been removed from the security list, and that 300 other security jobs had been removed from the lists. Mr. Rubottom recalled the clipping given to him by the Panamanian Foreign Minister in Santiago,4 following the latter’s open attack on the U.S. policies in the Canal Zone at the Foreign Ministers meeting, which consisted of two job descriptions, in English, which were word for word the same and which offered slightly over a dollar to a Panamanian and approximately $2.30 for an American doing road machine work. Assistant Secretary Roderick said that the Canal Zone authorities were “caught in this middle” between the U.S. objectives on the one hand and the requirement to cut costs on the other. He acknowledged that they might actually pay a U.S. wage under the terms of some of the contracts awarded there, while the contractor himself would ultimately pay the going Panamanian wage for the work prescribed. The President referred to his philosophical approach to all these problems. He said that times had changed since the 1903 Treaty was signed and that the United States could not operate the Canal Zone as though it were “an island.” The Secretary said that we should place a more favorable interpretation on our treaty commitments, in accordance with their spirit, wherever possible. Mr. Siciliano reverted to the discussion on labor problems, and said that, unless more incentive could be given to Panamanian workers, fewer and fewer Panamanians would be hired in the future rather than more of them. Assistant Secretary Roderick said that it would probably be necessary to guarantee Panamanian apprentices certain jobs at the end of their training period. There ensued a discussion of third-­country purchases which was acknowledged by Secretary Brucker to be one of the principal problems with Panama. He pointed out the high-­quality New Zealand beef could be purchased more cheaply than the same quality from the United States. He said that Panamanian beef was not of the same quality. He seemed to acknowledge that, if instructed to do so, the Canal Zone could purchase all of its beef from the United States or Panama. He also pointed 4 For documentation on the fifth meeting of consultation on Ministers of Foreign
