504 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement revolt or the attempt of any Satellite regime to secede from the socialist camp, the Soviet leaders would almost certainly decide to intervene militarily. This, in turn, would probably lead to the conclusion that the post-Stalin Satellite policies in general were a failure and that a return to more repressive policies offered the best means of coping with the problems in Eastern Europe. Soviet Policy Toward Yugoslavia 182. Moscow’s more flexible post-Stalin policies toward the Satellites may have been influenced by its apparently strong desire for a rapprochement with Yugoslavia. Efforts to accomplish this—­most nota­ ble since the spring of 1955—­have not been uniformly successful; in fact, Soviet-Yugoslav relations descended to a name-­calling stage during the winter of 1956–1957. But the present Soviet leaders apparently believe that the split with Yugoslavia was one of Stalin’s major policy failures and that, on balance, the prospective gains from a rapprochement out­ weigh the possible dangers. Moscow’s immediate objective is probably to re-­establish close party, state and ideological relations with Belgrade and, concomitantly, to encourage a weakening of Yugoslavia’s ties with the West; the ultimate objective is to bring Yugoslavia back into the Bloc. For its part, Yugoslavia almost certainly desires to avoid compro­ mising its independence but wishes to maintain close relations with the Bloc. As long as Belgrade assesses Soviet policies favorably, we believe that Yugoslavia will maintain its rapprochement with the USSR and may gradually move toward a somewhat closer alignment within lim­ its which would safeguard its independence. Sino-Soviet Relations 183. Communist China’s stature in the Bloc has continued to grow. Peiping last fall backed the Soviet intervention in Hungary and gener­ ally supported the Soviet attempt to preserve Bloc solidarity. Earlier, however, it probably exercised a moderating influence in the dispute between Moscow and the Gomulka regime. Communist China’s use of its influence in this manner was presumably motivated in large part by Peiping’s desire to maintain the strength of the Bloc and to assert its right to a major voice in Bloc affairs. Further, Peiping has clearly indicated that its ideological pronouncements are intended to represent “original’’ and significant contributions to Marxism-Leninism, a con­ tention which is probably of concern to Moscow. The ideological and political leadership of the Bloc can no longer be said to rest solely with the Soviet Union. 184. Moscow’s willingness to allow Peiping a share in the ideo­ logical leadership of the Bloc and to acquiesce in Peiping’s increased
