International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
993
300.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the NSC Ad Hoc
Group on Population Policy (Green) to the President’s
Special Assistant for Health Issues (Bourne)1
Washington, November 16, 1977
SUBJECT
Foundations for a New U.S. International Health Policy
Among the recommendations in the chapter on Medical Diplo-
macy of the subject report2 is one to establish “an interagency com-
mittee to coordinate international health activities of the various
agencies relating to foreign policy” (p. 329). The recommendation goes
on to say: “Ideally this committee would replace the NSC Ad Hoc
Group on Population Affairs.”
Obviously, health and population are closely related, and the de-
livery of integrated health, family planning, and nutrition services is the
key element of any health strategy for the developing world. However,
population concerns extend far beyond the health field. They relate to,
and interact with, such issues as food, environment, employment, mi-
gration, the status of women, education, social security, age at mar-
riage, village organization, and social/economic development gener-
ally. Health relates to some of these issues, but there are many
divergencies and differences. Hence, I do not see how a single com-
mittee could do justice to the many facets of health and population.
Thus, while I support the establishment of an inter-agency com-
mittee on international health, I favor preserving a separate population
policy committee (i.e., the NSC Ad Hoc Group on Population Policy)
and would expect that there would be close coordination between the
health and population committees, with each being represented at the
other’s meetings.
I would greatly welcome an early opportunity to discuss this and
related matters with you. Please let me know when it would be
convenient.
Marshall Green
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Special Assistant for Health Issues—
Peter Bourne Files, Subject Files, Box 34, International Health, 1/9/77–12/1/77. No clas-
sification marking.
2 See footnote 2, Document 299.
