310  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
there had been a Protestant chapel opposite his home in Sogamoso and 
that it had been attended by very decent, well-­behaved people. In other 
areas, however, they insisted on distributing Protestant propaganda 
and thereby irritated Catholics. I said that although I was a Protestant 
I recognized that Protestant propaganda occasionally touched Catholics 
on a very sensitive spot and that I had even heard that it had at times 
outraged Catholic sentiment. I thought the latter reports were generally 
exaggerated, if not untrue, but I certainly did not support anything of 
this kind if it did happen. I mentioned that I had steadily urged moder-
ation on the Protestant leaders, notably when talking with a number of 
them in New York in October.
I said that there was one other matter which made this problem of 
particular importance at the present time. Every time that we tried to 
do something for Colombia - for example, at the time of the $60 million 
loan - there had been outcries among the Protestants in the United States 
which had been reflected in Congress. In the ultimate analysis we could 
do nothing to help Colombia without Congressional approval, and I 
feared that some time at a most inopportune moment this might not be 
forthcoming. I therefore hoped that Colombia, for its sake, would feel it 
advisable to do something to correct the situation. I again made a plea 
for at least gradual action.
General Rengifo said that as Governor of Antioquia he had been 
familiar with Minister Villarreal’s circular, and that he had discussed 
this matter with our Consul. He felt that there were some areas of the 
country, where violence was still prevalent, where it would be inad-
visable to act in the present circumstances but there were other areas 
(such as Boyacá) where he saw no reason why the churches could not 
be reopened. He told me he would take up Minister Villarreal’s circular 
and follow through on it. I asked that he let me know when anything 
concrete developed.
Our talk was at all times very cordial.4
4 Ambassador Cabot discussed the matter of reopening the Protestant Churches 
in Colombia again with Minister Rengifo on February 18. In despatch 695, dated 
February 19, transmitting the memorandum of that conversation to the Department, he 
made the following statement:
“The Department will note that General Rengifo indicated that a few churches 
might be reopened and that he will confirm in writing the oral information which he 
gave to me in this regard. Some governors, however, are unwilling to have the Protestant 
churches in their departments reopened and a number of governors, for one reason or 
another, have not replied to the Minister of Gobierno’s inquiry. I think it can safely be 
assumed that these governors are reluctant to reply and will stall as long as they can 
before making a decision. I shall try personally to see one or two of these governors on 
forthcoming trips and hope in this way to make further progress in getting the churches 
reopened.” (821.413/2-1953)
