Chemical and Biological Weapons
237
that if all elements of the US verification position were accepted, ade-
quate confidence would exist.
H. French also raised a series of detailed questions d’Aboville
(French Del head) asked rhetorically if it might not be possible to have
separate verification agreements for those parties which possessed CW
stocks and those which did not. He also noted that Soviet position on
verification contains internal contradictions which could be exploited
by allies. In response to question about verification provisions for non-
transfer, Akalovsky (US) said that no specific provisions had been pro-
posed and that suspected transfers could be investigated using the
challenge inspection provisions.
5. Akalovsky (US) said US would continue to brief allies in Geneva
and offered to have quadrilateral consultations at the end of next round
of US-Soviet negotiations, if that were generally desired.
6. Following completion of quadrilateral consultations, Mikulak
and Sanches met with French experts, at their request, to clarify points
of uncertainty identified in French comparison of US and Soviet
positions.
[Omitted here is the list of participants.]
108.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in
Geneva1
Washington, February 13, 1980, 1422Z
39607. Subject: US–USSR Chemical Weapons Negotiations, Round
Eleven: Guidance. Ref: 79 Geneva 14553.2 State CW Message No. 2.
1. (C—Entire text)
2. This message provides general guidance for round eleven. De-
tailed responses to the questions posed Reftel are being provided sepa-
rately in the guidance package.3 Highlights are outlined below.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800077–0811.
Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Robert Mikulak (ACDA/MA/AT); cleared by
Flowerree (ACDA/MA), David Carlson (PM/DCA), Oplinger (NSC), Merle MacDonald
(OSD), Harry Wilson (JCS), and [name not declassified]; and approved by Thomas Davies
(ACDA/MA). Sent for information to Moscow, USNATO, London, Bonn, and Paris.
2 Not found.
3 Not found.
