3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1980
771
lactic, protective, or other peaceful purposes and that it originated at a
military facility in Sverdlovsk.
E.—Article V of the Biological Weapons Convention provides that
the parties shall consult and cooperate with one another in solving any
problems which may arise. In accordance with that Article, the US Gov-
ernment is asking that the Soviet Government consult and cooperate
with it and provide information to explain this outbreak of disease in
Sverdlovsk in April 1979.
F.—We want to deal with this matter in the same serious way in
which we have consulted on a number of questions involving compli-
ance with arms control agreements in recent years. Because of the im-
plications regarding compliance with the Convention itself and for
other arms control negotiations, we are raising this matter directly with
you and asking for prompt and full consultations. A simple denial in
response to this present US approach will not advance the situation and
will not serve our mutual interests.
G.—Since we are now in the process of consulting with you on a
compliance related question, we will make a statement before the Re-
view Conference concludes indicating that we are pursuing consulta-
tions in accordance with Article V. Any response you can make to our
request for consultation and cooperation under Article V before the end
of the Review Conference will be taken into account in determining the
character of the statement we will make.
H.—Obviously, under these circumstance we would not be pre-
pared to approve language in the final document of the Review Confer-
ence which states that no questions have arisen relating to compliance.
5. Embassy Moscow should inform Ambassador Flowerree imme-
diately after Ambassador Watson sees Korniyenko. Ambassador Flow-
erree should then inform Ambassador Issraelyan of the demarche, and
repeat points made in para 4 above.
6. For Geneva: We will provide additional guidance on RevCon
and consultations with allies.
Vance
