Haiti  773
to force the resignation of key Haitian administrators and technicians 
engaged in the “Poté Colé” regional development project in northern 
Haiti. In scope and cost, this is the most important component of the 
grant-­financed cooperative program. The Haitian Government has not 
yet supplied us with a report as to the circumstances of these demon-
strations (although this was immediately requested) or expressed 
regrets or official concern over the incident as would be normal if it had 
been contrary to the Government’s desires. Meanwhile the absence of 
these key Haitian employees has brought a number of the “Poté Colé” 
activities to a temporary halt and jeopardized the entire project.
The most important loan-­financed component of the development 
program (the Artibonite Valley irrigation project) came to a stop in early 
March following unilateral action by the Haitian Government in dismiss-
ing one of the project’s top Haitian employees, an engineer, and install-
ing as his replacement a discredited former Public Works Minister who 
had been fired for malfeasance. Persistent but inconclusive efforts have 
been made since March to arrive at satisfactory personnel and adminis-
trative rules to govern the project, with further disbursements from the 
Development Loan Fund suspended pending the outcome. On April 
20 President Duvalier ordered the project shutdown temporarily; early 
in May the Haitian Director of the project was forced to resign; a now 
Haitian Director was then appointed and accepted by us but President 
Duvalier still has not indicated when he plans to resume work on the 
project. On May 20, President Duvalier indicated his displeasure over 
what he considered improper conduct by the senior ICA technical 
advisor on this project. We plan to withdraw this man from Haiti if the 
President confirms that he has lost confidence in him; we acknowledged 
that this technician was indiscreet but we also recognize that his abrupt 
removal will create serious practical problems in trying to resume work 
on the project. This man was so well qualified technically and by previ-
ous service in Haiti that President Duvalier had specifically requested his 
return to Haiti as advisor on the Artibonite project.
We are deeply disturbed over various abrupt, unilateral and seem-
ingly irresponsible actions taken by the Haitian Government with 
respect to these economic development projects which seem vital to the 
Haitian economy. A variety of motives has been suggested to explain 
such actions, ranging from a desire for political patronage and personal 
enrichment through venal appointees to ultra-­nationalist impatience 
over outside “interference” in the Haitian development program. There 
may have been a few instances of personal friction between American 
technicians and their Haitian colleagues although working relations 
have been generally good. We also know that the Haitian Government 
has become more and more impatient over what it feels are excessive 
delays in getting action on requests for United States assistance. These
