454 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 5. Observers within and without Embassy comment that present Iran atmosphere is one of growing expectancy that unknown political event in not (repeat not) too distant future will either ease political position of Mosadeq Government or create serious open threat to its continuance. 6. If oil talks break down Mosadeq may be able exploit his rejection of proposals to retrieve his position temporarily. It seems to us just now however that failure of conversations may ultimately strengthen those heterogeneous forces opposed to him. Henderson 156. Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of State1 Tehran, February 23, 1953, 3 p.m. 3342. 1. Ardeshir Zahedi, son of Zahedi who severed relations with Point IV several months ago at request Prime Minister, called on Commander Pollard, Naval Attache´, at latter’s residence last evening. They are old friends and have maintained friendly contact during last two years. During course evening Ardeshir outlined to Pollard present differences between Shah and Mosadeq and said it possible father would become Prime Minister within few days. He stated that there had been two groups working for successor to Mosadeq. One group had supported Ali Mansur, other Zahedi. Mansur group several days ago had decided to throw in its lot with Zahedi. Also supporting Zahedi were Kashani, Baqai, leading officers of armed forces, et cetera. Zahedi was determined that before he would take over power an organization should be perfected and plans would be laid to maintain law and order so that incidents of last July would not (repeat not) be repeated. Zahedi thought he would have support of Shah but he was not (repeat not) sure. He would act, however, regardless of Shah’s attitude. Ardeshir added that his father had always been friendly to US and Western world and must depend on good will, particularly of US, for success his government. His father had several candidates for each portfolio in his proposed Cabinet and would if named Prime Minister give Shah op- 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.00/2–2353. Top Secret; Security Information; NIACT. Repeated to London. Received at 12:15 p.m.
