Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
201
—Africa. We have begun and should continue to achieve a peaceful
resolution to problems in southern Africa. A peaceful settlement in
Rhodesia and elections and independence for Namibia, both by 1978, and the
beginning of a peaceful evolution toward greater social, political and eco-
nomic equality and justice in South Africa itself are all high on our agenda.
As a matter both of principle and practical politics, it is important to us
that uncontrolled racial violence not develop in any of these areas. In
the Horn of Africa there is serious potential instability and our policies
will continue to aim at preventing warfare and limiting an expansion of
Soviet influence.
—Elsewhere. We will work with our NATO allies towards a medi-
ated settlement of the Cyprus and Greek/Turkish problems in the Aegean
and a resumption of our defense cooperation with Turkey; take a more
active role in mediating inter-American state conflicts such as those be-
tween Belize and Guatemala; seek, from a possibly skeptical Congress,
approval for the anticipated Canal treaty with Panama, which will pro-
tect our interest in a secure, open, and neutral Canal.
The world is unusually free of armed conflict at the present time.
We will watch carefully the potential development of crises or conflicts
in all areas with the objective of working toward their peaceful resolu-
tion. The North Korean posture toward our troop withdrawals from the
South; Soviet actions around Berlin; a possible internal crisis in Pakistan;
and internal political transitions in Yugoslavia, Saudi Arabia, and Iran
will be particularly sensitive.
Stress on process, rather than on single events, is central to pro-
moting our relations with more estranged nations. Aside from our on-
going pursuit of detente with the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, we
hope to establish formal ties with most, if not all, those countries with
whom we presently have tensions or no relations: Vietnam, Cuba, the
People’s Republic of China, Angola, North Korea, Mongolia, Albania,
and others. Of these, China is the most important and we hope to have
formal diplomatic relations with Peking within the next four years,
with due consideration for the security of Taiwan.
No pursuit of lasting peace is possible without a firm foundation
of economic and political strength among our allies. The Administration
set the proper tone with the Vice President’s post-Inaugural trip to
Western Europe and Japan,2 your meetings with key leaders in Wash-
ington, and the London Summit.
We must follow-up during the next four years with attention to
several continuing concerns. Those include: (1) maintaining support for
the process of European economic and political integration through
2 See footnote 1, Document 16.
