International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 Deniau: This is a detail. The negotiators are trying to protect their Christmases. We can accept the 15th of December. Carter: I should like to ask the President of France a question. Is our formulation on the first paragraph acceptable to you? Can we say we support the progress made? Giscard: There is some ambiguity in this matter. Jenkins’ report is exactly on the point. There are questions not yet resolved and there are vague sentences which can be interpreted in one way or another. I have followed since 1973 the U.S. position in favor of a considerable tariff reduction. Europe also wants a tariff reduction as well as other aspects of trade to be dealt with. In the text of the framework the provision on tariffs is clearer than that relating to the obstacles to trade. Thus, there may be a certain commitment in our agreeing to the declaration. But by using these words we don’t want to hide our differences. Also, I am not yet clear about what Japan will do. I prefer a formula which makes it clear that in the declaration there are points of real agreement but that ambiguities still exist. Trudeau: One might say we support progress as set forth in the framework. Thus, we would not endorse the framework but we could say we appreciate and clearly support the progress as set forth in the framework, although there are still some differences and important issues to be resolved. Giscard: That is a useful contribution from our bilingual friend and is a possible solution. Each word must be weighed carefully. “We appreciate and support the progress as set forth in the framework of understanding on the Tokyo Round of the Multilateral Trade Negotiations made public in Geneva on July 13, 1978, even though within the framework of understanding some difficult and important issues remain unresolved.” Deniau: With respect to the last paragraph on page 1, in a certain number of countries there are reservations to the GATT based on the right to keep previous legislation. The U.S. has the right not to apply all GATT rules. One purpose of the MTN is to have equal application of the GATT rules. We want agreement on uniform application of GATT rules. The U.S. wants to move as promptly as possible. I would suggest that we have the language “there must be agreement on uniform application of GATT rules”. Giscard: That seems fair. Strauss: We can’t accept that. It would impair our ability to get support at home. We can’t accept the word “must”. We can say that we intend to move in this direction and have so stated. There should be agreement to move. The use of the word “must” would impair dramatically our ability to deliver what you want, i.e. to bring our laws into harmony with GATT rules. We can say we “seek”.
