893.5045/198: Telegram
[Document 549]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, August 30, 1925—5 p.m.
[Received August 30—9:10 a.m.]
364. Your telegram number 221, August 27, 7 p.m.18
1. British Chargé d’Affaires now out of town, sent to me yesterday one of his
secretaries with a letter making “very urgent appeal” to me to urge you not to
insist on McEuen’s resignation and stating “my Government feel very
strongly that this procedure would be unfair and would lead to trouble:
indeed they are frankly unable to accept it.”
2. If, as is indicated both by this letter and by Chamberlain’s conversation
with our Ambassador, the British Government may be expected to persist to
the end in this shortsighted view, it seems necessary to accept that fact and
the consequences that McEuen cannot be got to resubmit his resignation
before the inquiry and that insistence upon it would indefinitely postpone all
action towards the settlement of the Shanghai incident.
3. Under these circumstances it seems to me wiser to yield to the extent of
contenting ourselves for the time being with his suspension which should
however be arranged to take effect as soon as possible without awaiting the
commencement of inquiry.
4. I remain however convinced that Shanghai affair can never be really
settled and the intense and widespread bitterness of the Chinese be allayed so
long as McEuen is retained in his post. If the inquiry should find him at fault
the matter will presumably be disposed of by his dismissal. But if as is quite
possible it should find that his conduct was not culpable but involved
question of the exercise of his administrative discretion’ which a judicial
inquiry is not competent to review, the Chinese would undoubtedly resent
what they would regard as a whitewash and there would be a fresh outburst
of agitation against the British and other nationalities which they considered
parties to repudiation of responsibility for shooting.
5. Unless therefore it can be arranged that McEuen if acquitted will
nevertheless retire from post in which his presence is a challenge and an
incitement to antiforeign feeling, we owe it to ourselves to dissociate
