392 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement The Costa Rican Institute of Electricity (ICE) has a preliminary loan application with the IBRD, the amount as yet undetermined, to finance the Rio Macho hydroelectric project. This projected development would have a generating capacity of 24,000 KW and the cost is estimated at $4.1 million. Whereas this was to be an autonomous government agency project, it may be that Mr. Echandi, in line with his thought concerning private investment, may have an interest in trying to have the American and Foreign Power Company develop this project. Development Loan Fund: The Government of Costa Rica has expressed interest in obtaining a million loan from the DLF for augmenting the capital available to the rural credit boards for promoting agricultural development. Preliminary discussions have taken place between officers of the Department and Costa Rican officials, but as yet no formal application has been made. Suggested Position: If this subject is raised, Mr. Echandi can be informed that the DLF is considering each loan request on its own merits, and that he can be assured that when a formal application is submitted, it will be given every possible consideration. Increasing Proportion of United Fruit Company Profits Subject to Costa Rican Taxation. Mr. Echandi has informed Ambassador Woodward that this is one of the subjects he wishes to discuss while in Washington. He is interested in obtaining a larger amount of taxes from the United Fruit Company. He has in mind eventually working out an arrangement (principally with the Treasury Department) by which a larger proportion of the profits of the banana producing and selling operations, which pertain to Costa Rica, would be allocated by Treasury to the operations of the producing subsidiary in Costa Rica in order that the larger proportion of the profits would be taxable by the Costa Rican Government. There is now in effect a formula established by Treasury by which approximately one-­half of all the profits made by the United Fruit Company and all its subsidiaries are taxed as profits made by the home company and therefore taxable only in the United States at the regular rate for corporate profits of 52 percent. The remaining half of the total profits are considered to be profits made by the subsidiary producing companies in the various countries where the country produces its product. This half of the profits divided among the operations in all producing countries is taxable in each producing country now at 30 percent.
