338 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 100. Memorandum From Michael Armacost of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, December 13, 1977 SUBJECT Human Rights and our Aid Efforts At the risk of becoming a bore on this subject, I should like to raise with you again my concerns about the way human rights considerations are being handled, particularly in relation to our aid programs. We are injecting political (i.e. human rights) considerations into the disposition of loan requests in the international and regional banks in contravention of their charters, and despite the fact that we recently walked out of the ILO on grounds others were “politicizing” that institution.2 We are maneuvering ourselves into a position where we appear to the public and Congress prepared to withhold shipment of commodities of such basic importance to human welfare as food in order to advance our concepts of political and civil rights in developing countries. And this is being done by a sub-Cabinet Committee which in my judgment operates with extraordinarily sloppy procedures and without much oversight from the Cabinet members with a stake in their decisions. My specific concerns are about the procedures. —The law requires that we not provide PL–480 to countries which engage in a pattern of gross and consistent violations of human rights. The Administration has also pledged to use its “voice and vote” to encourage International Financial Institutions to allocate funds with similar concerns in mind. Yet to my knowledge there has been no formal determination that any specific country has been adjudged guilty of a pattern of “consistent and gross violations”. —More serious, no one in the Human Rights Bureaucracy can define with any clarity the standards by which such a determination might be made. The standards against which “consistent and gross” vi- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues— Bloomfield Subject File, Box 17, Public Law 480: 11–12/77. Secret. Sent for action. Concurred in by Thornton and Oksenberg. Although Tuchman’s name is listed with Thornton and Oksenberg’s, Tuchman did not initial her concurrence; a typewritten note reads: “(see attached note).” Armacost added the following handwritten comment next to Tuchman’s typewritten name at the end of the memorandum: “I will forswear my own rebuttal (to the rebuttal) for the agreed-for meeting. MA.” Tuchman prepared a separate memorandum for Brzezinski, dated December 14, which is attached to this memorandum. 2 See footnote 4, Document 63.
