724 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 227. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for Health Issues (Bourne) to President Carter1 Washington, September 14, 1977 SUBJECT World Hunger Initiative This memorandum was prepared by an Ad Hoc Executive Office Working Group on World Hunger, chaired by my office, with participation of the National Security Council, Domestic Council, White House Intergovernmental Relations Office, Office of Science and Technology Policy, Council of Economic Advisers, Office of Management and Budget, Office of the Special Assistant for Consumer Affairs, and Council on Environmental Quality. I. Purpose To respond to your request for ideas and policy options on world hunger and to seek your guidance on how to develop policy initiatives. II. Background Interest in the world hunger issue is extensive within Government agencies and throughout the private sector. —Executive Office. Interest in and a desire to be part of the development of any world hunger initiative has already been expressed by the agencies which make up the Ad Hoc Executive Office World Hunger Working Group. —Congress. A letter to you signed by 33 members of Congress in June encouraged a Presidential world hunger initiative.2 Recent legisla- 1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files, Box 324, World Hunger [1]. No classification marking. The President wrote in the top right-hand corner of the first page: “Peter—Conform to memos—J.C.” Attached as Tab C to Document 229. In a September 15 memorandum to Brzezinski, Erb noted that another version of Bourne’s memorandum, also dated September 14, had been sent to the President without Erb’s concurrence: “It accurately reflects the NSC view on the point at issue, co-chairmanship of the Hunger Working Group, but it presents a very self-serving version of Bourne’s position.” Erb did recommend that Brzezinski send the memorandum to the President. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 92, Food: 1977) Daft sent this version of the memorandum to Eizenstat under a September 16 covering memorandum, noting: “Unless you feel otherwise, I propose that we indicate ‘no comment’ on the attached. As you can see from pp. 6 and 7, the turf battle rages on. And, as you requested, I’ve tried to stay out of it.” (Carter Library, White House Central Files, Subject Files, Box HE–6, Executive, 1/20/77–9/29/77) There is no indication as to when the version of the memorandum printed here was sent to the President. 2 Not found.
