Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX straitjacket, by refusing to tolerate criticism, and by insisting that whatever change takes place be initiated by an inherently conservative, bureaucratic structure. Above all, the formal repudiation of the most onerous Stalinist controls has made possible the systematic expression of dissent. (U) The roots of dissident activity reach back into the mid-1950s and the search for new political, social, and economic blueprints initiated by Khrushchev’s denunciation of Stalinism. Many of today’s dissidents either participated in, or are spiritual heirs of, those efforts to revise ideology and the Stalinist system that was built in its name. The presentday dissidents, unlike the earlier “revisionists,” do not consider ideological reform as the key to systemic reform, but they do seek, as did their predecessors, to expand the range of individual freedoms allowed by the authorities. (U) In the early days of de-Stalinization, dissent against various aspects of the Stalinist system was generally tolerated and even officially encouraged. Candid discussion and innovative proposals were permitted both for their cathartic value and as proof that Stalinism had been rejected. Over time, some of this activity became officially unacceptable. “Dissidence” that went beyond the bounds set by local Stalinist leaders still clinging to power or that led to “radical” demands for freedoms was banned. (U) In some instances, the advocates of reform became involved, willingly or accidentally, in scheming against local Stalinist leaders by political moderates, which was made possible by the concurrent political struggles in the Soviet Union. In Poland, for example, revisionist Marxists like Leszek Kolakowski publicly battled against dogmatism and helped bring to power in 1956 a “reformist” party leader, Wladyslaw Gomulka. Similarly, the fight by Hungarian writers to end censorship in late 1955 was closely linked with the efforts by backers of reformer Imre Nagy to bring down Stalinist party leader Matyas The spontaneous ferment of de-Stalinization was also at work in East Germany and Czechoslovakia in the mid-1950s, albeit more subdued. In East Germany, a young Marxist philosopher, Wolfgang Harich, led a small group of party members in advocating economic and political reforms, “true independence” (that is, an escape from Soviet hegemony) for East Germany, and eventual reunification of the two German states. Unlike developments in Poland and Hungary, however, the actions of the East German dissidents were of little consequence. Harich made his move too late (after the suppression of the Hungarian uprising when there was a general turn to orthodoxy) and did not make common cause with party chief Ulbricht’s opponents in the Politburo. (U)
