3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
367
The President noted that there were still differences between the
United States and the Soviet Union at the SALT negotiations and at the
CTB negotiations. He believed, however, that they could be resolved.
There were two other items, however, which had now reached serious
proportions and were tearing apart the mutual trust and friendship be-
tween our two countries which he believed were necessary to assure
detente and future peace.6 These two items were7 different in nature,
but equally8 important.
Africa
The first of these items concerned Soviet-Cuban intrusion9 and ad-
venturism in Africa. We were refraining from having a military pres-
ence in Africa, but the Soviet presence there had increased to alarming
proportions. We knew that the Soviet Union was in a position to exert a
strong influence on the Cubans. The Soviets usually claimed that Cuba
was an independent country that made its own decisions; we knew,
however, of the enormous economic support the Soviet Union was ren-
dering Cuba and could not believe that the Cubans could put 40 or 50
or 60 thousand men into Africa without the Soviet Union’s tacit ap-
proval or encouragement.10 Referring to Zaire and the Katangans’ inva-
sion into that country, the President said we did not believe it to have
been possible without Cuban assistance.11 As for Eritrea, he hoped that
the dispute there could be resolved without Soviet or Cuban presence
or involvement.12 With the United Nations we were trying to resolve
the difficult questions involving Rhodesia and Namibia, and were
doing so without any support on the part of the Soviet Union. He be-
lieved that it would be to the advantage of the Soviet Union and of our
country to see all the parties involved come together in order to resolve
the Rhodesian dispute by peaceful means. In this regard we were also
consulting with Britain and other nations. If the Cubans were to refrain
from interfering and if the Soviet Union were to lend its active support
to our efforts, the Rhodesian problem could be resolved by peaceful
means. Namibia was another instance requiring peaceful resolution.
The Soviet Union did have an influence it could exert, all the way from
6 Bartholomew added “and the support of the US people” after “future peace.”
7 Bartholomew added “very” after “items were.”
8 Bartholomew put brackets around “equally” and wrote “both” in the margin
above it.
9 Bartholomew added “presence,” after “Soviet-Cuban.”
10 Bartholomew put brackets around “tacit” and “encouragement.” In the margin
above “encouragement,” he wrote “support.”
11 Bartholomew added “and Soviet knowledge and approval” after “assistance.
12 Bartholomew put brackets around “involvement” and wrote “intrusion” in the
margin above it.
