656 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement the Commandant denied seamen’s papers and dockworkers cards to over 3000 individuals (some 400 of whom the FBI had listed for possi­ ble detention in the event of a wartime emergency). d. In 1956, a Federal Circuit Court ruled (Parker v. Lester) that the denial and revocation procedures followed by the Coast Guard under the Executive Order failed to meet the constitutional requirements of due process, including the right to confront and cross-­examine Government witnesses. The Commandant of the Coast Guard was ordered by the Court to issue seamen’s papers, forthwith, to those persons previously denied them. As of 6/30/58, the Commandant had complied with the Court order by granting applications of over 300 persons whom he had previously denied papers because he considered them to be security risks. e. Treasury previously pointed out several practical problems posed by the Federal Court ruling, including the following: (1) the Commandant of the Coast Guard is compelled by Court order to take action contrary to that required of him under the present Executive Order, (2) it may not be possible to produce certain confidential informants as witnesses in hear­ ings to revoke the papers of a subversive, and (3) witnesses who might be available for testimony are scattered, and funds for witness fees are lack­ ing. (As of 6/30/58, Coast Guard had revoked papers in 2 cases; hearings were pending in 4 cases; the availability of witnesses who could appear to testify was being examined in 65 cases; witnesses were unavailable in 4 cases; data and witnesses were considered to be insufficient at this time in 99 cases; and 105 cases remained to be processed with a view to determining whether bearings should be instituted). 4. Against this background, the Council adopted and the President approved, as part of U.S. Continental Defense Policy (NSC 5802/1), a Port Security section which provides that the various measures for the protection of U.S. ports and vessels shall include: “such exclusion of subversives from vessels and waterfront facilities as is feasible, hav­ ing due regard for legal procedures and rights”. Based on that policy, Treasury submitted and the President approved on 4/21/58 the details of an overall Port Security program which includes a screening pro­ gram under which the Coast Guard will (a) request FBI name and fin­ gerprint checks of applicants for seamen’s papers and dockworkers’ cards, (b) keep a list of the persons on whom derogatory information is obtained, and (c) on a selective basis, hold hearings to revoke the papers and cards of persons considered to be security risks, in those cases where action can be taken with a reasonable probability of success, in accordance with procedures acceptable to the courts. 5. Meanwhile, Treasury and Justice were asked to propose legis­ lation, and draft an Executive Order, to strengthen the approved Port Security screening program. As reflected in the Justice transmittal which has been circulated to the Council, both Treasury and Justice rec­ ommend against seeking additional legislation in this field because it would not stand the test of constitutionality and would raise “broader issues” which might reduce the effectiveness of the program. With respect to the drafting of the Executive Order called for by the NSC
