The Department is informed33 that the British Minister at Peking has informed the American Minister that his Government is withholding authorization for its Consul General at Shanghai to proceed in above manner pending fuller information as to the points on which the reports of the three Judges agree and disagree. The American Minister also reports that the Japanese Minister, at an informal meeting with the British and Dutch Ministers and himself, informed them that, “On November 27 Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs had told British Ambassador that since the reports were not unanimous there was in effect no decision resulting from Judicial inquiry and that he was therefore strongly of the opinion that it would be inadvisable to publish the reports and thus give occasion for the Chinese to play on differences among the interested Powers and that the British Ambassador had concurred.” The American Minister reports that the Japanese Minister promised to urge upon his Government the view of this Government that the terms of reference themselves contemplated the possibility of a divided Court and that it was our profound conviction that it would prove utterly impossible to prevent leakage of the substance of the reports and that the attempt to suppress or edit them would only act infinitely more unfavorably upon foreign interests in China. The above is communicated to you for your information and such use as you care to make of it in discussing matter with British Foreign Office. You will state to the Foreign Office that while it is regrettable that the Commission should have disagreed in its findings this Government feels that it would be most disastrous at the present time, in the face of conditions now existing in China, for the Powers to repeat the procedure which followed the investigation made into the Shanghai incident by the Committee representing the Diplomatic Body in July and to suppress, edit or delay the publication of the findings of the Judicial Commission. Already there has appeared in the press, both in China and in the United States, intimation to the effect that the Powers will refuse to give these reports to the press. You will state to the British Foreign Office that this Government does not feel that it should permit itself to share in the odium of a virtual repudiation of the results of the inquiry which has been publicly conducted by three Judges appointed at the request of the Diplomatic Body. You may add that, howsoever much we may regret the necessity of so doing, this Government will for its part feel obliged, even though there may be no agreement about the publishing of the three reports, to publish the report of the American Judge in the near future.34 KELLOGG 32 Telegram printed supra. 33 By telegram No. 509, Dec. 2, from the Minister in China (not printed). 34 By telegram No. 150, Dec. 3, the Ambassador in Japan was authorized to bring to the attention of the Japanese Foreign Office the views expressed by the Minister in China in the fourth paragraph of his telegram No. 509, Dec. 2, to the Department, which are
