Comprehensive Test Ban
383
Tab A
Letter From President Carter to the Director of the Arms
Control and Disarmament Agency (Warnke)12
Washington, July 11, 1977
To Paul Warnke
In the trilateral CTB discussions which begin on July 13, I want you
to continue the exploratory approach that I outlined in my letter of June
13,13 with the following specific objectives:
—Explore Soviet views on the political aspects of a CTB, with par-
ticular emphasis on avoiding a participation and review formulation
that would be contrary to our bilateral interests with France and the
People’s Republic of China. You may indicate that a shorter duration of
perhaps three or four years would be acceptable if a satisfactory ap-
proach on this issue can be worked out.
—Determine whether the Soviets have an official response to your
exploratory question regarding the desirability of suspending nuclear
explosions at an early stage of the negotiations. I will want to review
their response before making a decision on this issue.
—Indicate that in the US view, we should reach full agreement tri-
laterally on all issues of national security significance, before for-
warding these key elements to the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament for negotiation of a complete treaty text.
—Continue to stress the importance the US attaches to adequate
verification. In this context you should:
• Reaffirm the US position that PNE’s should not be permitted
under a CTB, and comment on Soviet PNE verification proposals.
• Express the view the installations of internal networks of secure
seismometers in the US and USSR could contribute to increased confi-
dence in compliance with a CTB and seek Soviet views on that matter.
• Explore alternative formulations to the Soviet on-site inspection
proposal, with a view toward trying to get as strong a commitment
from them as possible, and indicate that all rights and functions of the
inspection teams should be agreed explicitly.
The SCC will continue its analysis of our CTB verification capa-
bility and requirements. I will want to review this analysis and the re-
sults of your discussions before making further decisions on these
issues.
Depending on the course of your exploratory discussions, I would
be prepared to enter into formal trilateral negotiations for the develop-
ment of a comprehensive ban on nuclear explosions. You should con-
12 Secret.
13 Not found.
