National Security Policy 41 other U.S. national objectives and policies, but potentially it contains the seeds of serious danger. Planning Board Comment: In view of public concern and ­Congressional sensitivity on the exercise of criminal jurisdiction over servicemen by for­ eign courts, it is believed that the recommended position is the appropriate standard and that the national policy should be to achieve that standard wherever possible. [In those cases where this standard cannot be met, it is believed appropriate that the decision not to insist on the standard should be taken only at a high level.]5 Planning Board Recommendation: Accordingly, the Planning Board recommends that the National Security Council agree that: The objective of the United States should be to obtain, where feasi­ ble, criminal jurisdiction arrangements, with all countries in which U.S. forces are stationed now or in the future, at least as favorable as those contained in the NATO Status of Forces Agreement. [U.S. forces should not be stationed on foreign territory unless protected by criminal juris­ diction arrangements at least equal in substance to the NATO Status of Forces Agreement, except on determination by the Secretaries of State and Defense that overriding national interest demands their presence notwithstanding the absence of satisfactory arrangements.]6 9. Sharing Defense Responsibilities with Canada. Statement of the Issue (Report, p. 19): The United States should enable Canada to assume a growing share of the responsibilities for defending North America and the North Atlantic. Although our base relationships are generally excellent, and Canada realizes how closely her existence is identified with that of the United States, both within and without NATO, there is a grow­ ing Canadian sensitivity and feeling of national destiny that will spell trouble for us if we do not take every step we can to give Canada a practical sense of equality with the United States, particularly in defense matters. Further, the manifold problems inherent in provid­ ing [text not declassified]. Planning Board Comment: The same general position is taken by exist­ ing policy on continental defense (NSC 5802/1). Although we have gone far in cooperating with Canada in the military field, [text not declassified]. However, the principal areas for improvement are the political and eco­ nomic. Better cooperation is also required in non-­military defense mat­ ters. There is at present no national security policy paper on ­Canada. There is a Joint (U.S.-Canada) Committee on Trade and Economic Affairs, made up of the U.S. Secretaries of State, Treasury, Commerce, and ­Agriculture, and their Canadian counterparts. 5 Defense-Treasury proposal. [Brackets and footnote are in the original.] 6 Defense-Treasury proposal. [Brackets and footnote are in the original.]
