that the increased revenue which would accrue from the Washington Treaty surtaxes should be held by the Customs Administration for the purpose of being applied to the carrying out of such plans as shall be agreed upon by the Conference and that the funds should not be pledged or hypothecated to secure any indebtedness. In explaining this provision Mr. Strawn said that it was not intended as a reflection on the gentlemen who were trying to negotiate the treaty, but had been put in as a protection to the Chinese Delegation in anticipation of the importunities of Tuchuns and warlords by putting it beyond the power of anybody to raise any money on that anticipated revenues. Dr. Yen objected to this provision and said that the Chinese Delegation could not consent to the imposing of such humiliating conditions, whereupon Mr. Strawn remarked that they were not humiliating, but protective, and that in view of the financial situation in China the problem might just as well be faced squarely and frankly. Count de Martel supported Mr. Strawn, remarking that the last loan floated was secured on funds available after two years, for which reason he considered that there should be some guarantee against such transactions. Count de Martel said that he was ready to adhere to practically all of the American proposal because it covered nearly all of the ground in the French proposal and was better worded. Mr. Hioki said that he considered the American draft better than the Chinese draft, but he could not commit himself until he had made a more thorough study. At this point in the proceedings the third paragraph was reached and Mr. Strawn offered an amendment which would omit any reference to the “ninety million dollars” or to any other specific sum, merely “authorizing the levying of surtaxes at rates higher than those provided in Article III” of the Washington Treaty. Dr. Yen again entered protest against omitting the ninety million dollars from the paragraph and finally said that the Chinese Delegation would make a reservation on the point. Other paragraphs more or less technical, were read and discussed in order, but no definite decision concerning any of them was reached, it being the sense of the meeting that the questions should be considered by the technical advisers. On reading the last paragraph of the American proposal, Dr. Yen again entered vigorous protest against the provision prohibiting the pledging or hypothecating of any of the accumulated funds. He thought that this phase
