472
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
196.
Memorandum From Secretary of Energy Schlesinger to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 2, 1978
SUBJECT
COMPREHENSIVE TEST BAN CONCERNS
As we have discussed previously, I believe agreement must be
reached within the Executive Branch on a U.S. negotiating position for
a Comprehensive Test Ban that permits us to protect vital national se-
curity interests and that offers a realistic prospect of winning Senate
ratification.
Such a negotiating position must meet four central concerns:
1. Ensuring our ability to certify and maintain the U.S. nuclear
stockpile;
2. Ensuring verification provisions that give the U.S. high confi-
dence assurance of compliance by the Soviets;
3. Maintaining a linkage between permitted experiments, verifica-
tion, and Peaceful Nuclear Explosives; and
4. Ensuring that compliance provisions of the agreement on the
previous three issues improve, rather than complicate, U.S.-Soviet rela-
tions on arms control issues.
I am concerned that we have been unable to reach a consensus on
these issues, and that if we do not, the ability of the Administration to
win Senate ratification may be significantly lessened. In the present cli-
mate—with controversy growing regarding SALT, and in the wake of
the neutron warhead deferral and the B–1 cancellation—the Adminis-
tration must ensure that stockpile risks are minimized, and that verifi-
cation and compliance prospects are improved as a result of any such
treaty if we are to hope for ratification. Each of these major issues is dis-
cussed further below.
1. The nuclear weapons designers within the laboratories and the
Department of Energy believe that the DOE requires some level of
testing in order to identify stockpile problems and certify the adequacy
of fixes. Some level of testing would be required as well to implement
necessary changes in safety, security, and command/control, and to
adapt older designs to new delivery systems entering the inventory.
1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, James Schlesinger Papers, Sub-
ject File, Box 2, Energy Department, Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban, General, 1978
May. Secret.
