undated
On June 30 the Chinese Minister called upon the Secretary by appointment to discuss
with him the contents of his note of June 25.73 The Chinese Minister stated, among
other things, that he had been advised informally by his Foreign Office, although he
had not been authorized to make official representations to this effect, that while that
Government had desired greatly that a conference be called to consider the question of
treaty revision it was realized that such a conference could not take place at any early
date. He stated to the Secretary that this had come to him as a result of a telegraphic
inquiry which he had made asking for some explanation of the desires of his
Government as set forth in that note. He stated that his Government felt, therefore, that
they should not, in striving for the greater end, lose what had already been gained by
the treaties signed as the result of the Washington Conference and the resolution calling
for the sending of a commission to go into the matter of extraterritoriality.
The Secretary stated that the greater question of general treaty revision involved many
difficulties. He said that this Government had from the beginning desired to expedite
the holding of the Customs Conference provided for by the Washington Conference
treaty and the sending of the commission on extraterritoriality, but that the whole
matter of the Customs Conference had been delayed pending action by France on the
China treaties, while, as regards the commission on extraterritoriality, after the first
postponement at China’s request, this Government had been unable to obtain any
unanimity on the part of the Powers concerned as regards the fixing of the date for the
sending of that commission.
 
The Chinese Minister asked whether this Government would be willing to urge upon
the other interested Powers the hastening of the calling of the conference on tariff
matters. The Secretary stated that we would be glad to do this. He said that he was also
willing to urge the hastening of the sending of the commission on extraterritoriality.
The Chinese Minister stated that he was sure that his Government would receive this
information with pleasure. He pointed out, however, that the conference on tariffs, as
provided for under the Nine-Power Treaty, did not in fact give to China the fiscal relief
that she desired, that what was wanted was complete tariff autonomy. Mr. Johnson
suggested that something might be accomplished if the instructions to the conference
on tariffs could be amplified to include a request or recommendations upon which a
plan for giving complete tariff autonomy might be worked out after the special tasks of
the conference had been completed. The Secretary stated that this of course was a
matter which would have to be taken under advisement.
