1980  827
—The conference was then upgraded to a Threat Assessment Con-
ference and a NORAD assessment was requested.
—Pacific Command initiated a launch of its airborne command 
post because a Threat Assessment Conference had been convened.
—NORAD issued an assessment3 that we were not under attack 
since there were no outputs from the warning sensors (radars and sat-
ellites) to produce such displays. These sensor indications are present 
on the same boards that display the computer outputs; the absence of 
any sensor indications in these incidents has caused the duty officers in 
each case to be aware from the beginning that the situation was proba-
bly a false alarm.
—Thirty-­two minutes after the first false display appeared at SAC, 
the Threat Assessment Conference was terminated, and one minute 
later the SAC alert was terminated.
June 6
—A false BMEWS output of 2000 ICBMs appeared on the warning 
display at SAC. This was followed in a few seconds by false displays of 
6 missiles at the NMCC and 2020 missiles at the ANMCC.
—SAC again alerted its crews to move to their aircraft and start 
engines.
—A Missile Display Conference was convened 2 minutes after the 
first false display appeared at SAC. NORAD immediately assessed no 
confidence in the displays and no further alert actions were initiated.
—The SAC alert was terminated 17 minutes after the first false dis-
play appeared at SAC.
WHAT CAUSED IT?
—All of the false missile warning displays were caused by a mal-
function in a minicomputer at NORAD. Such a minicomputer is used 
with each channel of the NORAD computer system to transform the 
missile warning data from the NORAD computers into a form suitable 
for transmission to the NMCC, SAC and the ANMCC where it is auto-
matically displayed.
—The information reaches the display at NORAD via another 
route, so no false data ever appeared on the NORAD missile warning 
display screen.
—When no missile warning data are present, the output of the 
minicomputer for the operational channel of the NORAD computer 
should be a string of zeroes. However, in each of the preceding events, 
the minicomputer associated with channel 8, which was then operating, 
3 Not found.
