International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1043 II. Statement of Strategy The basic strategy will be to highlight and focus U.S. Government activities in international health so as to work more effectively with other nations, private voluntary organizations, and international organizations, within a broad, coordinated set of program priorities and goals. Presidential participation will encourage the active involvement of all Departments within the U.S. Government and of nations around the world. International health will become an integral aspect of U.S. foreign policy. The strategy will aim at increasing awareness of world health problems and support for both ongoing and new efforts to improve world health and nutrition.8 It will focus on long-range planning and local capabilities for continuing health programs. Another aim of the strategy will be to develop a mechanism for ensuring that both current programs and new directions are complementary, and provide the appropriate programmatic basis for the Presidential “New Directions in International Health” initiative. General Objectives Broad goals that this strategy will promote are: —Working toward the elimination of the major infectious diseases. —Providing access to a basic minimum level of health care for people everywhere, especially the poorest one billion. —Emphasizing the delivery of community-based primary health care training to health personnel as near as possible to the point where they deliver services. —Encouraging special initiatives to deal with the generic problems of ill health, malnutrition, and lack of clean water supplies, with a priority on prevention aspects of these problems. Action Plan The general approach to developing a world health initiative includes: —A Presidential statement, at an appropriate opportunity, indicating a personal interest in raising the level of public and private activities aimed at improving health around the world. Emphasis would be on program development, capitalizing on current U.S. programs, and striving for increased partnership with other donor countries, as well as with receiving countries, in making basic improvements consistent with the general objectives above. Better coordination of “human needs” activities would be a central theme. 8 An unknown hand underlined this sentence, beginning with the word “increasing.”
