618
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
The Pres said we could do what John Kennedy did at the time of
the Cuban missile crisis when he received two messages from the
Soviets: take the best part of the message and ignore the other. We can
couple the Majlis acknowledgement with a statement urging the earliest
possible release of the hostages.
CV asked Jody Powell for his view about how to handle the Kho-
meini speech.
JP said ignore it.
ZB said he thought mention of the Majlis weakened the statement.
The Pres said there is no need to keep going around this. He pre-
ferred to say something about the Majlis. We could say that the hostages
will be released when the Majlis convenes. That is in line with the
messages we have received from Giscard.6
Aaron and Jordan said it would be better not to say that they will
be released when the Majlis convenes. They have never said this pub-
licly and it could prompt a denial from them.
Christopher proposed wording it that “the hostage issue will be
resolved when the new Parliament convenes.” All agreed that this was
the best formulation. All agreed to drop the part about unity with the
families, etc.
ZB said we would be better off arguing the main point which is
the transfer of the hostages.
DA wondered if we should say that the hostages will be “trans-
ferred immediately.”
The Pres said he had trepidation about saying more than Bani-Sadr
had stated publicly. We should get the announcement out on the wires
immediately.
JP wondered if the President should make the announcement on
camera.
CV said it would be better for Jody to make the announcement.
The Pres said that this was good news. At least it is better than he
had expected from what he read at 6:30 last night.7 (Saunders said that
was starting from a pretty low base.) The Pres joked that Rosalynn
had gone in the bathroom and thrown up when he read her what
Khomeini was saying. He discussed briefly with JP what the effect
would be in Kansas and Wisconsin if he made the statement personally.
JP said he did not like the idea of the President personally standing
up and accepting conditions.
6 See footnote 7, Document 231.
7 Presumably a reference to Aaron’s memorandum on Khomeini’s speech. See foot-
note 2 above.
