Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 659 existed for several years, probably since the mid-1970’s, and possibly even longer. This unit appears to be a brigade of two or three thousand men. It is armed with about 40 tanks and other modern military equipment. It’s been organized as a combat unit. Its training exercises have been those of a combat unit. This is not a large force, nor an assault force. It presents no direct threat to us. It has no airborne or seaborne capability. In contrast to the 1962 crisis, no nuclear threat to the United States is involved. Nevertheless, this Soviet brigade in Cuba is a serious matter. It contributes to tension in the Caribbean and the Central American region. The delivery of modern arms to Cuba and the presence of Soviet naval forces in Cuban waters have strengthened the Soviet-Cuban military relationship. They’ve added to the fears of some countries that they may come under Soviet or Cuban pressure. During the last few years, the Soviets have been increasing the delivery of military supplies to Cuba. The result is that Cuba now has one of the largest, best equipped armed forces in this region. These military forces are used to intrude into other countries in Africa and the Middle East. There’s a special relationship between Cuba and the Soviet Union. The Cubans get their weapons free; other Soviet satellite countries have to pay for their military supplies. The Communist regime in Cuba is an economic failure that cannot sustain itself. The Soviet Union must send to Cuba about $8 million in economic aid every day. Fidel Castro does not pay money for Soviet arms; the Cuban people pay a much higher price. In every international dispute, on every international issue, the Cuban regime automatically follows the Soviet line. The Soviet brigade is a manifestation of Moscow’s dominance of Cuba. It raises the level of that dominance, and it raises the level of responsibility that the Soviet Union must take for escalating Cuban military actions abroad. Now, I want to report further on what we are doing to resolve these problems and to counter these activities. Over the past 3 weeks, we’ve discussed this issue at great length with top Soviet officials.4 We’ve made it clear that the presence of a Soviet combat unit in Cuba is a matter of serious concern to us. 4 For documentation on the oral and written exchanges, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Documents 219, 221–224, and 226–228.
