About the Series
The Foreign Relations of the United States series presents the official
documentary historical record of major foreign policy decisions and
significant diplomatic activity of the U.S. Government. The Historian of
the Department of State is charged with the responsibility for the prep-
aration of the Foreign Relations series. The staff of the Office of the Histo-
rian, Bureau of Public Affairs, under the direction of the General Editor
of the Foreign Relations series, plans, researches, compiles, and edits the
volumes in the series. Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg first promul-
gated official regulations codifying specific standards for the selection
and editing of documents for the series on March 26, 1925. These regu-
lations, with minor modifications, guided the series through 1991.
Public Law 102–138, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, es-
tablished a new statutory charter for the preparation of the series which
was signed by President George H.W. Bush on October 28, 1991. Sec-
tion 198 of P.L. 102–138 added a new Title IV to the Department of
State’s Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 U.S.C. 4351, et seq.).
The statute requires that the Foreign Relations series be a thorough,
accurate, and reliable record of major U.S. foreign policy decisions and
significant U.S. diplomatic activity. The volumes of the series should
include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation
of major foreign policy decisions and actions of the U.S. Government.
The statute also confirms the editing principles established by Secre-
tary Kellogg: the Foreign Relations series is guided by the principles of
historical objectivity and accuracy; records should not be altered or de-
letions made without indicating in the published text that a deletion
has been made; the published record should omit no facts that were of
major importance in reaching a decision; and nothing should be omit-
ted for the purposes of concealing a defect in policy. The statute also re-
quires that the Foreign Relations series be published not more than 30
years after the events recorded. The editors are convinced that this vol-
ume meets all regulatory, statutory, and scholarly standards of selec-
tion and editing.
Sources for the Foreign Relations Series
The Foreign Relations statute requires that the published record in
the Foreign Relations series include all records needed to provide com-
prehensive documentation of major U.S. foreign policy decisions and
significant U.S. diplomatic activity. It further requires that government
agencies, departments, and other entities of the U.S. Government en-
III
