International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
557
1. The Executive Departments directly concerned with trade policy:
These include the Departments represented on the TPC and the EPG.
Since a combination of initiatives across Executive departments would
be necessary, the project group should be comprised of members from
each of these entities to facilitate pulling together the package.
2. The advisory groups in labor, agriculture and industry: An expanded
contact program with these groups could review elements of the pro-
gram as they are being developed.
3. Members of Congress: An intensive series of consultations to ac-
quaint members of Congress with the key elements of the program to
build in the ideas of domestic program elements is essential in building
a trade constituency. This is anticipated by the notice period called for
in the Trade Act and is already well underway with the frequent
meetings and briefings regularly arranged between key Committee
leaders and their staff and MTN negotiators.
4. Liberal Trading Groups: These groups, including special trade
promotion associations and consumer groups, are ready to be
mobilized.
5. The General Public: An extensive program of communications, in-
cluding speeches, articles and explanatory materials, is needed before
and throughout the period of Congressional consideration.
This memorandum is only a thought starter for upcoming discus-
sions with leaders in the Administration concerned with trade policy.
From the Geneva perspective, we should have the major elements of
the international negotiation completed or sufficiently in view before
Christmas so that this effort could be organized and launched in early
January. The work should parallel the period of Congressional review.
It should build up as an intensive effort during the time of consulta-
tions with Congress and the drafting of the trade legislation (January
through March) and continue through the period of Congressional de-
liberations (April through August).
