History does not anywhere record so much progress made in the same
length of time as that which has been accomplished by the Negro race in the
United States since the Emancipation Proclamation. They have come up
from slavery to be prominent in education, the professions, art, science,
agriculture, banking, and commerce. It is estimated that 50,000 of them are
on the Government pay rolls, drawing about $50,000,000 each year. They
have been the recipients of presidential appointments and their professional
ability has arisen to a sufficiently high plane so that they have been
intrusted with the entire management and control of the great veterans’
hospital at Tuskegee, where their conduct has taken high rank. They have
shown that they have been worthy of all the encouragement which they
have received. Nevertheless, they are too often subjected to thoughtless and
inconsiderate treatment, unworthy alike of the white or colored races. They
have especially been made the target of the foul crime of lynching. For
several years these acts of unlawful violence had been diminishing. In the
last year they have shown an increase. Every principle of order and law and
liberty is opposed to this crime. The Congress should enact any legislation
it can under the Constitution to provide for its elimination.
AMERICAN INDIAN
The condition of the American Indian has much improved in recent years.
Full citizenship was bestowed upon them on June 2, 1924, and
appropriations for their care and advancement have been increased. Still
there remains much to be done.
Notable increases in appropriations for the several major functions
performed by the Department of the Interior on behalf of the Indians have
marked the last five years. In that time, successive annual increases in
appropriations for their education total $1,804,325; for medical care,
$578,000; and for industrial advancement, $205,000; or $2,582,325 more
than would have been spent in the same period on the basis of
appropriations for 1923 and the preceding years.
The needs along health, educational, industrial, and social lines, however,
are great, and the Budget estimates for 1929 include still further increases
for Indian administration.
