Government contemplates a larger cooperation between the U. S., British, and Japanese Governments with respect to China than merely cooperation regarding the Shanghai affair. Doc. and Doc. 643] July (134) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Telegram dated July 4 from Mahlon F. Perkins, on special mission in London (text printed), conveying opinion of British Foreign Office official that it would be preferable to concentrate efforts on the early convening of the special conference on Chinese customs tariff rather than upon meeting of the extraterritoriality commission. [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 644] July (682) From the British Chargé British Government’s sympathy with the U. S. aims as set forth in Department’s telegram No. 125, July 1, to the Chargé in China; doubt expressed, however, as to the wisdom of laying down such definite terms of reference for the Commission on Extraterritoriality as those suggested by the Department. [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 645] July (683) From the British Chargé Proposal of a joint declaration (text printed) to be made publicly by the treaty powers in reply to the Chinese note of June 24. Inquiry as to U. S. attitude. [Pg. 776 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 646] July 10 From the Secretary to the President (Sanders) to the Acting Secretary of State President’s opinion that the Secretary of State should cooperate as far as possible with the other interested powers, using great care not to have China think there is a division of counsel. [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 647] July (270) From the Chargé in China (tel.) From Mac Murray: Opinion that, in the face of the present agitation against foreign treaty rights, a strict adherence to the Washington Conference program is the only safe road. [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 648] July (124) From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.) Foreign Office views of the primary importance of complete accord between the United States, Great Britain, and Japan. Information that the Japanese position will be defined shortly. [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 649]
