16  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Shevardnadze replied that it was good, as the Vice President had 
said, that we had begun to destroy the weapons of destruction. This 
was, without exaggeration, a new stage of civilization, and it was the 
fruit of the cooperation between our countries and was an event of 
international significance. He wished to stress the special role of the 
Secretary of State in this unique cooperation between the two countries.
Shevardnadze continued that with respect to the processes which 
were now taking place in the United States and in the Soviet Union, 
account should be taken of the special characteristics and values of 
each system and differences between them, and that the two sides were 
learning to do that. The Soviet Union understands that the U.S. wants to 
be strong, and the Soviet Union also wants to be strong—­economically 
and in other ways. This is in the interest of all nations. The main thing is 
how we use our potential, and in this regard the events of the previous 
years were hopeful signs.
The Vice President said that he wished to say something and hoped 
that it would not sound self-­centered. When President Nixon went to 
China, politically he could do that, whereas it would not have been 
possible for a liberal president to do it. President Reagan could take 
the steps which were necessary on our side to get a good arms control 
agreement, whereas it was not certain that a continuation of the Carter 
presidency could have achieved that aim politically. With the coming of 
glasnost and perestroika the lines had become more blurred, but there 
was still a greater desire on the part of the American people to continue 
on the course which the Foreign Minister and Secretary Shultz had said.
The Vice President said that, in comparing himself with his oppo-
nent, the American people still had the “Missouri” attitude, i.e. “show 
me”, that is, if he were to win the election, he would have a better 
chance than his opponent to get the support of the Senate, the House 
and the American people for an agreement with the Soviet Union. He 
firmly believed this, although the lines had become less clear than they 
were when President Nixon went to China or President Reagan met 
with General Secretary Gorbachev.
Secretary Shultz interjected that the image which struck him in 
this regard was the picture of President Reagan at Moscow University, 
standing alone on the stage with a huge bust of Lenin in back of him.3
Shevardnadze replied that Secretary Shultz would recall how they 
had compared the first Summit meeting in Geneva4 with the one which 
3 See Reagan, “Remarks and a Question-­and-Answer Session With the Students and 
Faculty at Moscow State University,” May 31, 1988. (Public Papers: Reagan, 1988, Book I, 
pp. 683-692)
4 For the memoranda of conversations from Reagan and Shultz’s meetings with 
Gorbachev and Shevardnadze in Geneva, November 19–20, 1985, see Foreign Relations, 
1981–1988, vol. V, Soviet Union, March 1985–October 1986, Documents 150–159.
