1957 1423 Incidentally, I wonder if we are perhaps entering into some seman­ tic difficulty. As I interpreted, and I believe Peiping interpreted, our August 22 statement it meant that the U.S. would not give any visas to any correspondent bearing a Chinese Communist passport. As subse­ quently interpreted by the Secretary, we were prepared to accept appli­ cations from Chinese Communist correspondents but could not give any advance assurance as to whether any or what number would be approved. If we are in fact prepared to give favorable consideration to a qualified applicant it seems to me we are in fact giving reciprocity. In short, it does not seem to me as commonly used “reciprocity” necessar­ ily involves one for one exchange. As a minor point in this connection, Bob and Ed have noted that the Chinese terms used for “equal and reciprocal” in his draft today are not the same as used for those terms in the “Five Principles”. (I am enclosing a copy of the Chinese text.) Would you have Ekvall’s travel authorization 8-0200 of July 1 amended and his subsequent orders read so as to cover travel from any point in France on which he is on official duty to Geneva rather than just from Paris. Believe it or not he started his previous trip from Roquebrune which is closer and cheaper to Geneva than Paris, but Embassy, Paris refuses to pay him anything for it because his orders read only from Paris. Such are some administrative minds. Regards to all. U. Alexis Johnson Enclosure 1 Copy of Reuters Ticker2 reut 51542 Following recd ES Washington: An exchange of American and Chinese Communist correspond­ ents may be worked out if China does not insist on the use of the word “reciprocal” in any agreement, informed sources said today. Immediate State Dept reaction to the Chinese proposal at Geneva that American and Chinese reporters should be allowed to enter each others country on such a basis, was to go no further than the position recently expressed by Mr. J.F. Dulles the SecState. A Department spokesman said: “if any Chinese Communist news­ man applies for a visa, his application will be considered in the light of relevant laws.” 2 No classification marking.
