Afghanistan
167
could provoke widespread defections from the Afghan Army to rebel
forces, which in turn would require a full-scale military intervention.
While “there is no question that the Soviets could install a regime of
their choosing with a massive military intervention,” the memorandum
argued, a gutted Afghan Army would require an “open-ended” com-
mitment of regular ground force divisions. Thus, “we see few signs
that the Soviets are so wedded to leftist rule in Afghanistan that they
will undertake an operation of this magnitude. Their unwillingness to
label this regime Communist when its leaders clearly view themselves
as such, and their willingness to talk to non-Communist figures from
old regimes about participation in a new government suggests they
have long been mindful of the possibility that the leftist experiment in
Afghanistan will fail.” (National Security Council, Carter Administra-
tion Intelligence Files, Box I–047, Afghanistan: 15 Feb 1979–22 Aug 1979)
In a memorandum to Arnold L. Horelick, NIO for USSR–EE, the
NIO for Conventional Forces added a military dimension to assumed
Soviet considerations that might point away from a full-scale military
intervention in Afghanistan: such an operation would “appear to
require undertakings, quite unlike the massive armor-heavy thrusts
against clearly-defined objectives which have heretofore been the Soviet
forte. Seizure of Kabul offers no finality, like that of Berlin, Budapest,
or Prague. The Soviet advisors with the Afghan Army have been at it
long enough to have reported the frustrations and costs of trying to
winkle the will-o’-the-wisp insurgents out of the hills, and to have
assessed for Moscow the ephemeral fighting qualities of their Afghan
allies.” Even in the event of an “anti-Soviet regime seizing power” in
Afghanistan, which might compel such an intervention, it would be
unlikely that Soviet planners “would contemplate a swift (large-scale)
strike like those into Hungary and Czechoslovakia—nothing much to
strike against; no assurance that, having struck, any decisive political
or military change in the internal security situation would eventuate;
and no threat of external counter-intervention to forestall.” Instead, the
memorandum argued, the Soviets would employ “recourse to classic
counter-guerilla strategy, tache d’huile—seizure of Kabul plus other
centers which would constitute a minimal Soviet-controlled Afghan
polity, creation of a ‘legitimate’ Afghan regime, and retrenchment of
the Afghan Army.” (Central Intelligence Agency, National Intelligence
Council Files, Job 81B00080R, Box 11, NI IIM 79–100225, [cable number
not declassified] 28 Sept 79, Soviet Options in Afghanistan)
The CIA ended its August reporting on an equivocal note. Intelli-
gence information cable [cable number not declassified], August 27, noted
the challenges facing both the Afghan Government and the insurgency.
For the former, the only positive development was a “non-event” in
that “the government had not lost control of any major urban area
