274
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
truly independent and has become a puppet of the Soviet Union. Since
most Afghans despise the regime, and the government has at best
tenuous control of urban centers, its legitimacy can now be questioned.
The fact that Soviet troops have had to intervene to keep it from
collapsing makes too its legitimacy moot. A tough anti-Khalqi stand
by the U.S. would be widely welcomed by Afghans. I thus wonder
whether, were the first option to fail, we should not consider labeling
the present regime illegitimate and taking certain follow-up measures.
I appreciate that such a course would require our cutting diplomatic
relations with the Khalqi govt, and the withdrawal of our official pres-
ence in the country. This I realize would end our capability to help
monitor Soviet SALT compliance. Follow-up actions which we might
take might include raising in the UN Security Council the charge of
Soviet intervention and to appeal for Soviet withdrawal. It would also
be proper for us to try to terminate World Bank and UNDP aid to this
country, which together now comes to $100 million per year.
11. Last, but by no means least, we should then address the ques-
tion of whether the time has not come to assist the insurgents on a
large scale. I realize the last cannot be done without Pakistani concur-
rence, and that this would have difficult policy ramifications for the
whole unsettled world of U.S.-Pakistan relations (and the Glenn
Amendment).5
12. I am also not unmindful of other competing considerations,
which complicate the Afghanistan situation, such as our attempts to
get USSR cooperation to free our Tehran hostages, and to achieve SALT
Two. The Dept is in a better position than I to weigh these other factors.
In looking though at the big picture, what disturbs me is that almost
annually the USSR is succeeding in expanding its power around the
globe, and that here in the subcontinent the possible extension of the
Brezhnev Doctrine is likely in the long run to be detrimental to regional
stability and our interests.
13. In sum, I think the arrival of Soviet troops calls for new initia-
tives and new thinking about the U.S. posture towards this government.
Amstutz
5 Under the Glenn Amendment to the Arms Export Control Act (Section 102), the
President can apply sanctions against a non-nuclear state that detonates a nuclear device.
The status of non-nuclear states is defined by the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act, which
Carter signed into law March 10, 1978.
