1979 751 We have maximized the cost/effectiveness of our aircraft procurement programs by using a mix of high and low cost aircraft—­each possessing good mission performance characteristics. Procurement of lower cost alternatives such as the A–10 and F–16 allows our force modernization to proceed, while purchase of F–15s, F–14s, dual purpose F/A–18s, and E–3As improves our capability to maintain air superiority. V Managing the Department and its Resources Departmental Reorganization and Resource Management. Upon assuming office, I concluded there were significant obstructions to efficient management of the Department: headquarters were too large, lines of authority were confused, and there was a clear need to integrate better some activities. To correct these problems, we initiated a number of structural changes, which have: —Eliminated, since January 1977, five Assistant Secretary and approximately 31,000 other civilian positions, reduced the size of Departmental headquarters staffs by approximately 20%, and closed or substantially reduced operations at a number of installations. Estimated annual savings from these actions alone are over $375 million. —Strengthened policy and planning functions (through, for example, the creation of an Under Secretary for Policy) to insure that individual, detailed decisions on force structure and weapons will support our overall national security objectives. —Consolidated support-­related activities (under a single Assistant Secretary for Manpower, Reserve Affairs and Logistics) to provide integrated direction of DoD manpower and material resources. —Strengthened the programming and budgeting process (through, among other innovations, the establishment of the Defense Resources Board) to provide a more integrated approach to resource allocation decisions and to streamline the budget decision process. Weapons Acquisition Management. Procedures have been revised to insure consideration of logistic and manpower planning requirements at the same time that performance objectives are addressed. As a result, some high-­rate production decisions have been deferred until support questions have been resolved—­resulting in substantial cost savings. We have also required a more precise understanding of manpower and skill-­level requirements related to the introduction of new systems—­ resulting in additional economies. This increased attention to support problems before a system is fully operational is helping avoid readiness and manning problems like those experienced during the 1960s.
