fact, seize the Washington surtaxes by levying, in defiance of the treaties, certain additional taxes on the foreign trade of the port. His Majesty’s Government have with much reluctance joined in the protest against the new taxes for the sake of maintaining solidarity with the Powers, but they are not satisfied that this is the right policy for the present situation. They regret that they did not more insistently press their views at an earlier stage of the conference, but they think that it is still not too late, despite the protest already made, to return to the alternative course proposed in the memorandum of 28th May. His Majesty’s Government therefore strongly urge that the Powers should now authorise the immediate levy of the Washington surtaxes unconditionally throughout China. They hope that this may provide a basis for regularising the position at Canton. The principle [sic] objection that will probably be made to this proposal is that in strict logic it would amount to condoning a breach of treaty. This argument, however, does not sufficiently take into account the realities of the situation. The basic facts of the present situation are that the treaties are now admittedly in many respects out of date, and that in any attempt to secure a revision the Chinese are confronted on the one hand with the internal difficulty of their own disunion and on the other with the external difficulty of obtaining the unanimous concurrence of the Powers. The latest instance of this is the failure of the attempt to alter the tariff of 1858.96g His Majesty’s Government attach the greatest importance to the sanctity of treaties, but they believe that this principle may best be maintained by a sympathetic adjustment of treaty rights to the equitable claims of the Chinese. Protests should be reserved for cases where there is an attempt at wholesale repudiation of treaty obligations or an attack upon the legitimate and vital interests of foreigners in China, and in these cases the protests should be made effective by the united action of the powers. His Majesty’s Government have consistently carried out the obligation of full and frank consultation imposed upon all the Powers alike by article 7 of the Nine-Powers Pact96h and it has been their constant aim—sometimes even when this involved a sacrifice of their opinion—to maintain the solidarity of the Powers. It is in pursuance of this aim that His Majesty’s Government are now communicating to the Powers this statement of the principles by which they believe that policy should be guided in future.
