Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
137
verification issue and said it needs more analysis. State noted the possi-
bility of adding a collateral constraint to prohibit launch of ASAT test
satellites. The chair expressed interest in this idea and called for devel-
opment of a short paper summarizing the monitoring issue. (TS)
The group reaffirmed our current position on the shuttle, and
agreed to the chairman’s suggestion of January 1, 1982 as a more mean-
ingful ending date for the test suspension. Finally, the JCS noted that
the PD-50/ASAT analysis3 should be coordinated to reflect completely
the views of all agencies. (TS)
In summary, the group agreed that useful work could be done in
another round of negotiations with the Soviets, certainly on the first
main issue, and possibly on the second. (S)
3 Not found.
60.
Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, August 7, 1980
Soviet Interests in ASAT Talks
If US-Soviet talks on limiting antisatellite (ASAT) weapons resume, the
Soviets would have several specific objectives beyond reviving the arms control
dialogue and putting Afghanistan farther behind them. They especially wish to
extend to their other satellites legal protection akin to that afforded to satellites
involved in monitoring SALT. In addition, they want to curtail or slow down
US development of ASAT weapons while retaining the right to take action
against satellites whose missions they consider inimical to Soviet interests.
They would probably be willing to alter their positions somewhat on some of
the remaining unresolved issues in order to obtain an accord. [handling re-
striction not declassified]
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 4, Anti-Satellite System (ASAT): 7/77–10/80. Secret; [handling restriction not declassi-
fied]. A note at the bottom of the page reads: “This memorandum was prepared by the Of-
fice of Political Analysis and the Office of Scientific and Weapons Research. It has been
coordinated with the Office of Strategic Research, the National Intelligence Officers for
the USSR and Eastern Europe and for Strategic Programs, and the Arms Control Intelli-
gence Staff. [Omitted here is information on where comments and queries may be
addressed.]”
