International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
735
Thus while the wording of Section 1110(a) of the Trade Agree-
ments Act does not require you to make any recommendations as to
how to improve our export performance, we believe that you should
announce some specific steps designed to help U.S. exports when you
submit your report to Congress. We propose that you submit a brief
signed report, to which would be attached the lengthy and comprehen-
sive review of export promotion and disincentives. Your report would
contain the actions you are taking or plan to take on the basis of the
major findings of this review. We have attached a draft of your report,5
which was written on the assumption you would act favorably on all
our recommendations.
We recommend that you announce significant export-oriented ac-
tions in four areas: (1) taxation of foreign earned income; (2) Export-
Import Bank funding; (3) uncertainties regarding the Foreign Corrupt
Practices Act; and (4) export controls. These are the major issues of con-
cern to the exporting community and are the areas in which we believe
feasible actions are possible without sacrificing other major policy
objectives.
This memorandum and the accompanying report have been circu-
lated to all agencies on the Trade Policy Committee, and we have
worked very closely with the agencies having primary jurisdiction over
each issue. All relevant agencies concur with the recommendations in
this memorandum.
RECOMMENDATIONS
A. TAXATION OF FOREIGN EARNED INCOME
In comments received from trade associations, companies, and
U.S. embassies, the taxation of Americans working abroad was the
issue most frequently identified as an export disincentive. The export
community regards the Administration’s position on this issue as a key
indicator of the seriousness of the Administration’s commitment to ex-
port expansion. The President’s Export Council leadership considers
this to be the number one issue and the “litmus test” of your report to
Congress.
Most of our competitor nations exempt from tax all or many of
their nationals who reside and work abroad. Hence the tax liability of
American citizens employed abroad frequently makes it more costly to
hire Americans where the local income tax is lower than the U.S. tax.
Various segments of the exporting community argue that these addi-
tional costs have some or all of the following consequences:
5 Not attached.
