Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 resolution of issues which ultimately only the peoples of the area can resolve. There can be no turning back from Jerusalem. Arab and Israeli peoples would bitterly resent a diplomatic failure now that these longhostile nations have found the will and the capacity to approach each other in mutual respect. From what I have said today, I believe that you can tell that I am basically optimistic about our foreign policy and the chances for future advances in the cause of peace. Despite our problems, this is a strong and free country and one which is filled with hope and vitality. Some 33 years into the nuclear age, the world has not blown itself up. Indeed, we have in those years, through diplomacy and international leadership, lessened the chances of that ever happening. We have, since World War II, seen more than 100 new countries enter nationhood. They are becoming productive, self-sustaining members of the international community. The task ahead, as I see it, will be to persevere on the course we have charted. This is a time when political and economic change is taking place so rapidly—Peter Drucker has aptly called this “an age of discontinuity”—that it might tempt some to retreat to our old, inward fortress America habitudes.8 However, we are now being true to ourselves, and faithful to what one 200-year-old document called “a decent respect for the opinions of mankind.”9 In the past year, President Carter has led us to make the hard decisions that have shown again that our country has not lost its faith in man’s perfectability. We have great strength. Properly channeled, our strength can be a catalytic and vital force in bringing peace, opportunity, and material well-being to millions of people—in America as well as abroad. 8 Drucker, a Claremont Graduate University professor and consultant who wrote on management theory and practice, published The Age of Discontinuity: Guidelines to Our Changing Society in 1969. 9 Reference is to the Declaration of Independence. The actual line reads: “a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel them to the separation.”
