limitation, the size of the Navy which America is to have will be solely for
America to determine. No outside influence should enlarge it or diminish it.
But it should be known to all that our military power holds no threat of
aggrandizement. It is a guaranty of peace and security at home, and when it
goes abroad it is an instrument for the protection of the legal rights of our
citizens under international law, a refuge in time of disorder, and always the
servant of world peace. Wherever our flag goes the rights of humanity
increase.
MERCHANT MARINE
The United States Government fleet is transporting a large amount of
freight and reducing its drain on the Treasury. The Shipping Board is
constantly under pressure, to which it too often yields, to protect private
interests, rather than serve the public welfare. More attention should be
given to merchant ships as an auxiliary of the Navy. The possibility of
including their masters and crews in the Naval Reserve, with some
reasonable compensation, should be thoroughly explored as a method of
encouraging private operation of shipping. Public operation is not a success.
No investigation, of which I have caused several to be made, has failed to
report that it could not succeed or to recommend speedy transfer to private
ownership. Our exporters and importers are both indifferent about using
American ships. It should be our policy to keep our present vessels in repair
and dispose of them as rapidly as possible, rather than undertake any new
construction. Their operation is a burden on the National Treasury, for
which we are not receiving sufficient benefits.
COMMERCIAL AVIATION
A rapid growth is taking place in aeronautics. The Department of
Commerce has charge of the inspection and licensing system and the
construction of national airways. Almost 8,000 miles are already completed
and about 4,000 miles more contemplated. Nearly 4,400 miles are now
equipped and over 3,000 miles more will have lighting and emergency
landing fields by next July. Air mail contracts are expected to cover 24 of
these lines. Daily airway flying is nearly 15,000 miles and is expected to
reach 25,000 miles early next year.
