3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
620
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
Brezhnev interrupted and said: “Not for the Soviet Union.”
The President believed that it was good for the Soviet Union, too,
and he would explain why. Whatever influence we have at this time or
will have in the future on the leaders of China will be used to urge
peaceful relations between China and the Soviet Union and all other
countries. We will never let relations between us and China be at the
expense of the Soviet Union, nor will we ever permit an alignment to
develop between us against the Soviet Union.
Brezhnev interrupted and asked: “Why don’t you prod them to
sign an agreement with us?”
The President said he will be pleased to do so, because we believe
that this would be good for the United States. We will keep the Soviet
Union informed about our relations with China and would appreciate
it if the Soviets keep us informed about their relations with China.
Brezhnev said they could well do that.
The President said that we had nothing to conceal from the Soviet
Union. There are some relations between the Soviet Union and the
United States that are of both symbolic and substantive significance
and are very important for us. The President had no desire to em-
barrass Brezhnev, but would like to speak frankly on these issues.
Telemetry Encryption
The President noted that all our missile test firings are over the
ocean and the Soviet Union is able without obstacles to monitor the
firings of our missiles. We do not encrypt telemetry data and until quite
recently the Soviet Union had never encrypted data from missiles cov-
ered by SALT. Only with SS–20 missiles did the Soviets formally en-
crypt telemetry data. Of course, SS–20s were not covered by SALT, but
during the last few months encryption of telemetry from strategic mis-
siles had caused us great concern. As Brezhnev knew, we have peaceful
observation stations at sea, in space, and in a few nations in his part of
the world—formerly in Iran. The Iranian stations used to verify the
SALT agreement could no longer be used. This has not been a secret op-
eration, nor was it designed to act against the Soviet Union. It was only
used to verify compliance with the very important SALT agreements.
In order partially to replace this capability we would like to fly air-
planes over Turkey on peaceful missions for the purpose of verifying
compliance with our bilateral agreements. We were not asking the So-
viet Union to approve, but only to let the Turkish government know
that the Soviet Union would not object to such flights, or let us inform
the Turkish government to that effect without the Soviet Union contra-
dicting such information.
(At this point Brezhnev was handed a typed briefing paper by his
interpreter, selected from what was evidently a stack of talking points
on various subjects.)
