3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
186
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
ative; that we had no sense of feedback to our ideas. I had the impres-
sion that the Soviet Union was hoping that public pressure would bring
about a shift in the American positions, but if this is so, it represented a
serious misreading of US public opinion, the main force of which was
in the other direction. I expressed the hope that at Vienna Gromyko
would address Soviet concerns and American concerns in a forth-
coming spirit, with ideas of how we might find common ground on the
main issues. If this were done, I expressed confidence that he would be
met by the same spirit on the American side.
In reply, Dobrynin emphasized that we must understand the psy-
chology of Brezhnev’s situation. He had invested a great deal of effort,
and against substantial opposition, to reach the Vladivostok agree-
ments and, said Dobrynin, he simply could not go to the Politburo and
say: “Well, the Americans have rejected the agreement we reached.
What other ideas shall we put forward?” The only chance of forward
movement, Dobrynin thought, would be for the US to say to Brezhnev:
“We understand your commitment to Vladivostok, and we start from
there. But there have been changes in technology and other factors in
the three years since Vladivostok, and this is how we propose to take
account of those changes.” I said this was essentially what the frame-
work agreed upon at Geneva sought to do, but he replied that our pro-
posals, to have a reasonable chance of acceptance, had to reflect a will-
ingness to accept parity, whereas it appeared to the Soviet leadership
that what we sought, in our effort to reduce the Soviet heavy missiles,
was to prevent the Soviet Union from attaining a strategic capability
equal to ours.
We then reviewed the American concerns centering on Soviet
heavy missiles and the Soviet unwillingness to consider a reduction in
the MIRV aggregate. Dobrynin’s response covered familiar ground: the
US had at first agreed to count the air-launched cruise missiles individ-
ually against the MIRV aggregate, and now were unwilling even to
count a plane-load of them as one MIRV against the total, etc., etc. Do-
brynin also covered Soviet concerns about GLCMs as a problem exacer-
bated by the way the B–1 decision was handled.
Dobrynin expressed the hope that the US could transmit its pro-
posals through him in ample time so that Gromyko could have them
studied in advance, if we wanted the Vienna meetings to be productive.
He also inquired whether the Panama, Taiwan and Cuba issues
would make the President’s problem with domestic public opinion on
SALT more complicated. At this point, we broke off to watch the Presi-
dent’s press conference on television.2
2 The text of the President’s August 23 news conference, which covered the Panama
Canal, Israel, Rhodesia, and the People’s Republic of China, is in Public Papers: Carter,
1977, Book II, pp. 1486–1494
