504
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
heads. John Marcum replied they were about 80%, Harold Brown said
yes, 75–80% but pointed out the real difference was that for the
launchers they didn’t have to worry, there was a 25% chance that none
of them would work.
The President said it was his understanding that there would be a
provision that if he or Brezhnev had a pressing national need they
would be able to withdraw from the treaty. Harold Brown agreed,
saying there would be a “supreme national interest” withdrawal
clause, but it would be very difficult politically to exercise that clause
since it would abrogate the treaty. Further, there would be undoubt-
edly fierce interagency fights over whether the particular problem was
serious enough to justify withdrawal.
David Aaron pointed out that it might be possible to define a flex-
ible “supreme interest” clause that would let either side resume testing
for national security reasons without collapse of the treaty. The Presi-
dent agreed that this might be possible.
Jim Schlesinger interjected that an alternative would be to have a
small quota of tests below 5 KT and that this would minimize the diffi-
culty associated with the threshold. The President noted that from what
Harold Brown said we would be able to test if really necessary and
asked how long it would take us to do so if a problem arose.
Roger Batzel replied that this would take from 6 to 9 months de-
pending on the level of readiness provided for in the Safeguards Plan.
The President asked how long the moratorium had lasted. Harold Brown
said it lasted about 2½ years from the summer of 1958 to early 1961. Ha-
rold Agnew said that a lot of people thought he was paranoid but that he
had never gotten over this. He presented a chart5 showing that the So-
viets have resumed testing immediately with a massive and well pre-
pared program, whereas it had taken us an extended period to carry
out the first test. Frank Press told Harold Agnew that we really needed
his and Roger Batzel’s help in designing a Safeguard Plan which would
provide the right level of readiness and help keep our weapons group
together.
Harold Agnew said that he understood there could be concern as
the President mentioned with regard to whether the laboratories have a
vested interest in testing. He assured the President that their only con-
cern was to maintain our nuclear deterrent. He said that the labora-
tories constitute a valuable resource and they happen to think they are
smarter than anyone else and could do a better job in solving most new
problems. He commented that their staff spent 40% of their time on
5 Attached but not printed.
