Venezuela 1307 relating to coffee and tin, but that he did not like the people who are exercising the control in the case of oil. He expressed the view that the trouble stems from the Soviets, and asked whether the British side had any ideas about what could be done substantively to slow things up. Lord Home, in response, inquired whether Mr. Dillon felt that the Soviets are likely to upset the situation. Mr. Dillon replied that he thought they could cause trouble, but nothing insuperable. Lord Home asked whether there was any influence that could be brought to bear on Venezuela. Mr. Dillon replied that he did not know what could be done since power rested with one man. He expressed the opinion that the oil companies had done as much as they can to influence the Venezuelan situation. VE–49. Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Caracas1  Washington, December 1, 1960, 8:00 p.m. 496. Yesterday Venezuelan Representative COAS informed Council of Dominican Government’s alleged complicity and intervention Venezuelan affairs, and immediately thereafter requested IAPC initiate investigation, thereof. Presentation consisted of review past Dominican sins and was not effective principally because he had no specific details to support general assertions of new conspiracy. Peace Committee adjourned to allow Venezuelan representative time to obtain and present charges in more specific form. Presumably it will not be reconvened until Venezuela indicates it is ready. In light Embassy’s 4632 which was not decoded until after meeting it to appears there may be grounds for Venezuelan concern. However, neither U.S. nor other delegations had this information during yesterday’s sessions and statements so far have been made only by Venezuela and Dominican Republic. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 731.00/11–3060. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Mann and by Edward A. Jamison, Deputy Director of the Office of Inter- American Regional Political Affairs. 2 The referenced telegram from Caracas, November 30, 1960, reported that the Foreign Minister had made available to the Embassy that day a series of diplomatic reports indicating another civilian-­military movement to overthrow Betancourt, which had the support of Trujillo.
