Venezuela  1249
who, whether or not a “good” President, had been freely elected by the 
Haitian people after a year of chaos. Here was Cuba, in the first flush of 
victory over a tyrant, permitting attacks on a nearby government. Did 
he approve?
The President didn’t know about this situation but would look 
into it.
Then I said that he could count on the OAS for absolute protection 
of Venezuela against any outside attack. He was reminded of the Río 
Treaty which had proved its effectiveness. With reliance on the OAS, 
Venezuela need have no concern about aggression; it could concentrate 
on its internal affairs without fear. The United States would join with 
others to defend Venezuela before any serious ill could fall on his coun-
try. The President seemed to listen carefully, but he did not respond in 
any detail to my statement. Our host mentioned the reference to revi-
sion of the trade agreement in his inaugural speech. He described it as 
an “escape valve” to ease pressure on him from affected Venezuelan 
interests. I said we would discuss the subject through regular chan-
nels if he wished, but added that the agreement was carefully balanced 
and would have to continue to offer advantages to both parties. With 
the slack in demand for petroleum, and with the new crisis in the coal 
industry in the United States as result of reduced market in Germany, 
the time was not the most propitious. He did not press his point.
Finally, he turned to the subject of military equipment. The coun-
try had been left deeply in debt by Perez Jimenez. The military would 
be loyal to him. They need new equipment, especially for the armored 
forces. They hope to buy it from the United States at “token” prices. This 
would be one tangible way of helping and supporting his government.
I asked whether he was talking about additional equipment, or that 
included in the purchase agreement of 1957.7 His reply was not clear, 
but he seemed to mean a revision of the terms of the 1957 purchase 
agreement, and he again referred to the need to buy it for token prices.
As we left the table, I told the President of the United States’ effort 
to meet the Junta Government’s request for an early date to inaugurate 
the Boliver Statue in Washington.8 We wanted President Eisenhower 
to participate because of the event’s importance, and we were cog-
nizant of the plan of Venezuela to send Admiral Larrazábal for the 
7 In note no. 179 of February 5, 1957, the Government of Venezuela accepted the 
credit facilities offered by the United States in its note of December 6, 1956, for the 
purchase of U.S. military equipment to implement the defense objectives assigned to 
Venezuela by the Military Planning Talks concluded at Caracas, March 13, 1956. (731.5/2–
557) Documentation concerning the extension of credit for military equipment is printed 
in Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, vol. VII, American Republics: Central and South America, 
Chapter 17.
8 President Eisenhower accepted the statue on behalf of the U.S. Government on 
February 27, 1959. Documentation concerning the matter is contained in decimal file 831.442.
