Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 425 centives to exports and propose new governmental programs to facilitate marketing efforts by U.S. firms abroad.7 It is here that States play a dramatic and leading role, particularly through export industries and business. More than $20 billion in exports were shipped from the Western States in 1976. California led the entire country by a large margin in the export of manufactured goods with over $8 billion in shipments and over $11 billion in total exports— 65% of which went to Asian and Pacific countries. Washington, with over $3 billion in manufacturing exports, also ranked among the top eight States in the nation. Oregon sends 83% of its $1.6 billion in exports to Asia—trade which provides jobs to 11% of Oregon’s work force. Exports are an increasingly important part of the States’ economies. Most of the Western States tripled or quadrupled the dollar value of their exports between 1972 and 1976, with Idaho registering a sixfold increase. Inflation accounted for some of those gains, but there were solid indicators of real gains. For example, the total number of persons employed in manufacturing exports in the Western States almost doubled between 1972 and 1976. The importance of export promotion to the Western States is clear. In Alaska 22% of manufacturing employment is related to exports; in Washington, the figure is 12.5%; in Arizona and in Hawaii, it is 11.6%. In California the percentage is lower—7.8% but the absolute numbers are large: 125,000 people are employed in manufacturing exports alone. Export promotion efforts can be helped by informing business constituents that the investment climate in Asia is much improved as well. Following the end of the Vietnam war, the American business community grew less certain about the prospects for maintaining a favorable economic climate in Asia. But now that 3 years have passed, we can see that those fears were exaggerated and unjustified. As a result of the political stability in the market economy countries, there is a tremendous regional market developing that will be increasingly hungry for American quality products and attractive to American capital. Together, utilizing already existing facilities such as the Export-Import Bank and the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, Federal and State Governments can be important catalysts in helping America increase its share of the lucrative trade and investment markets. The other side to the coin is that the future of the Pacific community is closely tied to the maintenance of open markets in the Western 7 The President established the National Export Policy Task Force in April with Kreps as chair and Weil coordinating the working group. (Richard Halloran, “Export Aid is Weighed,” The New York Times, July 21, 1978, pp. D–1, D–7) In late July, Kreps submitted to the President a 12-point national export policy plan. (John T. Norman, “Plan for a National Export Policy Is Sent to President by Administration Officials,” The Wall Street Journal, July 26, 1978, p. 14)
