Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
559
this complicated context. It cannot. As I have often said, our relation-
ship with the Soviet Union is a mixture of cooperation and competition.
And as President of the United States, I have no more difficult and deli-
cate task than to balance these two. I cannot and I will not let the pres-
sures of inevitable competition overwhelm possibilities for coopera-
tion, any more than I will let cooperation blind us to the realities of
competition, which we are fully prepared to meet.
Because this carefully negotiated and responsible arms control
agreement will make the world safer and more secure, it is in our na-
tional interest to pursue it, even as we continue competition with the
Soviet Union elsewhere in the world. Therefore, I will seek both to con-
clude this new SALT agreement and to respond to any Soviet behavior
which adversely affects our interests.
To reject SALT II would mean that the inevitable competition in
strategic nuclear arms would grow even more dangerous. Each crisis,
each confrontation, each point of friction—as serious as it may be in its
own right—would take on an added measure of significance and an
added dimension of danger. For it would occur in an atmosphere of un-
bridled strategic competition and deteriorating strategic stability. It is
precisely because we have fundamental differences with the Soviet
Union that we are determined to bring this dangerous dimension of
our military competition under control.
In today’s world, it is vital to match the pursuit of ideals with the
responsible use of force and of power. The United States is a source of
both, ideals and power. Our ideals have inspired the world for more
than two centuries; and for three generations, since World War II, our
power has helped other nations to realize their own ideals.
The determination and strength of purpose of the American
people are crucial for stability in a turbulent world. If we stand together
in maintaining a steady course, America can protect its principles and
interests and also be a force for peace.
Americans have always accepted the challenge of leadership. And
I am confident that we will do so now.
Thank you very much.
