Covert and Overt Operations about 80% were pro-Khomeini.4 Although a modest bail was set, the vast majority refused to identify themselves, and the judge ordered them to remain in jail until they presented proper identification. The failure to identify themselves may render them out of status and subject to deportation. The combination of this fact together with possible criminal prosecution in connection with the demonstration, may shorten the tortuous deportation process. All of the jailed Iranians have hired a U.S. lawyer to represent them. (C) Iranian Claims Litigation Justice is intervening as a “friend of the court” in a claims hearing against Iran in New York.5 Our objective is to persuade the court not to make judgment on the case because of its possible implications at a delicate moment in the hostage situation. Regardless of how the judge decides, it could complicate eventual negotiations for the hostages’ release. Mr. Christopher executed an affidavit last night and is prepared to testify in person if essential. The Attorney General does not favor using IEEPA to attempt to prevent the court from issuing a judgment in the case. He believes that such an effort would ultimately fail and would undermine the authority to use IEEPA in other areas. No decision on IEEPA is required until we see if the amicus approach is successful. (C) [1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified] With regard to the assets of the former Shah, there is no way to determine the extent of his holdings in this country. Property and other assets can be held in forms which do not reflect identity of ownership. The Iranians have filed a claim in New York to retrieve these assets, but thus far they have been unable to figure out where to look. Mr. Aaron commented that we might wish to issue a public call for such information at some point if it appeared necessary as part of the hostage negotiations. (S) 4 Rival demonstrations in Washington on July 27 pitted pro-Khomeini groups against anti-Khomeini groups, including the Iran Freedom Foundation founded by Tabatabai. More demonstrations were held the next day. (Donald P. Baker, “Iranian Groups
