Covert and Overt Operations
871
about 80% were pro-Khomeini.4 Although a modest bail was set, the
vast majority refused to identify themselves, and the judge ordered
them to remain in jail until they presented proper identification. The
failure to identify themselves may render them out of status and subject
to deportation. The combination of this fact together with possible
criminal prosecution in connection with the demonstration, may
shorten the tortuous deportation process. All of the jailed Iranians have
hired a U.S. lawyer to represent them. (C)
Iranian Claims Litigation
Justice is intervening as a “friend of the court” in a claims hearing
against Iran in New York.5 Our objective is to persuade the court not
to make judgment on the case because of its possible implications at
a delicate moment in the hostage situation. Regardless of how the judge
decides, it could complicate eventual negotiations for the hostages’
release. Mr. Christopher executed an affidavit last night and is prepared
to testify in person if essential. The Attorney General does not favor
using IEEPA to attempt to prevent the court from issuing a judgment
in the case. He believes that such an effort would ultimately fail
and would undermine the authority to use IEEPA in other areas. No
decision on IEEPA is required until we see if the amicus approach is
successful. (C)
[1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]
With regard to the assets of the former Shah, there is no way to
determine the extent of his holdings in this country. Property and other
assets can be held in forms which do not reflect identity of ownership.
The Iranians have filed a claim in New York to retrieve these assets,
but thus far they have been unable to figure out where to look. Mr.
Aaron commented that we might wish to issue a public call for such
information at some point if it appeared necessary as part of the hostage
negotiations. (S)
4 Rival demonstrations in Washington on July 27 pitted pro-Khomeini groups
against anti-Khomeini groups, including the Iran Freedom Foundation founded by Taba-
tabai. More demonstrations were held the next day. (Donald P. Baker, “Iranian Groups
Clash in D.C., ” Washington Post, July 28, 1980, p. A1; Donald P. Baker and Donnel
Nunes, “Jailed Iranian Demonstrators Face Possible Deportation,” Washington Post, July
29, 1980, p. B1)
5 In a July 25 memorandum to Christopher, Owen provided the pros and cons of
renewed U.S. Government efforts to seek stays of the Iranian claims and assets cases
pending in U.S. courts. (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under
Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Iran Claims/
Assets Litigations) Tim Deal provided Brzezinski with information on current lawsuits
involving claims against Iran. (Memorandum dated July 24; Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 101, Meetings File, 7/17/80 Ad
Hoc Group re Iran)
