444 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II ernments to find reasons for discouraging assistance, i.e., they would claim that grants made by the Institute violated internal laws. Secondly, he argued, it would be too difficult to determine what was consistent with the laws of another country, and the Institute was not the appropriate body to interpret and apply foreign laws.4 Jan Nowak concurred; so did Alan Schwartz but he proposed amending the wording to read that assistance provided for use in a foreign country should be consistent with “the various constitutions or other governing documents of that country.” He noted that repressive regimes were “notorious in their desire to put high-flown and democratic phraseology into their constitutions.” 3) Jan Nowak proposed that the Institute “match” privately-raised funds to NGOs in order to enhance and stimulate public support for human rights projects rather than replace it. Relationship to United States Foreign Policy (Section 5) Most witnesses stressed the necessity of Institute independence from the U.S. Government. In this connection, Leonard Meeker proposed the deletion of this entire Section. (The Section reads: “The Secretary of State shall keep the Institute fully informed on United States foreign policy as it relates to the activities of the Institute. The Institute shall give consideration to the foreign policy of the United States in carrying out this Act, but shall not be subject to the direction of the Secretary of State in carrying out its responsibilities under this Act.”) Leonard Meeker further proposed for the same reason that the Institute should not be allowed to avail itself of “the use of information, services, facilities, officers” etc. of the U.S. abroad (Sec. 7 (a) (7)). Alan Schwartz’s testimony to the contrary supported Section 5 on the grounds that it gave the Institute governmental “clout” with foreign governments and at the same time enabled it to retain its independence. Management of the Institute (Section 6) The following amendments were made: 1) Politicization of the Institute—To ensure that the Institute would promote human rights globally and not become the tool of either the right or left (a point raised by Congressman Fraser), Frank Newman proposed that the preamble of the Bill refer to “universal” respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and that Section 6 (Management of the Institute) read that the Board of Directors have a demonstrated concern for, and experience in matters pertaining to “universal 4 An unknown hand bracketed this paragraph.
