1955 259 more than amply covered for a big influx of code people will be going in in preparation for the Foreign Minister’s Meeting, October 27. The telephone exchange on Wednesday was very satisfactory from our standpoint although we were sorry to have kept you waiting on the line so long. You handled Wang’s unexpected move well and there is no reason to worry about the slight misunderstanding of his intentions in the course of the session. I would have expected Ralph or Doug to pass you a note if they suspected that you did not get the purport of what Wang intended to do, but it turned out all right. Under separate cover we are sending you the five items you requested in your last letter. We are instructing Drum to try to record very systematically the stories of all the Americans who are now beginning to come out. The same instructions will go to Japan. We are also going back over the old records here in an effort to compile a complete story of the maltreat­ ment of Americans from the beginning. There may be no occasion to use it at Geneva but we want to have it in reserve in readily useable form in case it should be needed. I take Wang’s sudden unilateral public move on the 14th as a bad augury. I doubt if he would have made a public demand for moving the talks to a higher level at that moment unless a Communist deci­ sion had been made which depreciated the value of further talks at the ­Ambassadorial level, from their standpoint. It may be increasingly dif­ ficult to keep the ball rolling. We will give you all the ammunition we can before your next meeting. Good luck and warmest regards, Sincerely, Walter P. McConaughy 197. Telegram 739 from Geneva1 Geneva, September 17, 1955, 4 p.m. 739. From Johnson. 1. Have just received letter from Wang referring his Sept. 14 pro­ posal US “should formally entrust UK” and PRC “should formally entrust” GOI so as “to complete procedures of entrusting third powers”. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–1755. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution.
