1266 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX London and Bonn, and Minister of State Boutros Ghali appears to be making same argument in Rome. The state of play as we understand it is that various options will be examined at meeting of political directors June 4, who will prepare final recommendations to their leaders in time for summit June 12–13. 3. In our judgment the Europeans have already made up their minds that they will have to issue some kind of statement and it will therefore probably not be possible to talk them into holding off entirely on an initiative. We believe instead our efforts should be directed toward channeling any statement by the Europeans in directions that are as constructive as possible and that will be less damaging to our own Middle East strategy. We can best do this, we believe, by defining our own concerns and requirements as precisely as possible. 4. As the EC governments formulate their final positions over the next few days, you should seek appropriate opportunities to get our views across as outlined below at the level you deem will be most effective. In your remarks you should stress three principal points: (1) We will view any statement they make or any action by the contribution it makes to a negotiated settlement; (2) anything that appears to offer the Arabs the false hope of an easy alternative would conflict with our purposes since it would take the heat off the Arabs to engage eventually in the autonomy negotiations; (3) we wish to be consulted about any initiative the Europeans propose to launch well in advance. 5. Begin talking points: —The achievement of peace in the Middle East is, as we all agree, of vital importance to the West. In our view that cannot be achieved by actions which are designed primarily to satisfy one side. It can only be achieved by negotiations, as difficult as these can be, of the kind which flow out of the Camp David Framework. As the Secretary has already stressed, the President has determined that we will pursue these negotiations in the absence of any other alternatives which have a chance of achieving peace. —We are now attempting to cope with Sadat’s suspension of the talks2 over the proposed Jerusalem legislation.3 Amb. Linowitz is at work attempting to get the talks back on the tracks because we believe both sides basically want to see the process through. In the meantime the Israeli Cabinet crisis4 and the increased violence in the West Bank have complicated matters. But we continue to hold the view that the 2 See footnote 3, Document 368. 3 See Document 371. 4 Defense Minister Ezer Weizman resigned from the Cabinet on May 25 in protest of the government’s “marking time” in the peace talks with Egypt. (“Weizman Attacks Begin on Talks,” The New York Times, May 27, 1980, p. A18)
