Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1135
Joint Statement in Connection with Procedures for  
Confirming Launch Weight
The sides understand that, in accordance with paragraph 12 of 
Section XIV of the inspection protocol, they assume the obligation to 
agree within the JCIC procedures for weighing or determining by other 
means the weight of ICBMs or SLBMs with the purpose of confirming 
the launch weight of ICBMs or SLBMs of a new type declared on the 
basis of a change in launch weight before the beginning of deployment 
of any such new type of ICBM or SLBM. The parties further understand 
that they are obligated to negotiate such procedures in good faith, and 
without efforts to artificially hinder agreement on such procedures so 
as not to delay the deployment of such an ICBM or SLBM.
B. Reciprocal Statements:
U.S. Statement on Consultations Relating to the Release to the  
Public of Data and Other Information
The U.S. side understands that, pursuant to paragraph 6 of 
Article VIII of the Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic 
Offensive Arms, hereinafter referred to as the treaty, the parties shall hold 
consultations on the release to the public of data and other information 
provided pursuant to Article VIII of the treaty or received otherwise in 
fulfilling the obligations provided for in the treaty. In this connection, 
the U.S. side agrees that it intends to follow, on the basis of reciprocity, 
the precedent established by the agreement between the governments 
of the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. through an exchange of notes between the 
Embassy of the U.S.A. in the U.S.S.R. and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
of the U.S.S.R. dated April 20–23, 1990, concerning the release to the pub-
lic of information which is contained in notifications provided pursuant 
to the Treaty Between the United States of America and the Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics on the Elimination of their Intermediate-Range 
and Shorter-Range Missiles of December 8, 1987, including data updates 
with respect to the categories of data contained in the memorandum of 
understanding regarding the establishment of the data base for the treaty 
of December 8, 1987. The U.S. side further understands that such consul-
tations shall be concluded prior to entry into force of the treaty.
Soviet Statement on Consultations Relating to the  
Release to the Public of Data and Other Information
The Soviet side understands that, pursuant to paragraph 6 of Article 
VIII of the Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive 
Arms, hereinafter referred to as the treaty, the parties shall hold consul-
tations on the release to the public of data and other information pro-
vided pursuant to Article VIII of the treaty or received otherwise in 
fulfilling the obligations provided for in the treaty. In this connection, the 
Soviet side agrees that it intends to follow, on the basis of reciprocity, the
