Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 We will face a number of decisions on how to relate the timing of other arms control initiatives and negotiations to the SALT II debate. We are committed to beginning on SALT III soon after ratification of SALT II, and perhaps even before. The earlier we might gain an agreement that restrains theater systems such as the SS–20, the lower the level at which this program would be capped. But before pressing negotiations on gray area systems with the Soviets, we should be sure to develop a solid alliance consensus on how to handle this subject.17 Any allied concerns on SALT III and theater systems would play back directly into SALT II debates here. The priority we give to allied concerns may mean we should start SALT III discussions at a slow pace. As suggested below, it could be very important to our nonproliferation policies that we reach agreement on a comprehensive test ban by the end of 1979; we should seek progress in the negotiations during the coming year, but not try to reach final agreement until after SALT II ratification.18 The possibility that a SALT II agreement might create conditions for progress on MBFR is also considered below. D. Trade and the Dollar: The importance of international economic issues to our own economy and to our political relationships abroad has become increasingly evident. Working to enhance the strength of the dollar, which depends primarily on the anti-inflation program, remains crucial.19 1979 is likely to see a major struggle in the Congress over approval of an MTN package, as well as in response to the likely introduction of new protectionist measures aimed at our major trading partners (especially Japan) and at the more advanced LDC’s.20 The stakes are very high, not only in terms of the economic benefits to us and the future of the international trading system, but also in avoiding the acrimony abroad that would follow Congressional rejection. Our relationships with Europe would be damaged; and trade is an even more important strand in our ties to Asian friends. This is, I believe, a major strategic issue.21 17 In the left-hand margin next to this sentence, the President wrote “I’ll pursue at Guadeloupe” and drew an arrow from the comment to the sentence. 18 The President underlined the phrase “the end of 1979,” and in the left-hand margin next to the paragraph, he wrote: “earlier.” 19 The President underlined the word “crucial.” 20 The President underlined the phrase “approval of an MTN package.” 21 The President underlined the portion of the sentence beginning with “a” through the end of the sentence. In the left-hand margin next to this sentence, he wrote “True” and drew arrows from it to this sentence and the first sentence in the next paragraph.
