1290 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX schools, police, etc.—they found reticence. The mayor was fearful of being seen as betraying the Palestinian cause. Maybe this (i.e. consultations) is a fruitless effort. He understands the difficulties of having a formal group. Perhaps 5 or 6 mayors would be willing, collectively, if they know they had the tacit approval of the PLO and of Jordan. They could speak for the residents, and demand that the Israeli Military Government be removed. They could demand responsibility to run their lives, to have elections, and for the Self- Governing Authority to have full responsibility. So far, we are playing into Israel’s hands, by not being able to carry out the Camp David Accords. If Begin wants to slow down the process, he can blame it on the Palestinians, and say that he wants to do something, but can’t get the Palestinians to take responsibility. This (i.e. the consultations) would be a public relations achievement, at least in the U.S., if the West Bank and Gaza mayors were trying to take their own rights under the Camp David process. Now it is felt here, in the press, that the Palestinians are not willing to negotiate, but rather are terrorists. He is eager for progress. It is hard for us to meet with West Bank mayors. They are reluctant to talk with us. (Speaking to the Palestinians?): How can we help Jordan take over the West Bank, and get the Israeli Military Government out? One mayor is coming here. King Hussein said Khalaf. The Prime Minister said he has a relative here. The President said that his (Mayor Khalaf’s) brother is here. We will treat him,7 and hope it will succeed. We will try to break the stalemate (i.e. in the talks). King Hussein said that there are many members of the PLO and other Palestinians who would be ready, if it worked out, to speak directly to the United States. The issue is how can they join the Egyptian delegation—there is no Jordanian delegation. The President said that they do not need to be in a delegation. King Hussein said it might be easy to discuss with them. The President said that the problem is that if they are designated as representatives of the PLO, it will not work. If they come as individuals, we will not try to analyze whom they represent. Some mayors may be PLO members: we don’t know. If they say they will negotiate, but represent the PLO, it would be impossible for us. We can’t talk with the PLO. The Prime Minister said that there is a practical difficulty for West Bankers to come in a context that would prejudge the result—i.e. the
