34 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I I believe it will be possible to withdraw our ground forces from South Korea on a phased basis over a time span to be determined after consultation with both South Korea and Japan. At the same time, it should be made clear to the South Korean Government that its internal oppression is repugnant to our people, and undermines the support for our commitment there. We face a more immediate problem in the Atlantic sector of our defense. The Soviet Union has in recent years strengthened its forces in Central Europe. The Warsaw Pact forces facing NATO today are substantially composed of Soviet combat troops, and these troops have been modernized and reinforced. In the event of war, they are postured for an all-out conflict of short duration and great intensity. NATO’s ground combat forces are largely European. The U.S. provides about one-fifth of the combat element, as well as the strategic umbrella, and without this American commitment, Western Europe could not defend itself successfully. In recent years, new military technology has been developed by both sides, including precision-guided munitions that are changing the nature of land warfare. Unfortunately, NATO’s arsenal suffers from a lack of standardization, which needlessly increases the cost of NATO, and its strategy too often seems wedded to past plans and concepts. We must not allow our alliance to become an anachronism. There is, in short, a pressing need for us and our allies to undertake a review of NATO’s forces and its strategies in light of the changing military environment. A comprehensive program to develop, procure, and equip NATO with the more accurate air defense and anti-tank weapons made possible by new technology is needed to increase NATO’s defensive power. Agreement on stockpiles and on the prospective length of any potential conflict is necessary. We should also review the structure of NATO reserve forces so they can be committed to combat sooner. In all of this a major European and joint effort will be required. Our people will not support unilateral American contributions in what must be a truly mutual defense effort. Cooperative, Competitive Relations Even as we review our military posture, we must spare no effort to bring about a reduction of the forces that confront one another in Central Europe. It is to be hoped that the stalemated mutual force reduction talks in Vienna will soon produce results so that the forces of both sides can be
