Romania spective of origin, not totally under party/state control, especially if it could serve as vehicle for expression of accumulated grievances of diverse groups (e.g. “free trade union” group), and on past record it will move quickly, efficiently, and ruthlessly if necessary to destroy it before it can take root and spread. External Influences 26. There are many external influences on formulation and execution of Romania’s “independent” foreign policy, but very few lap over into internal policy or affect domestic stability. Internally, only Hungary and Soviet Union could play important roles, but there is no compelling evidence that they are doing so. 27. Hungary and Transylvania are linked together by history, race, and culture (as Transylvania is also similarly linked to classic Romania), and interest of Hungarian Hungarians in situation of their ethnic brethren is as natural as Romanian interest in Bessarabia, a region heavily populated by ethnic Romanians which is now the Moldavian SSR of Soviet Union. Given centuries of Romanian- Hungarian conflict and repeated shifts in ownership of Transylvania, however, Romanians interpret this Hungarian interest as a thinly veiled lust for recovery of this “lost” territory, probably at Soviet instigation. Realization that Hungary internally is now in many ways a more attractive place to live than Romania adds to Romanian concern about Hungary’s appeal to Transylvanian Magyars and the “subversive influences” emanating from Budapest. While we agree that GOH could exert a serious destabilizing force if it desired, we see present Kadar regime as essentially cautious on this issue, generally limiting official actions and keeping Hungarian nationalist firebrands under control. 28. All Romanians claim to see Soviet hand behind any internal disruption, but hard evidence is lacking. Still, as our study on Soviet leverage in Romania (Bucharest 138)6 concluded, one goal of Soviet activities within Romania must be identification and recruitment of individuals who could if necessary form a puppet regime imposed by the Red Army. Soviet Union has unquestioned military ability to subjugate Romania and has demonstrated in Hungary and Czechoslovakia, the political will to do so if it became convinced that vital security interests were seriously threatened by events in Romania. A Soviet invasion, unlikely as it seems now, would create so totally different a situation here as to render this analysis of regime stability inoperative. Aggrey 6 See Document 212.
