64 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII international Communist movement then that country is Communist. He noted that Khalq Party had not so considered itself in past but wanted to point this out as potential problem to U.S. assistance should PDPA (People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan) establish party-toparty relations with CPSU in future. Noting history of close Afghan relations with Soviet Union, Newsom asked Amin whether he expected party-to-party relations to develop. Amin said GOA will have relations with all political parties in power all over the world, such as the Democratic Party in the U.S., on the principle that parties in power should deal with other parties in power. He could not provide a further clarification at this time but stressed that what U.S. should consider is “what we are doing for our people not what we are.” 9. Domestic priorities: GOA leaders consider their principal tasks are to serve needs of the common man in an impoverished country previously exploited by aristocratic rulers. To meet their internal goals they need peace within Afghanistan and with neighbors and substantial foreign assistance. GOA is preparing five-year development plan which it hopes to have ready by first anniversary of revolution. GOA plans programs which will bring about basic economic and social reform, and GOA considers land reform to be its first priority. Both Taraki and Amin were asked whether cooperative or collective farms were envisaged. Both replied that small farmers would retain their land (up to two hectares) and would be organized into cooperatives. As first step in land reform, Taraki said GOA was about to announce program for graduated abolishment of debts owned by tenured farmers who had mortgaged their land to moneylenders and usurers. 10. Prisoners: Noting Borel visit, Newsom raised subject of possible release of imprisoned women and children related to officials of former government. Taraki bluntly replied that this was Afghanistan’s own affair and said “why shouldn’t I ask about the prisoners in your country?” However, Amin said they could not be released yet because their safety could not be guaranteed; he again indicated that there was possibility these prisoners could leave Afghanistan. When ICRC representative Borel visited Kabul in early July he visited prison but did not suggest release or departure for abroad. Borel was in Kabul again but Amin was unfamiliar with his activities.4 As for imprisoned officials of the Daoud regime, Amin said no decision on their future had yet been made by the Revolutionary Council. 11. Puerto Rico: Newsom noted to Dost that in 1977 Afghanistan voted with India, Iran and others in the Committee of 24 to set aside 4 The outcome of Afghan leaders’ July 3 meeting with Dominique Borel, a representative of the International Red Cross, was reported as unknown in telegram 5452 from Kabul, July 5. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780275–1071)
