1956  691
28. I said tension Taiwan area had been caused not by any action 
taken by US. Tension been caused by long repeated, often reiterated, 
and still continued threats his country initiate hostilities that area.
29. I said it was US had proposed it be made clear that there is 
determination not initiate hostilities in area but seek solution to dis­
putes existing between us in area by peaceful means. Not condition­
ally by peaceful means—that is not to say that if solution not found 
entirely satisfactory to one side or other that force will be resorted to, 
but unconditionally that solution be found by peaceful means.
30. I said he also persisted this morning in speaking of US occupa­
tion Taiwan. US is not occupying Taiwan. Presence US forces in Taiwan 
area in accord with collective defense arrangements with a government 
that is member UN and is recognized by great majority world govern­
ments. No amount words can twist this fact into supporting statement 
that US is in occupation Taiwan.
31. I said, however I recognized these were matters on which we 
have different views. I have not asked him accept my views in regard 
these matters. What I had asked was that we unconditionally and 
without reservations make it entirely clear we will not permit these 
differences lead us to war. Once this done, we could in that atmo­
sphere discuss our differences and other outstanding practical matters 
between us with better hope coming to mutually agreeable and mutu­
ally satisfactory solutions.
32. I said I had made it very clear in proposing and discussing this 
declaration that it not my intent they sacrifice their views or renounce 
their policies. I regretted their not being willing adopt same attitude.
33. I said I regretted this morning that he had made it very explicit 
that his govt’s purpose in these negotiations for declaration was to 
require US give up its right collective self defense. This entirely distorts 
proposal I had made.
34. I said what he seemed be saying was in making this declaration 
US Govt should entirely capitulate to views his govt with respect dis­
pute Taiwan area. I had made no such demand on his govt and in nego­
tiating this declaration did not believe it proper do so. That, it seemed 
me, got us completely away from proposition that we first make clear 
we not going to war and discuss our problems in that atmosphere and 
moved us to proposition that we discuss our differences under threat 
our side might resort to hostilities. That exactly situation I had been 
trying get ourselves out of.
35. I said I regretted that his govt gone so far in distorting this very 
simple straightforward and fundamental propsal.
36. Wang said he found hard accept views presented by me in 
my statement. Certainly not his intent initiate debate past history. Was
