1156  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
only at a facility at which non-deployed SLBMs may be located pursu-
ant to subparagraph 9(a) of Article IV of this Treaty or be in movement 
to such a facility.
3. For the purposes of this Treaty, including counting ICBMs and 
SLBMs:
(a) For ICBMs or SLBMs that are maintained, stored, and trans-
ported in stages, the first stage of an ICBM or SLBM of a particular type 
shall be considered to be an ICBM or SLBM of that type.
(b) For ICBMs or SLBMs that are maintained, stored, and trans-
ported as assembled missiles without launch canisters, an assembled 
missile of a particular type shall be considered to be an ICBM or SLBM 
of that type.
(c) For ICBMs that are maintained, stored, and transported as 
assembled missiles in launch canisters, an assembled missile of a par-
ticular type, in its launch canister, shall be considered to be an ICBM of 
that type.
(d) Each launch canister shall be considered to contain an ICBM 
from the time it first leaves a facility at which an ICBM is installed in 
it until an ICBM has been launched from it or until an ICBM has been 
removed from it for elimination. A launch canister shall not be consid-
ered to contain an ICBM if it contains a training model of a missile or 
has been placed on static display. Launch canisters for ICBMs of a par-
ticular type shall be distinguishable from launch canisters for ICBMs of 
a different type.
4. For the purposes of counting warheads:
(a) The number of warheads attributed to an ICBM or SLBM of 
each existing type shall be the number specified in the Memorandum 
of Understanding on the Establishment of the Data Base Relating to this 
Treaty, hereinafter referred to as the Memorandum of Understanding.
(b) The number of warheads that will be attributed to an ICBM or 
SLBM of a new type shall be the maximum number of reentry vehi-
cles with which an ICBM or SLBM of that type has been flight-tested. 
The number of warheads that will be attributed to an ICBM or SLBM 
of a new type with a front section of an existing design with multi-
ple reentry vehicles, or to an ICBM or SLBM of a new type with one 
reentry vehicle, shall be no less than the nearest integer that is smaller 
than the result of dividing 40 percent of the accountable throw-weight 
of the ICBM or SLBM by the weight of the lightest reentry vehicle 
flight-tested on an ICBM or SLBM of that type. In the case of an ICBM 
or SLBM of a new type with a front section of a fundamentally new 
design, the question of the applicability of the 40-percent rule to such 
an ICBM or SLBM shall be subject to agreement within the framework 
of the Joint Compliance and Inspection Commission. Until agreement
