428
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
One element which must be taken into consideration in making
our decision is that we are presently thinking of unilateral action to as-
sist the Mosadeq Government in the event that the British do not agree
to an oil settlement acceptable to Mosadeq.4 It would be virtually im-
possible to proceed with plans to overthrow Dr. Mosadeq while at the
same time giving him open assistance. Obviously, our assistance
would have the effect of strengthening his Government, whereas the
proposed plan for a coup requires a period of “softening up” designed
to discredit him and make clear to the Iranians that he can expect no
help from the Western Powers. In any case, it seems most improbable
that the British would agree to collaborate in the preparation of a coup
if we were acting unilaterally in a different direction.
With reference to this last point, it is not inconceivable that one
reason for the British suggestion is a desire to forestall unilateral Amer-
ican assistance to Mosadeq. They might take even a tentative agree-
ment on our part to proceed with the coup plan as meaning that we had
abandoned the idea of unilateral action, and this interpretation might
lead them to be less flexible with regard to new oil settlement proposals
of the kind we are now discussing. Conversely, our refusal to consider
the new plan for a coup might induce them to make more determined
efforts to reach an agreement with Mosadeq. It must be expected that
rejection of the British approach would be interpreted by them as em-
phasizing our determination to press for settlement of the oil dispute
with the Mosadeq Government and, in conjuction with the Secretary’s
remarks to Mr. Eden, as emphasizing our continued disagreement
with their estimate that Mosadeq must go before a settlement can be
reached.
Another obvious and vital consideration is the degree of assurance
we can have that preparations for the move and our connection with it
would not become known, and that the coup would eventually suceed.
4 An apparent reference to U.S. efforts to break the impasse between Iran and the
United Kingdom over compensation for the nationalized Anglo-Iranian Oil Company
(AIOC). The British believed that compensation should encompass foregone revenues.
The Iranian government wished to limit compensation to the physical value of the
Abadan refinery and other AIOC assets in Iran. In telegrams 3510, dated November 22,
and 1338, dated December 3, sent to London and Tehran respectively, the Department of
State discussed submitting claims to a board of arbitration appointed by the International
Court of Justice. The Board could select a model nationalization law, such as the British
coal nationalization law of 1945, to determine compensation. If both the British and the
Iranians agreed, the President, as stated in a draft memorandum to the Secretary, No-
vember 26, would approve a “program, under which one or more United States com-
panies, acting in cooperation with the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, would purchase and
market Iranian oil and oil products.” (Telegrams 3510 and 1338, and President Truman’s
draft memorandum, are in Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. X, Iran, 1951–1954, pp.
534–537, 540–541, and 538–539, respectively) In telegram 2181 from Tehran, December 6,
the Charge´ in Iran, Mattison, reported on Mosadeq’s cool reception of the plan. (Ibid., pp.
543–544)
