Yugoslavia
805
251.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, March 3, 1978
SUBJECT
Meetings with President Tito
The memorandum from Cy Vance (Tab A)2 sets out effectively the
background, setting, and issues for your meetings with President Tito.
A suggested arrival statement and talking points for your toast are at
Tab B;3 your latest letter to Tito at Tab C;4 his latest letter to you at
Tab D;5 and Reston’s article on his interview with Tito at Tab E.6 The
Yugoslavs have also suggested issuing a joint statement at the end of
the visit, as has been customary on past Tito visits. State is currently
negotiating an appropriate statement with the Yugoslavs, which we
will forward to you before the meetings.
In your recent letter to him, you suggested discussions on East-
West relations, disarmament, the Middle East, Africa, North-South
relations, the global economy, and Tito’s trip to the Soviet Union,
China, and North Korea. We have not yet had a response to your letter
soliciting his comments on this proposed agenda, but will send it to
you immediately if and when it arrives.
The Yugoslavs have made clear that Tito will want to talk about
major issues with you, preferably leaving bilateral issues to discussions
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit
File, Box 15, Yugoslavia: President Tito, 3/6–9/78: Briefing Book. Secret; Sensitive. The
date is handwritten.
2 See Document 252.
3 Attached but not printed. For the remarks at the welcoming ceremony and the
toasts delivered at the State Dinner, see Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book I, pp. 473–480.
4 Attached but not printed; dated February 24. In the letter, Carter proposed an
agenda for discussions including East-West relations, arms control and disarmament,
the Middle East, Africa, North-South relations, and global economic issues as well as
any other reflections Tito might have on his recent trip to the Soviet Union, China,
and North Korea. Carter also expressed support for achieving “a substantial and well-
balanced document” at the conclusion of the CSCE meeting in Belgrade. (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron
File, Box 57, Yugoslavia: 1–3/78)
5 Attached but not printed. In the undated letter, sent February 12, Tito addressed
the Palestinian issue, the Horn of Africa, and the CSCE conference in Belgrade. He
also stressed his belief of the importance of adopting a substantial and comprehensive
document at the conclusion of the Belgrade CSCE conference. (Ibid.)
6 James Reston, “At 85, Tito Still Looks to Future and Worries About the Present.”
(The New York Times, March 3, 1978, p. A1)
