International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981 669 interests. The existing policy allows considerable flexibility in applying export controls for foreign policy purposes, such as disassociating the United States from abhorrent acts of foreign governments, e.g., apartheid in South Africa or support of terrorism in Libya or Chile. Cy Vance opposes reversal of recent decisions based on present policy, which you reaffirmed in a decision memorandum last December 29.10 Consequently, we are not presenting other options examined in the study of export disincentives, such as limiting foreign policy export controls to cases where you find that the sanction is likely to cause a favorable change in the target country’s policy, or limiting the essentially symbolic sanctions, i.e., where alternative supply is likely, to countries engaged in actions hostile to fundamental US interests. (C) If you wish to consider changes in present policy before announcing your interim decisions, a delay of several weeks would be entailed while State prepared an analysis. (C) Approve statement confined to present policy11 Submit additional options, without delaying statement Submit additional options, delaying statement 4. Nuclear Export Controls. You would note that under your Administration there has already been major progress in liberalizing our own nuclear export practices, such as providing multiple reload licenses for most of our principal trading partners, providing general licenses for components for most reactors abroad, and eliminating licensing requirements for non-significant quantities of nuclear material; in streamlining Executive Branch procedures under the Nuclear Non- Proliferation Act; and in harmonizing with other suppliers our nuclear export policies in dealing with cases of proliferation concern. (C) You would now direct the responsible executive agencies:12 (1) in considering exports of dual-use items of significance for nuclear explosives, to assure that primary emphasis is placed on countries of proliferation concern, and to minimize the impact on commerce with our major trading partners; 10 In a December 28, 1979, memorandum to Carter, Brzezinski sought his decisions on extending various export controls for foreign policy purposes. Carter communicated his decisions to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives in two separate letters dated December 29, 1979. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 66, Trade: 12/79) 11 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation and initialed “J,” writing “(hard for me to understand)” in the adjacent margin. 12 Carter made a checkmark in the margin adjacent to all four numbered points below.
