International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
669
interests. The existing policy allows considerable flexibility in applying
export controls for foreign policy purposes, such as disassociating the
United States from abhorrent acts of foreign governments, e.g., apart-
heid in South Africa or support of terrorism in Libya or Chile. Cy Vance
opposes reversal of recent decisions based on present policy, which
you reaffirmed in a decision memorandum last December 29.10 Conse-
quently, we are not presenting other options examined in the study of
export disincentives, such as limiting foreign policy export controls to
cases where you find that the sanction is likely to cause a favorable
change in the target country’s policy, or limiting the essentially sym-
bolic sanctions, i.e., where alternative supply is likely, to countries en-
gaged in actions hostile to fundamental US interests. (C)
If you wish to consider changes in present policy before an-
nouncing your interim decisions, a delay of several weeks would be en-
tailed while State prepared an analysis. (C)
Approve statement confined to present policy11
Submit additional options, without delaying statement
Submit additional options, delaying statement
4. Nuclear Export Controls. You would note that under your Admin-
istration there has already been major progress in liberalizing our own
nuclear export practices, such as providing multiple reload licenses for
most of our principal trading partners, providing general licenses for
components for most reactors abroad, and eliminating licensing re-
quirements for non-significant quantities of nuclear material; in
streamlining Executive Branch procedures under the Nuclear Non-
Proliferation Act; and in harmonizing with other suppliers our nuclear
export policies in dealing with cases of proliferation concern. (C)
You would now direct the responsible executive agencies:12
(1) in considering exports of dual-use items of significance for nu-
clear explosives, to assure that primary emphasis is placed on countries
of proliferation concern, and to minimize the impact on commerce with
our major trading partners;
10 In a December 28, 1979, memorandum to Carter, Brzezinski sought his decisions
on extending various export controls for foreign policy purposes. Carter communicated
his decisions to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representa-
tives in two separate letters dated December 29, 1979. (Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 66, Trade: 12/79)
11 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation and initialed “J,” writing
“(hard for me to understand)” in the adjacent margin.
12 Carter made a checkmark in the margin adjacent to all four numbered points
below.
