advantage of leaving the first paragraph of Article I as originally drafted, and would enable either party subsequently to make a new declaration with respect to reciprocal rights if it should become satisfied that discrimination was being practised. It is my impression that in the last analysis it will be for the Department to consider whether it prefers to meet the existing difficulty by an exchange of notes in the manner suggested, or by the incorporation of a provision corresponding to that found in the Treaty with Turkey, more particularly the provision hereinbefore quoted as set forth on page 6 of the instruction under reference. Upon the occasion of my last interview with Dr. Schüller, I mentioned to him that I was assuming that the reciprocal application of the most favored nation treatment would continue until the treaty now being concluded had been negotiated and became effective. (See in this connection my telegram No. 45 of July 4, 1925, 2 p.m.)78 He smilingly answered that I could rest easily on this score, that he very well remembered that he had taken this matter into his own hands a year ago without consulting anybody but that he assumed full responsibility for it and that he was certain that there would be no disposition on the part of the Government to question the existing informal understanding. He did intimate, however, that he hoped we would be able to close the whole matter up by the end of the year. He will be away probably until the end of September and he knows that I am presently to go to the United States on leave. In this connection I note with satisfaction that, “The Department’s views and instructions in regard to the succeeding Articles of the Treaty will be transmitted promptly in subsequent instructions.” I have a feeling that I can make rapid progress in dealing directly with Schüller when the final instructions have been received, and that thereafter he will know how to secure the speedy acquiescence of his associates who must be consulted. I have [etc.] ALBERT H. WASHBURN 77 Neither printed. 78 Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 517.
