September 18–December 16, 1978
363
because of proximity, but they should not be given any other special
advantage. Boutros Ghali said that the Israelis can bid for the oil and this
would pose no problem.
In conclusion the President thanked the Egyptians for being very
forthcoming. He said he would support their position on oil and de-
leting the reference to internal law He said that the Israelis had also
tried to be forthcoming last night, and that he thought it was a good
step to have an agreed text of the letter on negotiations beginning on
the West Bank and Gaza in one month. This should help with the
Saudis.
99.
Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff to President Carter1
Washington, undated
Subject
Status of Israeli-Egyptian Peace Talks
The Egyptian and Israeli delegations met2 with us today and by
early afternoon agreement had been reached on a preamble and the en-
tire treaty text, except for the annexes. The only language in dispute
concerns the “priority of obligations” and there the difference is be-
tween Rosenne and Barak and not between the Egyptian and Israeli
delegations. The Egyptians will accept either alternative proposed by
the Israelis.
One new suggestion was made by Dayan this morning concerning
the Egyptian commitment to send an ambassador within one month.
The Egyptians are reluctant to make a public commitment on this
point. He suggested that President Carter send a letter to Prime Min-
ister Begin assuring him that President Sadat would send an ambas-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-
ject File, Box 15, Egypt-Israel Negotiations: 10/21–25/78. Secret; Eyes Only. Carter ini-
tialed “C” at the top of the memorandum. Printed from an uninitialed copy.
2 According to telegram Tosec 120171/268678 to Cairo, Tel Aviv, and Vance in
Moscow, October 22, Quandt, Hansell, and Atherton met with the Egyptian and Israeli
delegations for a drafting session on October 21. The Department further summarized
the specifics of the agreed treaty text, noting that resolution was still needed on the lines
of final withdrawal on the treaty map, Annex I, Annex III, and the Egyptian-Israeli oil
talks which had not yet begun. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
Office, Presidential Advisory Board, Box 72, Middle East: Box 3)
