1030  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
The Vice President presented President Eisenhower’s letter2 and, 
after an exchange of pleasantries, opened substantive conversation by 
asking whether the President considered the Communist problem bad 
in Argentina. The President replied that the combination of Peronism 
and Communism was indeed bad. Communism was also a serious 
problem here. In Cuzco a local Soviet had recently emerged and taken 
over the city for two days until additional troops could be sent. In Puno 
Communists crossed the border freely from Bolivia. If Peru’s economic 
problems were not solved, there would be an increasingly serious 
Communist threat in Southern Peru.
President Prado and the Vice President agreed that the economic 
problems of Peru and the U.S. were similar and due to the world-
wide fall in prices rather than to policies in either country. President 
Prado stated that mining represented a major part of Peru’s economy 
whereas it represented only a small factor in the U.S. economy. The Vice 
President mentioned our awareness not only of the importance of the 
mining problem to Peru but also agricultural problems and stated that 
our surplus disposal program was conducted with every effort to avoid 
disturbing the economies of friendly countries.
The Vice President inquired how it was that Peru had been able 
to develop such sound economic and political policies in contrast 
with some other South American countries. The President replied that 
the Peruvian people saw the advantages of such policies, as did the 
Government, and he would see that they were fully maintained. The 
Vice President cited Peru as a model of a policy of free enterprise, free 
exchange and a completely free economy. The President said that Peru 
was currently encountering financial difficulties but was proud that it 
had not had to dip into the $60 million Stabilization Fund, although 
there was great pressure to do so, particularly for public works and 
housing. The Vice President commented that the U.S. had similar 
problems.
At this point the Foreign Minister entered and the conversation 
returned to Communism. It was pointed out that although Communism 
was illegal in Peru under the Constitution, there was no legislation per-
mitting the Government to take action even against the ringleaders 
in such flagrant situations as the temporary occupation of Cuzco. He 
had presented legislation to the last session but Congress had refused 
to pass it on the grounds that it was undemocratic and could be used 
against persons other than Communists. Peru had not only complete 
political freedom but also almost excessive freedom of the press. The 
Foreign Minister mentioned that Communism in Cuzco was not limited 
2 See Document PE–5.
