Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
323
Last fall, I met individually with the leaders of 18 countries in this
hemisphere.7 Between the United States and Latin America there is al-
ready a new sense of equality, a new sense of trust and mutual respect
that exists because of the Panama Canal treaties. This opens up a fine
opportunity for us in good will, trade, jobs, exports, and political
cooperation.
If the treaties should be rejected, this would all be lost, and disap-
pointment and despair among our good neighbors and traditional
friends would be severe.
In the peaceful struggle against alien ideologies like communism,
these treaties are a step in the right direction. Nothing could strengthen
our competitors and adversaries in this hemisphere more than for us to
reject this agreement.
What if a new sea-level canal should be needed in the future? This
question has been studied over and over throughout this century, from
before the time the canal was built up through the last few years. Every
study has reached the same conclusion—that the best place to build a
sea-level canal is in Panama.
The treaties say that if we want to build such a canal, we will build
it in Panama, and if any canal is to be built in Panama, that we, the
United States, will have the right to participate in the project.
This is a clear benefit to us, for it ensures that, say, 10 or 20 years
from now, no unfriendly but wealthy power will be able to purchase
the right to build a sea-level canal, to bypass the existing canal, perhaps
leaving that other nation in control of the only usable waterway across
the isthmus.
Are we paying Panama to take the canal? We are not. Under the
new treaty, any payments to Panama will come from tolls paid by ships
which use the canal.
What about the present and the future stability and the capability
of the Panamanian Government? Do the people of Panama themselves
support the agreement?
Well, as you know, Panama and her people have been our histor-
ical allies and friends. The present leader of Panama has been in office
for more than 9 years, and he heads a stable government which has en-
couraged the development of free enterprise in Panama. Democratic
elections will be held this August to choose the members of the Pana-
manian Assembly, who will in turn elect a President and a Vice Presi-
dent by majority vote. In the past, regimes have changed in Panama,
7 Carter met with Latin American leaders in September 1977 during the signing cer-
emonies for the Panama Canal treaties.
