448 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV really been imposed on them before. While imposing these requirements may very well be justified, we should first examine the doctrinal issues that give rise to such needs and which have been addressed in the very nearly complete PD–18 follow-­on targeting study. We should also examine the potential for improvements in the capabilities of other forces to meet these same requirements. For example, SLBM C3 can be probably improved enough to allow large-­scale SLBM strikes against time-­sensitive targets under worst case conditions. The stated requirement for capabilities to destroy targets rapidly seems to drive much of the argument in favor of an ICBM force. Harold should be asked for descriptions of the various classes of time-­sensitive targets including numbers of each type, their relative day-­to-­day and minimum values, and the time the Soviets would need to reduce them to their minimum values. Further, since the large majority of the time-­ urgent hard targets are Soviet silos, launch control centers, and their associated C3 systems, it would be useful to ask Harold and Stan Turner to assess the likelihood that even if we did have an extensive time-­ urgent hard target kill capability we could prevent launch of a significant fraction of the Soviets’ ICBMs. I wonder if we aren’t being a little over-­selective in choosing where to mimic the Soviets and where not to. In particular, why must we match their land-­based ICBM capabilities, but not the [less than 1 line not declassified] strategy that their exercises suggest they might adopt in times of crisis? Soviet exercises and doctrine give us reason to believe that strategic warfare is very unlikely to grow out of situations in which you will not have had hours or even days to implement a crisis-­only [less than 1 line not declassified] strategy and contemplate your response if and when tactical warning of an attack comes in. We should also consider the possibility that in order to deprive us of strategic warning, the Soviets would have to leave themselves significantly more vulnerable to a retaliatory response. It seems clear that we need a better understanding of Soviet thinking and capabilities for [less than 1 line not declassified] The memo’s summary of difficulties and deficiencies of the alternatives to M–X/MAP seems a little hasty. We can afford to look at these possibilities more carefully, particularly if we keep our options open by proceeding with a common missile that could be used in Trident or in any of the ICBM deployment schemes, including MAP. The arguments given in favor of M–X/MAP assume the Soviets will not respond by fractionating their missile payloads significantly above current projections. Even within the limits of the current SALT proposals, they can fractionate enough to sharply raise MAP’s costs and the land area it would require. How should we view this possibility?
