856 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Defense people thought there is better assurance of public support for a large booster project over the years if it is put in Defense than if it goes into a civilian agency. The President did not give very much weight to this consideration. The President then commented that this shift will force us to focus on the development of a super-­booster, which to him is the key to a leading position in space activities. Dr. Glennan commented that there will still be need for interim vehicles and for collateral NASA activities. He commented that if ABMA is transferred, with a $140 million budget for FY–61, he could foresee saving approximately half of this out of the consolidated activity. The President said that a caustic budget review of space activities is required. The question is one of priorities. He thought the super-­booster is the key to successful competition and we should concentrate on that. He recalled his principle of attacking one enemy or one principal objective at a time. The NASA budget must go through the whole process of review. He recognized that there are of course many things—instruments, payloads, etc.—which must be brought along in order to make effective use of the booster when available. Dr. Glennan then presented the gist of the Defense/NASA proposal on the transfer (as set out in the joint letter of himself and Mr. McElroy to the President). The President said that this field breaks into three main elements in his view. The first is that we must get what Defense really needs in space; this is mandatory. The second is that we should make a real advance in space so that the United States does not have to be ashamed no matter what other countries do; this is where the super-­booster is needed. The third is that we should have an orderly, progressive sci­ entific program, well balanced with other scientific endeavors. He thought that these efforts should be carried out in agreement between DOD and NASA, efficiently and wisely. To this end he thought this transfer was a good one to make. He thought, however, that there is need for Defense and NASA to do a real job with ABMA and the Army in order to get them to understand the reasons for the transfer, and not only accept it but support it. Mr. McElroy said there will not be a perfect meeting of the minds. He anticipated that Congress will bring out whatever dissent exists. The President said he is more interested in good working relations between NASA and Defense. NASA can do a fine job of service to Defense, as NACA did before it. He stressed that this must be carried down and explained to the people really involved, however. He then raised the question whether the transfer should be announced at once or whether some time should be spent explaining it to the people involved. Dr. York commented that there had been so many leaks on the matter that an announcement seemed imperative.
