298
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
that West Bank/Gaza elections could be held as a first step toward es-
tablishing a Palestinian administration and the withdrawal of the Is-
raeli military government.
Secretary Vance said preliminary work could be done in Wash-
ington on how to organize elections and a local administration. The
President asked how Palestinians could be brought into the process.
Dayan responded that if the Palestinians see the Egyptian-Israeli nego-
tiations progressing, they will join. In response to a question by the
President, Dayan said he was referring to their joining a short time after
the Egyptian-Israeli treaty was signed. This could not be done, how-
ever, in the next two or three weeks.
With respect to Hussein, Secretary Vance said he had three
choices: to join the negotiations, to stay out but encourage Palestinians
to join, or to reject negotiations entirely. The Secretary said he doubted
Hussein would reject totally but was not certain precisely where Hus-
sein would come out given the many pressures he is under.
Dayan thought it most likely Hussein would give a green light to
the Palestinians while not committing himself. Hussein would watch
carefully how the Washington talks would progress. If a treaty is
signed in two to four weeks, the chances were that the Palestinians
would join. Dayan said it would have a negative impact if in the Wash-
ington negotiations we seem to be patronizing the Palestinians by ne-
gotiating for them.
Secretary Vance said he saw another problem. While there is no
linkage between the two frameworks, Sadat sees them as part of the
same context. He needs to show that he has not forgotten the Pales-
tinians. If there is no movement on West Bank/Gaza issues, Sadat will
have problems. Dr. Brzezinski stressed that we needed to keep in mind
Weizman’s distinction between a “separate peace” and a “first peace.”
Weizman responded that if West Bank/Gaza issues are rushed too
much, nothing will result. Once an Egyptian-Israeli treaty is signed, Is-
rael should seek to implement what it has promised by moving toward
West Bank/Gaza self-government. If Israel demonstrates that it is pre-
pared to go ahead—and Israel can do this—this will help Hussein.
The President then commented that he had honored his pledge to
have no contact with the PLO. If he goes to Cairo, however, Sadat
wants him (the President) to meet with some Palestinians. How far, the
President asked, could he go in this respect? The President said he does
not want to violate his promise to the Israelis but could not check the
credentials of Palestinians Sadat might ask him to meet. Dayan said he
did not know which Palestinians Sadat might bring to Cairo. The Presi-
dent commented that perhaps Hussein could choose them. Dayan
said this would be better. If the issue to be discussed was the self-
government proposal, they should be Palestinians who live in the West
