682
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
dented vacuum of power in Southwest Asia and consolidate a position
of privileged access to Middle Eastern oil and control over oil supply
routes. In this way, the Soviet Union would be assured of a solution
to its own emergent energy problem, and also win immense leverage
against the West—leverage which, among other things, Moscow could
utilize to forestall the sort of Western military buildup which could
redress the currently favorable “correlation of forces”.
Rather different policy implications flow from these alternative
explanations and expectations of Soviet behavior. The first implies that
if the Soviet Union can be induced to withdraw from Afghanistan in
return for suitable “reassurances” it will revert to a more acceptable
pattern of behavior and may even show a heightened appreciation of
the value (and fragility) of “detente”. According to this view, the pres-
ent Soviet predicament is in large part the product of miscalculation
which is now recognized as such. This has led to a situation in which
the mutual interests of the West and the Soviet Union lie in fashioning
a face-saving solution which will permit the resumption of normal
relations.
The second view holds that the Soviet Union is determined to
maintain a permanent military presence in Afghanistan and will use
it to bolster its geopolitical position in the region, to bring pressure to
bear on neighboring and nearby countries, to discredit or nullify West-
ern security guarantees, and to highlight Western weakness and irreso-
lution. With reference to detente, this view holds that the Soviets are
prepared to write off for the time being what they already perceived
before Afghanistan as unsatisfactory levels of US trade, credits and
technology transfers. Simultaneously, Moscow will seek to preserve
and extend its commercial relations with Western Europe, and Japan
through what it believes can be a successful policy of “differentiated
detente”.
The relevance of the central and regional military balances for the
Soviet decision to intervene in Afghanistan is also at issue in these
contrasting views of Soviet behavior. Members of the aberrationist
school are inclined to believe that shifts in the military balance over
the course of the last ten to fifteen years were essentially irrelevant
with respect to the Afghanistan intervention. Given the identical set
of circumstances, they contend, the Soviets would have intervened in
Afghanistan ten or fifteen years ago, as they did in Hungary in 1956.
In contrast, those who view the invasion as reflecting a higher Soviet
propensity to take risks hold that it was precisely the shift in the
military balances of the past ten to fifteen years that emboldened the
Soviets for the first time to employ military force directly against a
non-bloc state. As these analysts see it, the shifting strategic balance
has created a military environment in which Soviet recourse to force
became both physically possible and politically attractive.
