3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1978
467
people all over the world, detente was on an upward track. It was a
process that needed to be developed and was developing, but the
greater the effort applied in that direction the better and stronger it
would be. For its part, the Soviet Union was fully prepared to do all in
its power to promote everything that furthered detente, and to pre-
serve in our mutual relations everything that had been achieved in the
past, and boldly go further.
Gromyko wanted to assure the President that in all its actions the
Soviet Union was not trying to undercut relations between the United
States and third countries so long as these relations were not directed
against the Soviet Union. He and the Soviet leadership felt that condi-
tions were now ripe for going ahead, improving and strengthening our
relations.
Gromyko noted that in his statement today the President had not
referred to one thought which he had repeatedly expressed in the past.
Perhaps that was only an oversight, but it was an axiom of foreign
policy that the nature of relations between the Soviet Union and the
United States to an enormous extent determined the general world sit-
uation, the state of detente, the state of East-West relations and the in-
ternational atmosphere as a whole. That was indisputable, and it was
an idea the President had put forward in the past and one with which
the Soviet Union agreed wholeheartedly.
The President wanted to repeat that, as he had said earlier, good
relations with the Soviet Union were a keystone of our foreign policy.
Gromyko said that was one aspect of the matter, the other being
that these relations determined the general situation throughout the
world. That was not necessarily to everyone’s liking, and he was aware
of the many epithets being directed at each of us, but particularly at the
Soviet Union, referring to superpowers, to attempts at exercising he-
gemony, etc. He felt that neither of our countries was to blame in that
respect, for neither of us had elected ourselves as superpowers. That
had resulted from the objective process of historical development.
Gromyko wanted to speak briefly on some specific aspects the
President had touched upon.
Middle East
With regard to the Middle East situation he had to say that the So-
viet Union took a different approach to the actual state of affairs in that
area. He would note that both sides agreed that the situation there was
complex and dangerous. As for methods to resolve Middle East
problems and the specific political steps necessary to ensure a settle-
ment of the Middle East problems, our respective standpoints were en-
tirely different. Regarding the Camp David meetings, of course the
President would know that the Soviet Union did not share his views
