February 1951–February 1952 121 41. Project Outline Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 Washington, undated. 1. References a. NSC 10/22 b. NSC 1073 c. The Crisis in Iran dated 13 March 1951, TS Control4 d. Attachment entitled Declaration of Iranian Nationalists5 2. Problem Iran, internally dissatisfied, facing a severe economic crisis, plagued by pressure from foreign nations, and left without adequate means of developing into a democratic state in the Western sense, shows little possibility of becoming master of her fate and architect of her future. The steady deterioration of the Iranian oil situation has been of great value to the Soviet Union, and the USSR is prepared, through the medium of the Tudeh Party of Iran, to capitalize on the chaotic situation toward which Iran is now heading. On the other hand, the United States has no Iranian party or group with which to combat the Tudeh/ Communist menace in Iran and the West in general has been unable to keep up with Soviet policy which, for various reasons, has been dynamic, timely and flexible. In view of the importance which Iran is bound to retain in the international picture, due to both strategic and economic significance, it is essential that the United States do everything possible to keep the Iranian Government from being subverted or overthrown by the Communists in Iran. a. Objective The objective of this project is to establish an effective force in Iranian politics with which to oppose the Tudeh/Communists. OPC will back individuals and groups in an endeavor to produce an organized and directed attack upon the Communists in Iran. It will attempt to contact, through the indigenous elements it backs, various religious 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 78–01521R, Box 5, Folder 25, [text not declassified]. Top Secret. According to an attached clearance sheet, the plan was developed [less than 1 line not declassified] on July 24, and approved [less than 1 line not declassified] on August 10. According to another copy of the outline, this project was approved by the Project Review Committee on September 6, although with its funding reduced to [dollar amount not declassified]. (Ibid., Job 58–00070R, Box 12, Folder 494, OPC Operational Project Outline, Reel 96) 2 See footnote 2, Document 40. 3 Document 6. 4 See footnote 1, Document 5. 5 Attached but not printed.
