August 8–September 17, 1978 3 President Assad’s current aim is to neutralize the political and military power of the Christians sufficiently to force them to acquiesce to Syria’s directions. Assad probably will attempt to avoid an all-out assault on the Christian heartland. Concern over possible Israeli intervention has been the principal constraint on the Syrians in dealing with the challenge posed by the Christian militias. Thus far, Assad has moved cautiously, seeking to avoid confrontation with Israel while reinforcing the Syrian military presence around the principal Christian areas and attempting to isolate the militia leaders politically. Assad has demonstrated to date an intuitive sense of how far he can go in provoking Israel, but there is always the risk of miscalculation on his part. The aim of most militia leaders is to force the withdrawal of Syrian forces from Lebanon, and to reinforce further the dominance of the principal Christian militias throughout Lebanon. We believe that the Christian militias will continue attempts at provoking the Syrians into renewed large-scale fighting that would draw the Israelis directly into the Lebanese conflict on the side of the Christians.3 If necessary, Christians leaders are quite prepared to see the collapse of the government of Lebanese President Sarkis and the establishment of a truncated Christian state in Lebanon, which they believe would be backed by Israel.4 [Omitted here is the Discussion portion of the estimate.] 3 The Department of State disagrees with the thrust of this sentence because it implies that the Christian leadership has determined to escalate the fighting in order to draw in the Israelis. [text not declassified] most Christian leaders suspect that the Israelis may not intercede even if the level of fighting increases. However, action by the militias ensures continued high level Israeli support and interest. Moreover, there are clearly provocations on both sides. [Footnote is in the original.] 4 In an August 9 memorandum to Brzezinski, Sick reported Ambassador Samuel Lewis’s assessment of the “very ominous” mood among the Israeli leadership over Lebanon: “Israeli TV is showing emotional pictures of Lebanese refugees talking about the killing and destruction, and Begin keeps saying ‘Christians are being killed and no one is doing anything.’ It is very clear that Israel is considering ‘doing something.’” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 57, Lebanon: 8/78)
