August 8–September 17, 1978
3
President Assad’s current aim is to neutralize the political and military
power of the Christians sufficiently to force them to acquiesce to Syria’s
directions. Assad probably will attempt to avoid an all-out assault on
the Christian heartland. Concern over possible Israeli intervention has
been the principal constraint on the Syrians in dealing with the chal-
lenge posed by the Christian militias. Thus far, Assad has moved cau-
tiously, seeking to avoid confrontation with Israel while reinforcing the
Syrian military presence around the principal Christian areas and at-
tempting to isolate the militia leaders politically. Assad has demon-
strated to date an intuitive sense of how far he can go in provoking Is-
rael, but there is always the risk of miscalculation on his part.
The aim of most militia leaders is to force the withdrawal of Syrian
forces from Lebanon, and to reinforce further the dominance of the
principal Christian militias throughout Lebanon. We believe that the
Christian militias will continue attempts at provoking the Syrians into
renewed large-scale fighting that would draw the Israelis directly into
the Lebanese conflict on the side of the Christians.3 If necessary, Chris-
tians leaders are quite prepared to see the collapse of the government of
Lebanese President Sarkis and the establishment of a truncated Chris-
tian state in Lebanon, which they believe would be backed by Israel.4
[Omitted here is the Discussion portion of the estimate.]
3 The Department of State disagrees with the thrust of this sentence because it im-
plies that the Christian leadership has determined to escalate the fighting in order to
draw in the Israelis. [text not declassified] most Christian leaders suspect that the Israelis
may not intercede even if the level of fighting increases. However, action by the militias
ensures continued high level Israeli support and interest. Moreover, there are clearly
provocations on both sides. [Footnote is in the original.]
4 In an August 9 memorandum to Brzezinski, Sick reported Ambassador Samuel
Lewis’s assessment of the “very ominous” mood among the Israeli leadership over Leb-
anon: “Israeli TV is showing emotional pictures of Lebanese refugees talking about the
killing and destruction, and Begin keeps saying ‘Christians are being killed and no one is
doing anything.’ It is very clear that Israel is considering ‘doing something.’” (Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 57, Leb-
anon: 8/78)
