74  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
the Soviets deploy ballistic missile systems good enough to destroy 
the Minuteman force (and they have not yet), we could have a cruise 
missile carrier developed and ready for deployment. To the extent that 
improvements in our strategic bomber force can alleviate pressures to 
deploy the M–X, deployment of either the B–1 or a new cruise missile 
force should work about equally well.
A Bureaucratic Problem
Our final observation concerns the ongoing competition between 
the B–1 and the cruise missile advocates in the Pentagon. Because of 
this competition, the cruise missile programs have taken a back seat 
to the B–1 program, at least within the Air Force. Thus, if you choose 
Option 3, and thereby continue the perceived competition between the 
B–1 and the ALCM, the cruise missile programs will probably continue 
to receive less than enthusiastic support. To avoid this, you and Harold 
would have to show strong personal interest in these programs.
Continued Support
Your decision on the B–1 production question is clearly not an easy 
one—­a fact that has become quite obvious to me as I have carried out 
my investigation of it. Though the three memos I have sent you cover 
what I see as the major factors bearing on your decision,2 I would be 
more than willing to provide additional analysis if you would find it 
helpful.
If you would like me to subject some additional bomber modern-
ization options to the sort of analysis presented in this memo, I can 
probably turn your requests around in a single day. I could also set 
up a small meeting to discuss the issues involved in this decision, and 
answer any questions you may have.
Finally, the presentation to the Congress and the public of what-
ever decision you make will be important not only in terms of accept-
ability but for what it will convey to our allies, the Soviets, the Chinese 
and the world at large. I believe it would be the occasion for an authori-
tative statement by you on how we view the strategic relationship with 
the USSR and how we plan to respond to the Soviet strategic programs.
In this connection, let me reiterate my strong feeling that Option 
4—­if that is your choice—­should be related to a US-Soviet SALT bar-
gain. Option 3–A can also be related to SALT in that it could be made 
clear to the Russians that as part of the three-­year interim protocol we 
are deferring the deployment of the B–1, subject to later agreements 
with regard to the issues covered by the protocol. In particular, Option 
2 The three memos on the B–1 production decision are printed as Documents 17, 
19, and 22.
