About the Series
V
ment in the Carter Library file. In such cases, some editors of the Foreign
Relations series have indicated this ambiguity by stating that the attach-
ments were “Not found attached.”
Editorial Methodology
Documents in this volume are presented chronologically ac-
cording to time in Washington, DC. Memoranda of conversation are
placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than
the date the memorandum was drafted.
Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Rela-
tions series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance
from the General Editor and the Chief of the Editing and Publishing Di-
vision. The original document is reproduced as exactly as possible, in-
cluding marginalia or other notations, which are described in the foot-
notes. Texts are transcribed and printed according to accepted
conventions for the publication of historical documents within the limi-
tations of modern typography. A heading has been supplied by the ed-
itors for each document included in the volume. Spelling, capitaliza-
tion, and punctuation are retained as found in the original text, except
that obvious typographical errors are silently corrected. Other mistakes
and omissions in the documents are corrected by bracketed insertions:
a correction is set in italic type; an addition in roman type. Words or
phrases underlined in the original document are printed in italics. Ab-
breviations and contractions are preserved as found in the original text,
and a list of abbreviations and terms is included in the front matter of
each volume. In telegrams, the telegram number (including special
designators such as Secto) is printed at the start of the text of the
telegram.
Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate omitted text that
deals with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classi-
fied after declassification review (in italic type). The amount and,
where possible, the nature of the material not declassified has been
noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of text that were omit-
ted. Entire documents withheld after declassification review have been
accounted for and are listed in their chronological place with headings,
source notes, and the number of pages not declassified.
All brackets that appear in the original document are so identified
in the footnotes. All ellipses are in the original documents.
The first footnote to each document indicates the source of the doc-
ument and its original classification, distribution, and drafting infor-
mation. This note also provides the background of important docu-
ments and policies and indicates whether the President or his major
policy advisers read the document.
