188  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
41.	
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, November 28, 1977
SUBJECT
PD/NSC–18 Follow-­on Studies
In response to your memo of 3 November on the above subject, I 
would like to make the following points.2
First, the study on targeting looks like it will address the issues of 
concern. I am assuming, however, that you will not limit the study to an 
examination of what we can do with the inventory of weapons that we 
currently project for ourselves. It is important for us to understand just 
how our targeting policies and their effectiveness might change as we 
continue with SALT. We should also consider what we could do with 
increases in our weapons inventories that might be driven by factors 
such as political sufficiency.
The second study appears to address most of my concerns about 
hard target kill capability and the future of the TRIAD concept. Your 
combining of these issues in a single study focused primarily on the 
future of the ICBM force seems like a reasonable approach.
The three questions you have posed for this second study seem 
appropriate. I assume that you will delve into the basis of requirements 
for the unique capabilities provided by the land based ICBM. I also 
assume that you will seriously consider the possibility that non-­time 
urgent hard target kill capability in the form of (possibly improved) 
ALCM’s can meet substantial portions of our need for hard target kill 
capability.
Your intentions for the third study on “secure reserve force target 
acquisition” sound reasonable. I agree that much of this study must 
await completion of the targeting study.
The substance of the sustainability study also sounds reasonable; 
my staff has been in contact with yours and has given them informal 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/Security, 
Huntington, Box 45, PD 18: (Follow-On). Secret.
2 Utgoff and Huntington forwarded Brown’s memorandum, printed as Docu-
ment 39, to Brzezinski under a November 16 covering memorandum, which reported: 
“Harold’s memo shows that some progress has been made in getting these studies 
underway—­though in general not much given the amount of time that has elapsed.” 
Utgoff and Huntington also noted: “We have worded the comments on the Navy study 
in such a way as to avoid the impression that we accept this study as an appropriate 
response to your request. We believe that it would not be prudent to give the NSC impri-
matur to a study of the missions of the Navy—­done by the Navy.” (Ibid.)
