1184 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement made again for four years. A law recently passed modestly increases a large proportion of existing pensions to make income catch up at least in part with increased prices. When these and various other pending adjustments in salaries and wages are made, it is the Government’s intention to adopt a wage policy, that, henceforth, wage increases shall not be larger than increases in the cost-­of-­living index. It will remain to be seen whether the Blanco Administration can promote sufficient improvement in the economy of Uruguay before the next national elections in November 1962 to be able to win. This will depend partly upon the success of the Administration in developing sound economic development projects and obtaining the financing for them. The success of the Blanco Administration will also depend in part upon World demand and prices for wool and beef and upon the increased quantities of these and other products that can be produced in Uruguay. Uruguayan agriculture—­particularly the wool industry—was heavily taxed through low exchange rates and therefore low receipts in the multiple exchange-­rate system. Agriculture was forced to operate upon such a low-­cost basis that large farms became larger with fewer workers, which brought about a decline in total agricultural production and even in the number of individual farm operators. The small farmers were badly squeezed and became the most neglected identifiable segment of the population. The present Uruguayan Administration represents, in part, a reaction to this situation. The Herrerista Blancos, who now control the Executive branch of the Government, have a preponderance of their supporters in the rural areas and the small towns. And Sr. Benito Nardone, whose Liga Federal or “Ruralists” joined forces with the Herreristas in the last elections, is the spokesman and leader of the small farmers who vigorously protested their lot. Undoubtedly, considerable improvement can be made in Uruguayan agricultural productivity without increasing costs more than increasing productivity, and this possibility will be enhanced by progress in the science. However, the additional effort and management required on the part of ranchers who have been accustomed to extensive rather than intensive techniques will retard such individuals who do not see much prospect of individual profit—­even though the nation as a whole may badly need increased productivity and export trade. Moreover, Uruguay’s natural advantages for beef production are not as great as those of Argentina, and the small size of the country and modest quality of the soil place a natural limitation on the expansion of Uruguay’s agricultural exports.
