Señor Rada y Gamio assured me that every obstacle to the presentation of
the treaty to the Parliament and its ratification had now been removed. He
said that it had been necessary to go rather slowly with the Senators and
Deputies because of their well known susceptibilities, that if they felt the
Government was trying to hustle the members of the Foreign Relations
Committee of the Parliament into a hasty recommendation of the treaty, or
was trying to hustle the Parliament itself into a hasty ratification, they might
easily become antagonistic. He added that acrimonious comment in the
newspapers and the Parliament of Colombia and the obvious impatience of
the Colombian Government did not help matters when it came to
ratification here, that the main basis for asking for ratification of this treaty
lay in advancing the theory of Peruvian-Colombian friendship and that
every act of Colombia, or even of individual Colombians, which could be
used to show that Colombian friendship was not sincere, made it more
difficult to obtain favorable action from the Peruvian Parliament.
After our conversation at the Foreign Office, the Minister of Foreign
Relations asked me to accompany him to his house in order that he might
show me the extensive work which he had done himself in connection with
the Treaty. As we were leaving the Foreign Office building, he called one of
his two confidential assistants from his office … This gentleman … said
that the documents on which they had been working up to two o’clock in
the morning for several days past, were now almost ready and that within a
few days they would be in the hands of the Committee.
At his house Señor Rada y Gamio showed me a file of manuscript notes
which he had made in connection with his defense of the treaty in the
Parliament, as well as a series of very rough maps of the district which he
had drawn, and several large and fairly detailed maps which he had had
made. It was apparently his object to show me that the preparations for
submitting the treaty to the Parliament had necessarily been complicated
and lengthy and had required a great deal of work on his part. He said,
however, that he expected the treaty would be ratified in the course of the
month of October, as the Government expected to see it presented for
ratification at the end of this month or the beginning of next month and that
he did not think that the actual debates of the Parliament would take more
than five or six days.
