Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III agreed international goals. While progress is thus being made on fundamentals, the U.S. will use resources generated by bilateral U.S.-German swaps, IMF drawings, and larger sales of SDRs, as announced in our joint statement of March 13, to counter disorder in currency markets.6 4. In trade, I hope the Summit Preparatory Group can define the areas that heads of government will need to address,7 in order to ensure successful conclusion of the Multilateral Trade Negotiations and to forestall any revival of protectionism.8 I was pleased by Jim Callaghan’s forthcoming posture on these issues. I am much concerned about growing government interventionism in matters of trade and production, in response to weak economic conditions.9 5. As part of this package approach, we should consider how to increase long-term capital flows to developing countries. I hope that you will agree the surplus countries have special responsibilities in this connection; I will be discussing possible increased Japanese aid with Prime Minister Fukuda when he comes here in early May.10 If a five-point approach along these lines commends itself to you, we might proceed as follows: —In addition to launching preparations for the July Summit, the Bonn Preparatory Group could prepare a short statement for heads of 6 In Carter’s letter to Fukuda, the final sentence of this paragraph was replaced by these two sentences: “I understand the economic difficulties that you now confront; I am hopeful that if progress can thus be made on fundamentals, currency disorders will subside. As you know, we do not intend to intervene to defend any fixed dollar rate or target range, but I believe our impending actions on energy and inflation will make a real contribution to improvement in global prospects.” 7 In Carter’s letter to Fukuda, the phrase “at the Summit or before” was added at this point in the sentence. 8 In Carter’s letter to Giscard, the paragraph ends here. In his March 24 covering memorandum to Carter (see footnote 1 above), Owen noted that “the letter to Giscard has less on trade than the others, given his views on this subject.” 9 In Carter’s letter to Fukuda, the final sentence of this paragraph was replaced by these two sentences: “I look forward to discussing with you in early May the further measures to be taken by both our countries in fulfilling the Ushiba–Strauss agreement, including the additional MTN offers required to meet the objective specified in that agreement. Given the size and continued growth of Japan’s current account surplus, I know you will agree that it is important that every effort be made to achieve progress in the areas listed in that agreement.” Regarding the Ushiba–Strauss agreement, see Documents
