468 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI begin a specific discussion of START II so that at the summit we could delineate the next stage of the negotiations. Shevardnadze then asked if the Secretary was prepared to address ABM and space issues. The Secretary said he had points to make on these subjects and also on the Krasnoyarsk radar, chemical weapons, CFE and other topics. He asked whether Burt and Nazarkin should go to work or whether we should first address defense and space. Shevardnadze replied that the Ambassadors should probably stay for that discussion. Defense and Space/ABM Treaty The Secretary said the U.S. had tabled a revised defense and space treaty. Its aim was to reduce the risk of war by strengthening deterrence and stability. Our revised treaty responded to the steps the two Ministers had taken in Wyoming. In addition to resolving the issues dealt with in our draft treaty, our negotiators should agree upon certain predictability measures to build confidence as the strategic defense programs on both sides go forward. The December visit by Soviet experts to U.S. SDI labs showed the clear value of such measures. In order to expedite our negotiations on defense and space, the U.S. was developing an initiative for early implementation by both sides of certain predictability measures. These might later be integrated into a defense and space treaty, specifically, in its protocol on predictability. This approach would parallel our verification and stability measures initiative in START. Our negotiators would be presenting a specific proposal later in the current round in Geneva. The Secretary said the Soviets had suggested a protocol on what the ABM Treaty permitted and prohibited. In the U.S. view, there was really no need for such a protocol. We were simply not prepared to negotiate new limits that were more restrictive than the present ABM Treaty. In Wyoming and Geneva, the Soviets had also proposed that violation of the ABM Treaty would justify withdrawal from START. He wanted Shevardnadze to know that we did not accept this. We could not and would not agree that exercise of our rights under the ABM Treaty in any way justified withdrawal from START. As he had mentioned in Wyoming, the START and ABM treaties each stood on their own merits. Therefore, we hoped that the Soviets would not continue to insist on some kind of common understanding. We thought that our position was reasonable in light of the fact that each side could withdraw from the START treaty under the supreme interests clause. To insist on a common understanding was going to put a major impediment in the way of concluding a START treaty. To repeat, given the supreme interests clause, which allowed withdrawal on six months notice, either party already had available means to withdraw from START.
