94 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Watson, for economic issues.2 We need to tell Jack what topics you might suggest. Background/Analysis Your recent and projected trips provide some obvious possibilities.3 There would be substantial interest in your evaluation of Mideast peace prospects or the state of US-Soviet relations. On the other hand, there may be even more compelling arguments for your treating topics which: —Stress the connection between US domestic and diplomatic interests—particularly in the so-called “new issue areas”; —Serve to emphasize State’s role and perspective beyond strictly diplomatic issues; and —Help stimulate discussion and follow-through on such issues. We believe that any one of the following topics might serve such functions, and would be pleased to help draft submissions for your review: 1. Economic Issues a. General—A more conceptually-oriented discussion could revolve around Shared Challenges Before Post-Industrial Society—or how the trilateral partnership hits home. A combination of factors—the President’s campaign stress on working with allied industrial democracies, the problems they have in common (economic recovery, decreased confidence in government, crises of crime and urban decay) and related policy issues (need for more economic policy coordination/planning within and among the developed nations?)—suggest the value of a short, potentially provocative presentation. b. Specific cases—You might get at some of the same points by using a specific concrete problem—like pending trade challenges on shoes or specialty steel—as a microcosm of problems that affect broader domestic and diplomatic interests. For example, a cutback on shoe imports could both affect US jobs and consumer prices and influence US relations with our Western European Allies, prospects for democratic progress in Southern Europe, prospects for trade liberalization at the Geneva trade talks,4 etc. 2 Attached but not printed at Tab B is a February 16 handwritten note from the President to Watson instructing Watson to give him by Thursday of each week a “short list of topics from which I can select one for major emphasis” in advance of the next week’s Cabinet meeting. 3 In addition to his just-completed trip to the Middle East, Vance was scheduled to visit Moscow. See footnote 5, Document 19 and Document 31. 4 See footnote 4, Document 6.
