94
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Watson, for economic issues.2 We need to tell Jack what topics you
might suggest.
Background/Analysis
Your recent and projected trips provide some obvious possibil-
ities.3 There would be substantial interest in your evaluation of Mideast
peace prospects or the state of US-Soviet relations.
On the other hand, there may be even more compelling arguments
for your treating topics which:
—Stress the connection between US domestic and diplomatic in-
terests—particularly in the so-called “new issue areas”;
—Serve to emphasize State’s role and perspective beyond strictly
diplomatic issues; and
—Help stimulate discussion and follow-through on such issues.
We believe that any one of the following topics might serve such
functions, and would be pleased to help draft submissions for your
review:
1. Economic Issues
a. General—A more conceptually-oriented discussion could re-
volve around Shared Challenges Before Post-Industrial Society—or how
the trilateral partnership hits home. A combination of factors—the
President’s campaign stress on working with allied industrial democ-
racies, the problems they have in common (economic recovery, de-
creased confidence in government, crises of crime and urban decay)
and related policy issues (need for more economic policy coordina-
tion/planning within and among the developed nations?)—suggest
the value of a short, potentially provocative presentation.
b. Specific cases—You might get at some of the same points by using
a specific concrete problem—like pending trade challenges on shoes or
specialty steel—as a microcosm of problems that affect broader do-
mestic and diplomatic interests. For example, a cutback on shoe im-
ports could both affect US jobs and consumer prices and influence US
relations with our Western European Allies, prospects for democratic
progress in Southern Europe, prospects for trade liberalization at the
Geneva trade talks,4 etc.
2 Attached but not printed at Tab B is a February 16 handwritten note from the Pres-
ident to Watson instructing Watson to give him by Thursday of each week a “short list of
topics from which I can select one for major emphasis” in advance of the next week’s
Cabinet meeting.
3 In addition to his just-completed trip to the Middle East, Vance was scheduled to
visit Moscow. See footnote 5, Document 19 and Document 31.
4 See footnote 4, Document 6.
