against the province in the distribution of customs revenues, the purpose of such a provision being to prevent the collection of customs duties and likin on the same commodity. Dr. Yen brought up the question of administrative expenses and debt consolidation and stated that he assumed that unsecured debts would naturally refer first to domestic and then foreign loans. Mr. Strawn replied that the two categories of loans would have to be treated on a parity and that no distinction should be made between loans obtained from individuals in China and those from individuals abroad, no preferential rights to be enjoyed by either. He stated that it had been suggested by some that those who had furnished materials for China’s railways should have preferential rights, but on this point he expressed no opinion, confining himself to a citation of a ruling of a Federal Court of the United States that in the event of the insolvency of railroads those who had furnished materials within a period of six months prior to the insolvency had a preferential claim. In connection with Paragraph 9 under Article III, Mr. Strawn emphasized the fact that it would be necessary to refer any treaty which the American Delegates might negotiate to the Senate of the United States for ratification. To obviate any long delay on the part of any signatory power in ratifying the treaty, he suggested that perhaps something could be worked out whereby the treaty might become effective when a certain number of the countries had ratified the treaties, or a certain number of countries representing a certain amount of foreign trade in China had ratified the treaty. Mr. Strawn also briefly discussed the provision in the American Plan calling for another Conference in 192894 for the purpose of declaring that likin had been abolished and of negotiating any further agreements that the situation might require. The question of the levying of surtaxes at land frontiers was again brought up by Count de Martel, and Mr. Strawn reiterated that Article VI of the Washington Treaty, in express terms provided that there should be no distinction in the rate of taxes collected at the land and maritime frontiers, and after reading Article VI he stated that if there exists anything inequitable about the situation it was the function of the Conference to remove the inequalities. Count de Martel reserved the right of making further statements on this point and after further discussion Mr. MacMurray
