1140 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Ambassador Ashraf Ghorbal, Egyptian Ambassador to the United States Mr. Osama el-Baz, First Under Secretary and Director of the Office of the Vice President The President began by suggesting that this afternoon2 they talk about the procedural approach to be followed until the end of May. He believes it useful to get a sense of the key differences there are between Egypt and Israel. He would like to do what they did at Camp David and during his Middle East trip: to reach agreement with President Sadat, with flexibility, and then deal with Begin on that basis. Not everything can be agreed by May 26. We should proceed, as Ambassador Linowitz and Prime Minister Khalil had worked out, to hold continuing negotiations, preferably here. President Sadat can designate whom he wants—Burg would be here for the Israelis—because he understands that Prime Minister Khalil might not be able to be here all the time. That would give us only a month to iron out as many difficulties as possible. Ambassador Linowitz had suggested working out “heads of agreement,” and Khalil and Burg had agreed. This would be agreement on principles, and on specifics. Some of the details could be left until later. (President Sadat said fine.) It would not be possible to get Israeli and Egyptian agreement on all points by then, and since the Palestinians are not in the talks, and on some issues they are needed for agreement, this could be done with their elected representatives or with the mayors. We can negotiate for a month, and then the heads of agreement can incorporate what is agreed by May 26. Second, there should be definition of the specific responsibilities and authority of the SGA. We do not know how large it would be. Egypt prefers having it fairly sizable; Begin wants about a dozen members. One possibility would be to have the mayors on an interim SGA. For the Palestinians, this would give them a voice—either personally or chosen. We have not discussed this possibility with Begin, and do not know his view. The SGA should have the right to issue proclamations, and to modify existing statutes, but not change the terms of the heads of agreement. It would have no right to change agreements reached between him, President Sadat, and Prime Minister Begin. The Continuing Committee would include representatives of the SGA, Egypt, the U.S. (if 2 On the morning of April 8, Carter met privately with Sadat in the Rose Garden and the Oval Office from 11:01 a.m. to 12:10 p.m. No memorandum of conversation for this meeting has been found. At the same time, the U.S. and Egyptian delegations met in the Cabinet Room, where they discussed the proposed powers and responsibilities to be transferred to the SGA, as well as the future competencies of the Continuing and Security Committees in the autonomy talks. Carter and Sadat joined the delegations at 12:10 and conversation turned to the two leaders’ hopes for their discussions and touched upon Egyptian-Saudi relations, the Horn of Africa, and the agenda for the afternoon meeting. The memorandum of conversation for these meetings is in the Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 37, Serial Xs—(2/1/80–4/15/80).
