450 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement CR–25. Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter- American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Ambassador in Costa Rica (Willauer)1  Washington, August 5, 1960. Dear Whitey: I refer to your letter to me of July 18, 19602 in which you draw special attention to your despatch No. 14 of July 11, 1960.3 It is particularly convenient that you presented your ideas and suggestions on assistance to Costa Rica in despatch form since they can be given appropriate distribution among the various interested agencies of the government, which ultimately would be involved in any action based on your suggestions and recommendations. Naturally such distribution does not occur with letters addressed to the Secretary or me although these letters do serve to supplement and emphasize in a more personal way the ideas conveyed more formally in your despatches. I agree wholeheartedly with you that we would like to have “the spontaneous support of Echandi toward our ends,” since the lack of such support appears to have been the crucial element in the recent failure to achieve the joint break with Castro. However, it does not seem to me that United States economic assistance should be the quid pro quo whereby the Costa Rican government would take measures which are in the long term interest of the Costa Rican people. The decisive factor should be whether or not the Costa Ricans are vitally interested themselves in maintaining the integrity of their political system against the encroachments of communism and are willing to adopt the measures necessary to that end. The United States is attempting to supplement the efforts of the Costa Ricans to maintain and improve their political and economic system but we are not attempting to supplant the efforts of the Costa Ricans themselves. Having said the above, I also wish to say that we have by no means spared efforts in seeking to respond to president Echandi’s requests for economic assistance. I can personally verify that enormous efforts were spent in seeking the reapportionment of the United Fruit tax. Likewise, with reference to the loan project for the Juntas Rurales, I can say that this project has had the sympathy and support of myself and other officials in ARA. A major deterrent in the consideration of all or part of this loan was 1 Source: Department of State, Rubottom-Mann Files, Lot 62 D 418, “Costa Rica, 1960.” Confidential; Official-Informal. Drafted by Godfrey, on August 3. 2 A copy of this letter is filed with the source text, but not printed. 3 See Document CR–23.
