Uruguay  1169
constructive and interesting development of the unique Uruguayan sys-
tem of elections and Government.
This Embassy, like most other political prognosticators and pundits 
in Uruguay, was resigned to a continuation of a List 15 Government by 
a small and unworkable margin, and the Embassy was as surprised as 
were the Herreristas themselves at their victory. After a few days or 
reorientation, however, the Embassy is inclined to be optimistic and to 
believe, for all the reasons outlined in the preceding paragraph, that the 
elections offer much more promising possibilities for Uruguay and for 
Uruguayan-United States relations than we had expected.
Robert F Woodward
UR–10.	
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for 
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Under Secretary 
of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1

Washington, February 3, 1959.
SUBJECT
Removal of Countervailing Duty on Uruguayan Wool Tops
According to the latest Treasury calculation, recently imposed sur-
charges on certain categories of Uruguayan imports have raised the 
weighted average Uruguayan exchange rate to 4.25 pesos per dollar, as 
compared with a wool tops rate of 4.11 pesos per dollar. Applying the 
formula used in imposing the countervailing duty on Uruguayan wool 
tops in 1953, Treasury concluded that no subsidy of Uruguayan wool 
tops now exists and that the countervailing duty should be removed. 
Last week it informed interested members of Congress and key persons 
in the U.S. wool trade that an order to this effect would be issued in ten 
days, that is, on February 5.2
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 411.334/2–359. Confidential. Drafted by 
Jackson W. Wilson, Officer in Charge of Uruguayan Affairs in the Bureau of inter-American 
Affairs.
2 A handwritten covering note from Rubottom to Dillon reads: “This is for your use 
in case Treasury gets faint-hearted. So far, they are standing firm.”
A second handwritten covering note from John M. Leddy, Special Assistant to 
the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, to Charles S. Whitehouse, Special 
Assistant to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, dated February 4, 1959, 
reads: “Treasury tells me they have no intention of backing down on this and will go 
ahead tomorrow with the action rescinding the duty. I am informing ARA.”
