Negotiating Channels
449
preparations—including terms of reference—which would have to pre-
cede it. Step Three (the game with the Panamanians) is irrelevant. Step
Four (hearings by the commission in Tehran) is allotted a week, but
almost certainly could be accomplished no faster than two weeks or
more. Step Five (commission report to the UN with a simultaneous
resolution and release of the hostages) would add at least another
week, which almost certainly puts us into March. Yet Step Five is
supposed to take place during the week of February 10. That is simply
impossible.
—The scenario being proposed sets up Ghotbzadeh as the goat.
He is designated as the sole negotiator or point man. That probably
suits his amour propre, but it also leaves him increasingly exposed as
the logical fall guy when the knives come out in Tehran—as they will.
It bothers me not at all to contemplate Ghotbzadeh’s sacrifice in a noble
cause, but I doubt if he will stand still for it. He is crafty and very
much concerned with his political skin. He is not going to give Bani
Sadr the perfect excuse to fire him after first destroying his relationship
with Khomeini. A double cross is virtually inevitable at some point.
With those cautionary notes in mind, I believe this strategy is worth
pursuing, but with some precautionary modifications:
—We should view Step One as the process of smoking out the
new political relationships in the post-election environment. Therefore,
we should establish a concrete test which will require a real decision
from Tehran without tipping our entire hand from the start.
—The memo indicates that “key Iranians would know the entire
proposed scenario,” presumably from the start. I do not believe we
should spell out the entire scenario at the beginning, but only indicate
that we are prepared to proceed with a series of concrete steps (unspeci-
fied) once a reliable channel of communication has been established.
—In Step One, we should ask that a reliable interlocutor from our
side be established in Tehran—or near Tehran if that is preferred—
before we can proceed. We should identify an American (Cottam?) or
a third country national to establish himself in the Swiss Embassy or
some other location with good and reliable communications to pursue
the negotiations. They may wish to suggest an individual, and we
should be flexible.
—If both Bani Sadr and Ghotbzadeh can agree on this, we would
have some indication that the process had promise. If they cannot
agree, we would have a better idea of what to expect.
—Only after a mutually agreed interlocutor was in place should
we undertake detailed discussion of a scenario. By then we would have
some tangible evidence that practical decision-making was possible on
the Iranian side, and we would have removed the negotiations from
