El Salvador 627 ES–31. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Mann) to the Acting Secretary of State1 Washington, November 5, 1960. SUBJECT Recent Developments in El Salvador. REF NSC paper dated October 30 entitled “Coup d’etat in El Salvador.”2 In the past week it has become clear that currently the most prominent if not the dominant figure in the revolutionary movement which overthrew the Lemus Government is ex-President Oscar Osorio who, while a complex individual, has a long record of cooperation with the U.S. and of opposition to Communist domination of El Salvador’s political life. In this coup he appears to have had the financial support of some of the leading “14 families.” There is, however, a question as to whether he is in full control of the situation with indications that the influence of the extreme left may be growing rapidly and unchecked. Also, there are reports of dissension in the military and plans for a counter-­coup by dissident officers. The question of the recognition of the new Salvadorian regime is being given urgent consideration in the light of these reports as this paper is being prepared. The most significant new indications of expanding Castro- Communist influence include: a) The appointment of more leftists to second and third echelon positions in the Government, particularly in the Attorney General’s office, the Ministries of Education and Labor, the Supreme court (two to three seats in nine seat body), and in the Junta public relations office. Among these are some extremists or Communists. b) The commencement of a daily half-­hour radio program carrying the straight Communist line, reportedly with the blessing of the new Junta public relations office, and the cancellation of a USIS daily prepared international newscast on the Government-­controlled station (since reinstated). c) The rapid resumption of activities by Communist-­dominated groups, including the reappearance of manifestos making demands on the Government apparently designed to foment unrest and keep
