80  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
ETA–28.	
Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Inter-
American Regional Economic Affairs (Turkel) to the 
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs 
(Rubottom)1

Washington, January 7, 1960.
SUBJECT
Our Economic Analyses in a Nutshell.2
Argentina. An intense financial stabilization effort has improved 
the balance of payments situation but led to large increase in cost of 
living and fall in industrial production. Outlook for 1960 is for some 
economic improvement over 1959 with greater price stability and some 
revival in industrial and agricultural output.
Bolivia. A higher tin quota and prospects for increased output of 
oil and other minerals (including gold) give grounds for expecting fur-
ther modest improvement in economic conditions. This is subject, how-
ever, to the continuation of a relatively stable political situation. On the 
assumption of the continuation of present trends it should be possible 
to make a further gradual reduction in U.S. aid.
Brazil. Although 1939 saw largest inflation since war, balance of 
payments improved owing to excellent coffee export volume and some 
curtailment imports. Economic expansion appears to have continued. 
Expect international payments problem will again become urgent 
about April–May 1960 as reserves are modest.
Chile. Owing to good copper prices and strikes abroad, has accu-
mulated sizeable dollar reserves. For first time in number of years, 1939 
was period of economic growth. Government politics, however, have 
tended aggravate inflation and failed take advantage of favorable eco-
nomic climate. As long as copper price is good, Chile will go through 
1960 in payments balance but the problem of unbalanced budgets and 
weak monetary policies will continue inflation.
Colombia. In 1959 economic growth was resumed after declines 
since 1956. Cautious fiscal and monetary policies and good coffee 
exports led to payments surplus of $45 million. For 1960 it is expected 
that payments situation will not be so bright as imports are increased 
1 Source: Department of State, ARA Files, Lot 62 D 302, “Chron File of Memoranda 
& Miscellaneous.” Official Use Only. Drafted by Post.
2 A hand-­written notation on the source text by Assistant Secretary Rubottom reads 
as follows: “Thanks. Very useful.”
