International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 335 possible, would have been an illusory achievement. The EXIMBANK would observe the guidelines but our competitors would not. As under the existing “consensus,” the Italians, French, Japanese et al would ignore their commitments if the price were right. But the expanded reporting requirements will at least force governments to notify other participants so that they may offer matching terms. The Arrangement applies to credits for both rich and poor countries as well as Communist states, most of which fit in the so-called “intermediate” category. The main objective of the “consensus” was to avert counterproductive competition in providing export credits to the USSR and East Europe. It largely accomplished its purpose, although most of the reported violations of the “consensus” involved sales to the Soviet Union. As the financial value of these transactions is frequently large, and because the Soviets are especially hard bargainers, there will be continuing pressure on the Europeans to shave interest rates and lengthen repayment terms to meet the demands of the Soviet borrowers. The Arrangement we have just concluded will not stop such practices entirely, but it will force them out into the open—maybe. 111. Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to President Carter1 Washington, February 24, 1978 SUBJECT My Discussions with Chancellor Schmidt I have given you an oral report last week on my discussions with Chancellor Schmidt. It may nevertheless be useful to supplement this with a written summary of the principal points, particularly since this relates to what we do in our relations with the Europeans and with the Germans over the next few months, the tactics on preparing for the Summit, and how we handle any energy actions you may decide to take. 1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential File, Box 74, 2/24/78. Confidential. Copies were sent to Vance and Brzezinski. A stamped notation reads: “The President has seen,” and Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page.
