National Security Policy  9
The President commented on how Dr. Killian had given much 
attention to the programs for research, that a very generous $5 billion 
was set up for research and development, and that things were moving 
so rapidly that there might well be additional requests for 30 or 40 or 
50 million dollars for basic research.
The President noted how inter-­service rivalries had come out into 
the open. He knew of several specifics, but they were not as important 
as public reaction to this rivalry, so he was devoting a big piece of the 
Message to what the Administration intends to do about it.
There was extensive discussion of the actual strength of the United 
States that exists in contrast with the sudden concern about Russia 
being ahead.
The Leaders urged the President to make a strong personal-­type 
statement that would inspire the trust and confidence of the American 
people. The President replied that actually he had been trying to play 
down the situation, but perhaps he had been guilty of understatement 
in regard to the strength of the Nation’s defenses despite Sputnik.
The Leaders commented on the defeatism evident in so many news­
paper columns. The President commented that history seemed to be 
repeating itself—he recalled how there was such a tremendous gloom 
around Washington in 1942 after Pearl Harbor, the fall of Tobruk, and 
as the Japs approached Brisbane. But on July 4th, he had been asked to 
make a speech before the Red Cross in London, which he did, and he 
devoted his whole speech to how the Allies would win the war—and 
quickly. It had seemed to be a very effective antidote.
Sen. Knowland was anxious to see a U.S. earth satellite go up suc­
cessfully soon, to keep demands on the budget from going hog ­wild.
On Sen. Knowland’s mention of getting up a U.S. satellite, the 
President recalled that we had announced our plans for trying one as far 
back as May, 1955. Since that time, the scientists had come back several 
times for more money for the project, but no one had ever said anything 
about speeding it up. Only very recently had this psychological factor of 
beating the Russians to it been introduced. It seemed ironic, the President 
added, that we should undertake something in good faith only to get 
behind the eight-­ball in a contest which we never considered a contest.
The President’s final comment on the broad subject of defense was 
to highlight how this was a long term problem. It was possible to do 
almost anything you wanted for one year, but when it was a matter of 
having to carry on for thirty or forty years, that was entirely different. 
He referred to the import regulations that the British had had to have 
for so long, and he concluded that if we finally get to the point where 
the economy won’t readily provide what is necessary, then we would 
have to put on controls. But what we really want is for people to do the 
maximum voluntarily, and if they would do that, then in his opinion
