258
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
89.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Bulgaria1
Washington, December 3, 1978, 2024Z
305798. Subject: (C) Assessment of Tsvetkov Visit.
1. (C-entire text)
2. Immediate benefits. The most immediate benefits of Tsvetkov’s
visit were the clarification of each side’s position on various issues
and the establishment of personal contact between officials of the two
foreign affairs establishments.2 Both sides gained a clearer understand-
ing of each other’s terms for improving relations, i.e., the importance
we attach to progress in resolving divided families cases and the impor-
tance the GOB attaches to improved economic relations (the “spine”
of bilateral relations, to cite the word Tsvetkov used at Commerce)
and to simultaneous progress in all aspects of relations. Such progress,
Tsvetkov implied, would assist in the resolution of divided family
cases. The fact that a Deputy Foreign Minister had talks in Washington
was also a symbolic plus for the GOB.
3. Closer consultations—The GOB clearly desires closer consulta-
tions as indicated by Tsvetkov’s invitation to Vest to visit Sofia within
the year and Tsvetkov’s apparent approval of a visit early next year
of a team headed by EUR DAS Goodby to review CSCE implementation
and to discuss preparations for Madrid. We hope that a by-product of
the visit will be enhanced access for Embassy Sofia officers to GOB
officials.
4. Dialogue on conditions for MFN? The GOB obviously would
like to obtain MFN tariff status. Tsvetkov’s signal during Round-Table
II that the GOB is interested in MFN, and the Deputy Secretary’s
indication that we would be willing to discuss our laws and policies
pertaining thereto, may have set the stage for subsequent GOB efforts
to establish a dialogue on this issue. However, Tsvetkov and his col-
leagues must have realized that we do not contemplate any early
movement on MFN.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780499–0186.
Confidential. Drafted by Glenn and Gilmore; cleared by Schmidt; approved by Vest.
2 Tsvetkov participated in two roundtable discussions at the Department. The first,
chaired by Vest, discussed international issues, in particular détente and the CSCE
process, but also disarmament, the Middle East, and U.S. normalization of relations with
the People’s Republic of China. The second roundtable, chaired by Vine, discussed
Southern Africa and Balkan developments, as well as bilateral relations, trade, chancery
sites, and divided families. The Department reported the discussions in telegram 291476
to Sofia, November 16. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780472–1195)
