376  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
President Lleras for the GOC’s possible guidance and recommendation 
pursuant to the Survey team study. Therefore, I believe it is urgent that 
we now take a decision one way or another and so inform President 
Lleras. Whether the recommended program will produce the desired 
results within his term of office is of secondary consideration. His gov-
ernment, in any case, would receive political credit for any successful 
program launched under his administration. Also, I consider it urgent 
that we fulfill our commitment to give President Lleras a report of the 
Survey Team findings—­that is, general observations and recommen-
dations for the GOC’s consideration – ­apart from the question of assis-
tance from us in the form of training and material.
I think it is desirable at this point to review the history and nature 
of Lleras’ request for assistance. For this purpose I refer you to the 
Embassy’s Despatches 864 of June 24, 19594 and 1 of July 1, 1959,5 
the letter which transmitted the GOC’s request for certain material. 
Earlier President Lleras had urged that we provide helicopters. His 
request was essentially of two parts: (1) a request for specific material 
and equipment; and (2) a request that we review our policy of mili-
tary assistance to Latin America (not making Colombia an exemption) 
with the idea of removing restrictions on the use of MAP for internal 
security purposes. President Lleras expressed to us on several occa-
sions, both here and during his official visit to Washington, his belief 
that our present policy of military assistance for purposes of hemi-
sphere defense only is outmoded—­that it would be a better policy to 
reorientate training of Latin American military establishments toward 
internal security and counter-­guerrilla warfare to cope with move-
ments such as that which took place in Cuba—­the sort of thing most 
likely to threaten the stability of Latin American governments in the 
future. It might be added that idea is growing in Colombian military 
circles (see Embassy’s despatch 624 of May 2, 1960).6
With the foregoing history in mind, the Country Team and I [text 
not declassified] are of the [text not declassified] opinion that, as between 
the two proposed programs, the Defense Department paper should be 
adopted as the basis for a program of assistance to Colombia to combat 
the violence situation. [text not declassified]
4 Despatch 864, not printed, conveyed background information relating to 
President Lleras Camargo’s interest in securing MAP assistance from the United States 
for the purpose of maintaining internal security against guerilla warfare in Colombia. 
(721.00/6–2459)
5 See footnote 5 to telegram 439 from Bogotá, March 25, 1960, Document CO–26.
6 Despatch 624, not printed, transmitted a memorandum reporting a conservation 
between Lt. Col. Howard C. Parker, Army Attaché to the Embassy in Colombia, and Brig. 
Gen. Alberto Rueda Teran, Secretary to the Colombian Minister of War, concerning the 
Colombian Armed Forces primary mission in the area of internal security. (721.5/5–260)
