3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
724
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
fering with plans to modernize the Soviet economy across the board
with the help of Western equipment and technology. Finally, a pro-
posed boycott of the Olympics would be a political setback for Mos-
cow and deny the USSR some hard currency. [handling restriction not
declassified]
A review of these measures suggests that a one-year grain em-
bargo would force meat consumption in the USSR down to the level of
the early 1970s, which would have an immediate impact on consumer
perceptions. A continued denial of Western grain would severely cur-
tail the Brezhnev livestock program in the 1981–85 period. Losing the
superphosphoric acid would reduce the availability of fertilizer (and
thus grain) only marginally. The impact of a denial of fishing rights
would also be minimal, even if Canada and Japan cooperated with the
United States. The Soviet Union’s catch in the waters belonging to these
countries has been declining, and the USSR probably can move else-
where to maintain its production. [handling restriction not declassified]
Although the United States is the predominant manufacturer of
petroleum equipment, the USSR probably could satisfy most of its
needs from other Western countries if they did not cooperate with a US
embargo. In any event, a brief embargo would have little impact. Con-
tinued denial of US petroleum equipment technology and know-
how—if at least partially supported by other countries—would force a
more rapid decline in Soviet oil production than we now expect and
greatly reduce the chances that the decline could be slowed or stemmed
in the late 1980s and beyond. [handling restriction not declassified]
Because the steel industry ranks second only to energy as a Soviet
problem area, Western denial of steel products could have a substantial
impact on domestic steel supplies for several years at least. In the long
term, a denial of Western help in building up the Soviet steel industry
would severely impede Soviet efforts to modernize that industry and
slow improvements in the technological level of machinery output. It
would delay the completion of several projects necessary (a) to produce
quality steels that the Soviet economy requires in growing amounts
and (b) to eliminate Soviet dependence on imports. In addition, a long-
term denial of steel pipe would seriously interfere with Soviet pipeline
construction and cut the growth of gas production in half—a loss
equal to about 250,000 barrels of oil per day. [handling restriction not
declassified]
Curbs on Soviet purchase of Western computers, communications
equipment, and automotive production equipment would have little
economic impact unless all important suppliers cooperated and the
curbs were maintained for an extended period of time. The effects
would be felt to a degree in oil exploration, and production would be
