950
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
principal if it faces a debt servicing problem could be added to U.S. loan
contracts (bisque clauses).
301.
Memorandum From Guy Erb of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 7, 1978
SUBJECT
North-South Policies
Dick Cooper sent you a memo to follow-up his conversation with
you and Henry Owen concerning our North-South policies. (Tab A)2
After some discussion within the State Department, no reference was
made in the memo to implementation of policies announced by the last
Administration, e.g., the International Fund for Agricultural Develop-
ment and the IMF Trust Fund. The note is optimistic, and on specific
points is somewhat misleading. For example, its reference to a “gen-
erous offer” in the MTN refers to the average overall tariff cut that we
offered, 43 percent. The U.S. offers to most developing countries are
considerably lower, for example, Brazil—25 percent, India—33 percent,
Malaysia—33 percent, Mexico—34 percent. The offer to Nigeria, 66 per-
cent, is an exception.
The report, U.S. Relations with the Developing Countries—1978, pre-
pared by the PRM 8 working group, gives a contrasting impression of
the state of our North-South policies. (Tab B)3 That report states that the
“honeymoon” is over between the United States and the developing
countries. After reviewing trade, foreign assistance, investment, and
arms sales, the PRM 8 report concludes that, “. . . we face a very difficult
set of issues, with few bright spots for 1978.”
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 27, PRM
08, 3 of 3, [3]. Confidential. Sent for information. A stamped notation at the top of the
page reads: “ZB has seen.” Copies were sent to Owen and the North/South Cluster of the
NSC Staff. The latter copy included an unidentified regional bureau report, presumably
at Tab A (see footnote 2 below).
2 Tab A, attached but not printed, comprises a February 23 memorandum from
Cooper to Brzezinski and an undated Department of State paper entitled “North-South
Activities of the Carter Administration.” The latter asserts that “[s]ince taking office the
Administration has pursued an active North-South policy.”
3 Tab B is attached but not printed.
