1348
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The President: I understand. Well I look forward to that. Give all
your friends my best regards. Thank you for calling.
Prime Minister Begin: Thank you very much for everything.
The President: God Bless You.
404.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, September 18, 1980
SUBJECT
Memorandum of Conversation: Thursday, September 18, 1980, The Pentagon,
Secretary’s Conference Room
PARTICIPANTS
U.S. Participants (U)
Hon. Harold Brown
Hon. Robert W. Komer, USD/P
Hon. David E. McGiffert, ASD/ISA
Hon. Robert H. Pelletreau, DASD/ISA
Mr. Charles Hill, Political Officer
American Embassy Tel Aviv
BG Carl Smith
Israeli Participants (U)
Foreign Minister Shamir
Israeli Ambassador Evron
MG Meron, Defense Attache
Mr. Bar-On, Director General, MFA
Mr. Rubinstein, Asst Director General, MFA
Foreign Minister Shamir said he would like to discuss the strategic
situation in the Middle East and its implications for the State of Israel.2
1 Source: Washington National Record Center, OSD Files, FRC 330–82–0217B, Israel
1980 (August). Secret. Drafted by Pelletreau; cleared by Smith on September 24. The
meeting took place in the Secretary’s Conference Room in the Pentagon. An undated ad-
denda to the conversation, drafted by Pelletreau, reads: “In reply to Foreign Minister
Shamir’s request for closer US-Israeli strategic cooperation in Southwest Asia, Dr. Brown
stated that before discussing these possibilities, it would be necessary to look at Israeli
capacities. These talks were ready to proceed but it was important that they not be
scenario-oriented. After the U.S. had looked at the capacity of Israeli air bases to accept
U.S. forces, and after we had a better idea of what would happen if the Soviets became
involved, we could consider looking beyond. Meanwhile Dr. Brown reaffirmed, the U.S.
was ready to continue its strategic dialogue with Israel.” (Ibid.)
2 Shamir also discussed this issue with Muskie on September 17. A summary of
their meeting is in telegram 250624 to Tel Aviv, September 20. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, P880142–0890)
