September 18–December 16, 1978 421 After consulting his colleagues in Hebrew, the Prime Minister suggested leaving out the word “issue” and simply saying “without prejudice to the position of either party on the status of the Gaza Strip.” The Secretary said this would be even more difficult and asked what is wrong with the language as it stands. Begin said that the phrase “without prejudice” always refers to the positions of parties, not to issues. Egypt wants Gaza to be part of a Palestinian State. The Prime Minister said that he believed after five years Israel would seek sovereignty over Gaza. If this was not agreed, the autonomy regime would continue. Brzezinski had thought this reasonable. Israel wants to make clear that neither side’s position is prejudiced. The Secretary said the present language accomplishes that. The words “the issue of” were an Israeli proposal. Sadat wanted much more about Gaza. We are trying to hold him to this single reference. The Secretary said he was concerned what would happen if we opened the language. Barak suggested dropping the word “issue.” The Secretary replied that he would report this to the Egyptians; Begin said he would report to his Cabinet. The Secretary said it was best to leave this language alone; if the Egyptians sent it back to Cairo, this would open the whole thing up. The Prime Minister replied that he had no choice but to return it to the Cabinet. The Secretary said he was afraid this would open the whole issue with the Egyptians. Statesmanship could solve this problem and the Prime Minister is a statesman. Turning to Article III, paragraph two, Barak noted that the word “anywhere” had been omitted from the first sentence. Rosenne said Israel had only included it in the second sentence but saw no problem with the Egyptians in adding it to the first sentence as well. The Secretary said, since it was not previously in the first sentence, if this agreed language was re-opened there would be a problem. If we keep changing agreed language, there will never be agreement. Begin said Israel would accept this language as presently written. The Secretary said “good.” Turning to Article IV, Begin said the Cabinet had rejected the idea of a five-year review period. While the Cabinet had not changed its decision, he was prepared to accept the present wording and recommend this to the Cabinet. He had talked to Yadin who would support him. The Secretary again said “good.” With respect to Article VI, Begin said the present title (The Relationship of Obligations) did not reflect the contents of the Article and suggested substituting “precedence” for “relationship.” Begin also said Israel still preferred its original text of this Article. The Secretary said he would raise with the Egyptians the words “precedence” or “priority.” Rosenne then read Israel’s original text which said that this treaty would “prevail over” other obligations. Begin asked if we could con-
