Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Because of the level of our proposal, there is a risk that the Czechoslovaks will not be willing to enter into meaningful negotiations; however, we believe that the substantial increase in the value of the gold provides an incentive for the Czechoslovak Government to consider our proposal seriously and to make a reasonable response. Moreover, the Czechoslovaks will expect us to present an initial position that will allow some bargaining room. If the Czechoslovaks do reject our proposal to resume negotiations, we will have in any event sought to satisfy the mandate of section 408 of the Trade Act to renegotiate the 1974 Czechoslovak Claims Settlement Agreement. However, such an outcome could also result in increased pressure from the claimants and from Members of Congress for the U.S. Government to vest the gold to satisfy U.S. claims. Congressional and Public Consultations We consulted extensively last fall with interested Members of Congress on the terms of a settlement. With the important exception of Senator Long, all of the Members consulted indicated they would be willing to support a settlement in the range of 50%. Since our present proposal meets even Senator Long’s expressed requirement for “100 cents on the dollar,” we believe that he will not block a settlement at or near this figure. Similarly, we have discussed the terms of a possible settlement with a number of the claimants or their representatives. They would be delighted to receive anything close to 100% of the principal value of their claims. The claimants, many of whom are elderly, are anxious for a settlement, and many are disgruntled with our failure to obtain one since 1974. Individuals who were active in obtaining Congressional disapproval of the 1974 agreement are now lobbying for legislation to use the gold to compensate the claimants directly and we understand some Members of Congress are prepared to introduce such legislation.5 Taking such a step without the agreement
