346
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Because of the level of our proposal, there is a risk that the Czecho-
slovaks will not be willing to enter into meaningful negotiations; how-
ever, we believe that the substantial increase in the value of the gold
provides an incentive for the Czechoslovak Government to consider
our proposal seriously and to make a reasonable response. Moreover,
the Czechoslovaks will expect us to present an initial position that will
allow some bargaining room.
If the Czechoslovaks do reject our proposal to resume negotiations,
we will have in any event sought to satisfy the mandate of section 408 of
the Trade Act to renegotiate the 1974 Czechoslovak Claims Settlement
Agreement. However, such an outcome could also result in increased
pressure from the claimants and from Members of Congress for the
U.S. Government to vest the gold to satisfy U.S. claims.
Congressional and Public Consultations
We consulted extensively last fall with interested Members of Con-
gress on the terms of a settlement. With the important exception of
Senator Long, all of the Members consulted indicated they would be
willing to support a settlement in the range of 50%. Since our present
proposal meets even Senator Long’s expressed requirement for “100
cents on the dollar,” we believe that he will not block a settlement at
or near this figure. Similarly, we have discussed the terms of a possible
settlement with a number of the claimants or their representatives.
They would be delighted to receive anything close to 100% of the
principal value of their claims. The claimants, many of whom are
elderly, are anxious for a settlement, and many are disgruntled with
our failure to obtain one since 1974. Individuals who were active in
obtaining Congressional disapproval of the 1974 agreement are now
lobbying for legislation to use the gold to compensate the claimants
directly and we understand some Members of Congress are prepared
to introduce such legislation.5 Taking such a step without the agreement
5 Congressman Lester L. Wolff (D-New York) introduced H.R. 7338 on May 13,
which directed the Secretary of the Treasury to “take full possession of all Czechoslovak
gold located in the United States, if a settlement agreement is not submitted to Congress
or such agreement has not been approved by Congress, within 60 days of enactment of
this act.” The proceeds of the sale would be invested in U.S. and foreign securities, and
all interest accrued from the investment deposited into the Czechoslovak Claims Fund
for payment of claims. The bill also directed the Secretary of State to negotiate with the
United Kingdom and France on the vesting of Czechoslovak gold in the United Kingdom,
to be used in conjunction with the vested gold in the United States for payments to
claimants. The bill was referred to the House Committee on Foreign Affairs. A joint
hearing was held by the Subcommittee on International Economic Policy and the Subcom-
mittee on Europe and the Middle East on August 19. In telegram 229046 to Prague,
August 28, the Department reported: “most of the subcommittee members present were
clearly sympathetic to the concerns of the claimants” and that “the administration’s
presentation regarding the desirability of a negotiated settlement and the legal and
political problems which the bill presented did not appear to have had much effect.”
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800410–1048)
