956 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 2. The talks with Egypt and Israel2 on peacekeeping arrangements in Sinai ended this afternoon with an agreement, subject to approval3 of the respective governments and in the case of the US, the approval of Congress, on the following points: —With respect to Zones A and B, we would agree to assume the supervision and observation function during the interim period to ensure compliance with the treaty terms. Both sides accepted our position that we could only consider undertaking this role if it could be performed with a contingent of civilian personnel which did not exceed the presently authorized size for SFM. —We also agreed to increase the frequency of Olive Harvest flights to an average of one per week.4 —With respect to the buffer zone, both sides have agreed to work out arrangements jointly between themselves without U.S. involvement. 3. We had several exchanges with Kurt Waldheim during the day to try to work out a letter from him which would enable the Israelis to accept UNTSO as the supervising mechanism for Zone B. Unfortu- 2 The talks took place in Washington September 18–19. Memoranda of conversation for the tripartite talks have not been found. A memorandum of conversation for a September 18 bilateral meeting between the Israeli and U.S. delegations during which Vance outlined the requirements for any U.S. role in the peacekeeping arrangements in the Sinai (all U.S. personnel should be civilian and unarmed, the total number should not exceed present complement of SFM, the United States must obtain congressional approval before participation, some form of UN presence should be sought), is in the Department of State, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, NEA Front Office Subject File 1978–1984, Lot 85D251, Box 3, 1979 Memcons—Secretary. The Department of State produced a draft aide me´moire on Sinai peacekeeping arrangements, based upon the trilateral negotiations on September 29. See footnote 3 below. 3 The agreement was approved by the Israeli and Egyptian Cabinets on October 7 and October 13, respectively. The Israelis, however, insisted that the United States forge a multinational peacekeeping force at least a year before the IDF withdrawal reached its final completion in 1982. (David K. Shipler, “Israeli Cabinet Approves Temporary Plan for Monitoring Treaty in Sinai Without U.N.,” The New York Times, October 8, 1979, p. A8; “Egypt OKs Agreement to Monitor Israeli Pullout,” Los Angeles Times, October 14, 1979, p. A15) In response to the U.S. draft aide me´moire, the Israeli Foreign Ministry produced a counter-draft on October 9. Further minor revisions were agreed on October 18 in a meeting held in Washington among Evron, Sterner, Saunders, and Vance. Summarizing the meeting in an October 19 briefing memorandum for Vance, Sterner wrote: “Evron tried hard to get us to put language in the Aide Memoire to make it clear that UNTSO would not have an independent role, and that it should be there exclusively to support us.” Sterner added that United Nations Under Secretary General Brian Urquhart had “asked specifically” that the United States avoid such language in the aide me´moire. He concluded that the new U.S. draft aide me´moire, dated October 19, “meets Israel’s needs and that, together with the language in the previous aide me´moire, it fully reflects what was agreed to in Washington.” Sterner’s memorandum, along with all three draft aide me´moires, is in the National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P880104–1380. 4 Previously, the U.S. Air Force reconnaissance flights undertaken under Operation Olive Harvest (see footnote 2, Document 122) numbered two per month. (David K. Shipler, “Israeli Cabinet Approves Temporary Plan for Monitoring Treaty in Sinai Without U.N.,” The New York Times, October 7, 1979, p. A8)
