1957 1419 result of obstruction on part of American Govt such an exchange could not be realized. 11. Wang continued. In order to develop mutual visits and con­ tacts his govt in addition to 22 Sept proposal also on own initiative had given permission to American correspondents to visit China for news coverage. After stubborn obstructions and prohibitions on part of U.S. Government three American press representatives in person of Stevens, Harrington and Worthy succeeded in going there and com­ pleting their coverage. When they did so, they expected that following this step on their part the US would also take corresponding measures in this respect. Now the application of reciprocity in international inter­ course is a matter of common knowledge familiar to everybody. He was afraid that I would not be able to quote any remarks of their side to effect that only American correspondents could enter China while no Chinese correspondents could enter US. Now the August 22 statement of my government says arrogantly in effect that only American corre­ spondents are going to China while no Chinese correspondents will be allowed into US. Now anything in common between this statement and the friendly gesture indicated by his side? Such a haughty and arrogant statement by U.S. is an insult to Chinese people and Chinese people can in no way accept that. 12. Wang continued. Now it not his intention to enter into debate with me on US law. What he proposed and was interested in was mutual exchange of visits between Chinese and American people and mutual improvement of relations between two countries. It showed he recog­ nized that no question can be resolved in international intercourse if we adopt an attitude of imposing one’s decision on the other. The unilateral decision of the US Dept of State has not only caused great ­indignation on part of people of China but has also met with ­condemnation inter­ national public opinion. 13. Wang continued that proposal he made this morning would offer reasonable solution to question of news coverage by two countries. It was his hope that we would be able to make some progress on this matter. He believed that this step would bring something good in our talks. 14. I replied that I found it impossible to understand his position on the basis for what he called indignation. Some time ago his authorities indicated they desired visits of American newspaper correspondents. The US has now rpt now agreed to validate passports for such travel. The US was certainly not rpt not imposing anything on him. If his govern­ ment has now changed its mind and decided to not grant visas that was entirely a matter for decision of his government. I could not and would not attempt impose decision on him that his government grant visas for these correspondents.
