Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II —Delete the exemption which, under the Harkin Amendment, authorizes us to support aid programs for needy people, and —Require the Secretary to prepare and transmit to Congress a list of countries engaged in gross violations of human rights. Bureau Views We oppose the Reuss proposal. We are taking steps to develop a comprehensive, broad-based policy on human rights. Our initiatives vis-a`-vis the international financial institutions must flow from this overall strategy. In this connection we plan to contact key governments and the management of development banks and ascertain how best to relate our overall human rights objectives to the lending policies of these multilateral institutions. We have cited this initiative in the proposed reply to Congressman Reuss. The thrust of the letter is to convince Reuss that we are taking strong steps to support human rights, we need time to develop a comprehensive strategy which has an appropriate role for the multilateral institutions and, therefore, we want him to hold off further action on his bill. Recommendation That you sign the letter (Tab 1) to Congressman Reuss and personally call him to underscore the rationale for our reply.4 Talking points you may wish to use when calling Congressman Reuss are at Tab 3.5 4 According to a stamped date, Christopher initialed his approval of this recommendation on February 26. He bracketed the phrase “and personally call him to underscore the rationale for our reply” and added a notation in the margin: “Could Doug Bennet call, saying that I went to Brazil after signing letter.” Reuss responded to Christopher in a February 28 letter, proposing that he and Christopher meet with Harkin, Fraser, and Gonzalez to discuss human rights matters. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P770038–2341) Jenkins provided Christopher with a copy of Reuss’ letter under a March 3 action memorandum, which included a recommendation that Christopher agree to the meeting. Christopher approved the recommendation on March 4 and added the following handwritten comment: “Should Cooper also be present? Derian?”
