58
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—Delete the exemption which, under the Harkin Amendment, au-
thorizes us to support aid programs for needy people, and
—Require the Secretary to prepare and transmit to Congress a list
of countries engaged in gross violations of human rights.
Bureau Views
We oppose the Reuss proposal. We are taking steps to develop a
comprehensive, broad-based policy on human rights. Our initiatives
vis-a`-vis the international financial institutions must flow from this
overall strategy. In this connection we plan to contact key governments
and the management of development banks and ascertain how best to
relate our overall human rights objectives to the lending policies of
these multilateral institutions. We have cited this initiative in the pro-
posed reply to Congressman Reuss. The thrust of the letter is to con-
vince Reuss that we are taking strong steps to support human rights,
we need time to develop a comprehensive strategy which has an appro-
priate role for the multilateral institutions and, therefore, we want him
to hold off further action on his bill.
Recommendation
That you sign the letter (Tab 1) to Congressman Reuss and person-
ally call him to underscore the rationale for our reply.4
Talking points you may wish to use when calling Congressman
Reuss are at Tab 3.5
4 According to a stamped date, Christopher initialed his approval of this recom-
mendation on February 26. He bracketed the phrase “and personally call him to under-
score the rationale for our reply” and added a notation in the margin: “Could Doug
Bennet call, saying that I went to Brazil after signing letter.” Reuss responded to Christo-
pher in a February 28 letter, proposing that he and Christopher meet with Harkin, Fraser,
and Gonzalez to discuss human rights matters. (National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, P770038–2341) Jenkins provided Christopher with a copy of Reuss’ letter
under a March 3 action memorandum, which included a recommendation that Christo-
pher agree to the meeting. Christopher approved the recommendation on March 4 and
added the following handwritten comment: “Should Cooper also be present? Derian?”
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P77038–2337)
5 Attached but not printed.
