Romania government there will be no opportunity for such a meeting; the US will not meet representatives of the North without representatives from the South. President Ceausescu said that since the US has relations with South Korea it would be wise to also have direct contacts with the North. The President replied that we are there on the basis of a UN resolution. We favor reunification of Korea and military representatives have been meeting at the 38th parallel, but the US is not the dominant political factor there. We are there to keep a fragile peace and we cannot claim the political leadership of South Korea. To undertake political negotiations with North Korean leaders in the absence of President Park would be to assume a false posture. The PLO President Ceausescu then turned the conversation again to a possible meeting of US and PLO representatives. Although this is not now on the agenda, it is important if a new impetus is to be given to the peace process in the Middle East. They will meet with the US either secretly or publicly. I have been specifically assured that the PLO has already mustered a majority within its organization to support such a useful meeting. The President recalled that he had stated the US position in talks the previous day,5 but indicated his willingness to exchange ideas as the situation develops. Our current desire is for Egypt to propose a new solution and then have Egypt and Israel work together in resolving their differences. At this stage the insertion of the PLO into the process would be a complicating factor. Perhaps later it would be more reasonable. President Ceausescu said he was not referring to PLO participation in general, but only to its participation in talks on the Palestinian question. The President felt that Egypt would not be willing to have the PLO involved even on that problem at present, and Israel certainly would not. King Hussein would probably take the same view. President Ceausescu suggested that President Sadat wishes the PLO to participate in the discussion of the Palestinian problem but not the discussion of Egypt’s problems. He felt that Hussein is of the same opinion; so is President Assad. The President agreed that Assad may hold that view, but not Hussein. 5 See Document 200.
