National Security Policy  387
They stated that in the periods of the greatest national progress of the 
United States in the world, in a period when we had full employment, 
in a period of peace, in a period of expansion, we could not meet our 
obligations on a day to day basis and therefore there must be some­
thing wrong with our system if we were borrowing from the future in 
these good times, and we could certainly not pay back in bad times, 
so there was doubt. He said this was repeated by every nation from 
little nations, who didn’t know very much about finances, to big pow­
erful nations. He further said that nearly all of our outstanding obli­
gations are not in the hands of the little countries—­they are in the 
hands of our major allies. I don’t know what he meant by this unless 
he was fearful of them putting the squeeze on us in our competitive 
marketing. He stated that there was a gradual flow of gold away from 
the United States, but that this did not mean that our gold reserves 
were in danger at the moment.
All in all it was a very sobering ten minute discussion.
Mr. McElroy: Then Mr. McElroy picked up the ball and gave a speech 
on the need for not cutting personnel, not cutting budgets too much.
It was a pretty good speech.
Vice President: The Vice President then repeated some of the President’s 
remarks that what was needed was a unified voice from the Pentagon. 
He stated that if we put out the same story that this was enough—­that 
we could sell the program regardless.
Gen Taylor: Max Taylor correctly brought out that we were subjected to 
very probing questions by Congress and that if, for example, they asked 
him whether or not the modernization of the Army was fast enough, he 
would have to say no.
He went into this at quite some length and the President started to 
take him apart.
Mr. McElroy: Then made a speech and said that in view of the remarks 
made by the Chiefs and the Services that it was apparent that we had to 
reexamine the budget. He misinterpreted the remarks or at least some 
place during about this period the remarks in general were misinter­
preted by most everybody.
The President: The President stated that he hoped that we could get 
down to an agreed budget of about 40.8 or less—­he meant expenditures.
I tried to break in twice to state that this could be done but if it 
were done we would have to do it—­each Service would have to do it in 
its own way. We couldn’t have people telling us what should be in the
