806
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
at the ministerial level. However, he may raise with you the question
of the Krsko reactor.7
The Yugoslavs have repeatedly said that the exchange of letters
between you and President Tito have deeply impressed him, and it is
clear they have done a lot to improve relations between our two coun-
tries. The Yugoslavs were particularly struck that in a recent letter you
praised Tito’s leadership of the non-aligned movement,8 something no
U.S. Administration had done before.
In your most recent exchange of letters, you discussed the Middle
East, the Horn of Africa and CSCE. His reply (tabbed in the book) was
only generalon thefirst twoissues, but soughtyour assistancein moving
Belgrade to a successful conclusion, an appeal he also addressed—
unsuccessfully—to Brezhnev. (Your response is also tabbed in the book,
and you may wish to refer to it.)
Issues
In addition to material in the State Department book, there are the
following issues:
Krsko. The basic issue is well set out in Cy’s memo: as part of our
own non-proliferation program and in accord with the Act, we seek
commitments from the Yugoslavs about disposition of U.S.-supplied
equipment and fuel—commitments additional to the original Yugoslav
agreement with the IAEA. We offered a package which would meet
our requirements, and negotiations seemed to be going well. However,
7 In telegram 1359 from Belgrade, February 17, Eagleburger reported his conversa-
tion with Malivoj Maksic, Tito’s National Security Adviser, in which the two discussed
how the meetings between the two Presidents should be organized, and whether the
Foreign Ministers would participate in the meetings with the Presidents or have parallel
meetings. Eagleburger concluded: “Tito clearly prefers to focus on international problems,
leaving bilateral issues to others.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D780076–1117) In telegram 1582 from Belgrade, February 25, Eagleburger reported
his February 25 meeting with Maksic, in which the Yugoslav official stressed Tito’s
desire for private meetings with Carter and informed Eagleburger that Tito would not
get into details on bilateral matters, but would concentrate on international issues such
as détente, CSCE, disarmament, the Middle East, China, North Korea, and the Non-
Aligned Movement. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780088–
0200)
8 In his January 31 letter, Carter discussed the deteriorating situation in the Horn
of Africa due to increased Soviet and Cuban involvement in the area. Carter asked Tito
to use his influence in the Non-Aligned Movement and his good offices to convince the
Ethiopian Government of the need for a negotiated settlement. He also asked Tito to
convey to the Soviet Government the growing U.S. unease about Soviet and Cuban
involvement in the Horn. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 21, Yugoslavia: President
Josip Broz Tito, 5/77–5/79)
