Afghanistan
525
19. It would be better, Gromyko went on, to stick closer to the
facts. Meanwhile, no one should tell the Afghanis how to run their
affairs. And it is now clear to the whole world what kind of figure
Amin was. One can only be astonished at what is being said about
him in Washington. Every Afghani damns him, but Washington seems
to like him.
20. As example no. 9, Gromyko took up Pakistan and the Persian
Gulf, stating in this connection that he found the turn of Washington’s
thinking on foreign policy questions really remarkable. This was espe-
cially true in connection with the aggression against Afghanistan, and
also in regard to the statement in my démarche which implied anxiety
on the part of the administration that the Soviet Union might take
some action in regard to Pakistan and the Persian Gulf. In actual fact,
he said, he thought that Washington did not actually think that way;
there were too many leading figures who knew better, and only the
paranoid could believe that the Soviets were intending action against
Pakistan and in the region of the Persian Gulf. He asked that I inform
my government and the President accordingly. My statement, he said,
suggested that the Soviets were sending some sort of challenge. He
asked what kind of challenge and to whom. As for the alleged danger
to Pakistan and the Persian Gulf region, it was not enough to say
simply that this was false; it was fabricated. The thought could only
arise in the mind of a person who does not go to the trouble to analyze
the situation. Anyone who knows the Soviet Union knows that such
action is alien to the Soviet Union’s policies, ideology, and foreign
policy line aimed at international détente and peace.
21. Noting that Brezhnev had made it clear, in his answers to a
Pravda correspondent, that any such intentions toward Pakistan, Iran
and the Persian Gulf were alien to the Soviet Union, Gromyko said
that he was thus spared the necessity of speaking in more detail on
the matter.6 He could only wonder however at the people who posed
such questions concerning the intentions of the Soviet Union, and he
asked whether I personally, as an Ambassador, and as an important
representative of the American business community, could really
believe such fabrications. But if there should be someone, somewhere,
who has such beliefs, he hoped that his clarification would help them
understand the truth of the matter.
22. As his tenth example, Gromyko referred by indirection to the
measures taken by the U.S. in response to the Afghanistan action. The
administration, he said, is now working energetically in shirtsleeves to
increase international tension and sow discord in U.S.-Soviet relations.
6 See Document 166.
