152 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 51. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, April 26, 1979 SUBJECT Status of CIA Discussions with the Pakistanis Concerning Aid to the Afghan Dissidents (S) 1. At the 6 April 1979 meeting of the SCC, it was concluded that CIA should explore with the Government of Pakistan (GOP) provisions of U.S. financial and material aid to Afghan insurgents as well as the feasibility of radio broadcasts into Afghanistan.2 The following is a status report on the CIA response to this tasking: (S) a. Discussions with GOP. From the two discussions we had with Pakistan liaison, after an initial delay on their part, it is apparent that the matter of aid to the Afghan insurgents has become increasingly politicized. (See attachment for a detailed report on our liaison discussions to date.)3 This perception is based in part on comments by GOP liaison that Pakistan would not risk acting against Afghanistan without firm U.S. backing. Also, at the request of liaison, our discussions with them are now in a “pause” status while they review the situation. We suspect that General Zia is orchestrating this slowdown awaiting developments in his ongoing talks with Ambassador Hummel. If we 1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–047, Afghanistan: 15 Feb 1979–22 Aug 1979. Secret. Attached but not printed is Brzezinski’s handwritten note forwarding the memorandum to Aaron: “DA, Please get on top of this through a mini-SCC. We need action. E.g, give them money. Also black ops.” At the top of Brzezinski’s note, Henze wrote: “Turner will take up formally with ZB 1 May 79.” Neither a record of the May 1 meeting nor a record of a mini-SCC on the topic was found. The next SCC meeting that took up the Afghanistan issue was held June 26. See Document 53. 2 See Document 48. 3 Attached but not printed. The attached memorandum reported on two meetings the Chief of Station in Islamabad had with ISID Director Major General Mohammad Riaz Khan and ISID Deputy Director Brigadier General Kamal Rabbani. At the first meeting, Riaz proposed that the United States fund Pakistan’s procurement and distribution of medical supplies to Afghan rebels and provide non-U.S.-made small arms and ammunition to be distributed to the rebels. The supplies would go to Pathan tribesmen on the Pakistani side of the border who were supporting the rebels based on the Afghan side of the border. The second meeting effectively froze these propositions; in light of Soviet and Afghan charges of Pakistani involvement in the Afghan rebellion, ISID had become wary of commencing direct support. Additionally, Rabbani disclosed that the tribesmen “could not be disciplined to keep quiet about outside aid,” and that in any case, the Afghan Government had sufficiently penetrated the rebel groups so that it would learn the source of the aid.
