International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
283
procedures. The Treasury Department has already concluded that there
is sufficient basis to believe there is a pervasive dumping problem in
steel trade to justify implementation of a trigger price system on all
steel imports. It is likely therefore that any trade restriction, such as the
Japanese cartel for exports to the EC, would only increase the likeli-
hood of dumping in other markets. If the dumping is stopped, there
would be little basis for a claim of deflection since one would expect
U.S. imports to increase from more competitive producing countries,
whether or not other markets are restricted.
Recommendations
I recommend that STR announce discontinuance of its review of the AISI
section 301 complaint on the grounds that the Treasury Department’s
trigger price system to deter dumping will eliminate any unfair burden
on the U.S. steel industry which may be resulting from the EC-Japanese
understanding.3 I would indicate that while we were able to determine
that such an understanding exists, we were unable to measure its im-
pact. We had kept the case under review, however, because significant
diversion would have posed a threat in the deteriorating domestic steel
situation. As it became clear that widespread dumping was the central
trade problem, we turned to antidumping remedies. With the trigger
price system, we believe that any unfair burden in U.S. trade due to the
EC-Japanese understanding will be remedied. I would announce fur-
ther that we continue to believe that such informal arrangements are
not in the interests of the world trading system and should be brought
under better international discipline.
The Departments of State, Treasury, Commerce, Agriculture, Inte-
rior, Labor, and the Council of Economic Advisers concur in the above
recommendation. Eizenstat and NSC also concur.
There may be some adverse reaction from the domestic steel in-
dustry and the Congress to discontinuing this case, however, it may be
riskier not to dispose of it. There are already legislative proposals to put
statutory deadlines on our handling of section 301 cases, which would
limit our flexibility to achieve solutions in these cases, because they
usually involve extended negotiations. The adverse domestic reaction
should be ameliorated by the implementation of the trigger price
system by Treasury.
The EC and Japan would, of course, welcome dropping the case. It
is regrettable that we have no better international rules available to us
to cover the arrangement in which they have participated. We are
working on a safeguard code in the Multilateral Trade Negotiations
3 A typed notation in the margin adjacent to this sentence reads: “See Tab A.” See
footnotes 15 and 16 below.
