216 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Third, our policies should recognize and encourage African nationalism. Having won independence, African nations will defend it against challenges from any source. If we try to impose American solutions for African problems, we may sow division among the Africans and undermine their ability to oppose efforts at domination by others. We will not do so. Fourth, our policies must reflect our national values. Our deep belief in human rights—political, economic, and social—leads us to policies that support their promotion throughout Africa. This means concern for individuals whose rights are threatened anywhere on the continent. And it means making our best effort peacefully to promote racial justice in southern Africa. In this we join the many African nations who, having won their freedom, are determined that all of Africa shall be free. Fifth, our ties with Africa are not only political, but cultural and economic as well. It is the latter two that are most enduring. And finally, we will seek openness in our dealings with African states. We are willing to discuss any issue, African or global; to broaden our dialogue with African nations; and to try to work with them, even when we may not agree. Only thus can we promote our views without rancor. Our renewed relations with the People’s Republic of the Congo, our experience at the recent conference on southern Africa in Maputo [U.N.-sponsored International Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia, May 16–21], and our work with African delegations at the United Nations all demonstrate the value of this approach. In the end, of course, our Africa policy will be judged by results, not intentions. Assistance for Human Needs One of Africa’s principal concerns is that its basic human needs be met. Despite its vast resources, it is still one of the least developed areas of the world. Eighteen of the twenty-eight least developed countries in the world are African. We are prepared to help. In addition to our growing trade and investment relationships with African nations, we are committed to providing economic assistance that will directly improve the lives of those most in need. Turning this principle into practice cannot be accomplished overnight. But it must be done. Our economic assistance to Africa is being increased from $271 million in fiscal year 1976 to a projected $450 million in fiscal year 1978. We hope that assistance from our European friends will also increase, and expect to consult with them on how we all can make the most effective contributions.
