International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
537
be made on those agricultural and industrial products that have the
greatest potential for increased U.S. exports if present offers are
maintained.
—At worst, the withdrawal of our textile offer would result in a
complete collapse of the negotiations. Failure of the MTN would mean
the loss of new agreements on export subsidies, trade safeguards,
customs valuation and government procurement, as well as the loss of
foreign tariff cuts. Failure of the MTN would also damage the overall
climate for international economic cooperation.
2. Acceptance of the MTN exemption provision in the enrolled bill
would undoubtedly lead to requests for similar treatment by other in-
dustries. Congressmen would be under intense pressure from impor-
tant industries in their districts to extract similar concessions in their
behalf.
DISCUSSION
Although the industry would clearly prefer that you sign the en-
rolled bill, the negative reaction to a veto would not be as strong as we
had originally anticipated. The recommended veto message empha-
sizes our interest in the prosperity of the industry and pledges us to
take further action on its behalf.2 In view of these commitments, key
union leaders have agreed to downplay their disapproval of a veto and
stress the positive elements of our policy toward the industry.
We have already responded to the legitimate concerns of the tex-
tile and apparel industry by limiting our tariff cut offers in these
products to less than one-half of the level consistent with the general
tariff-cutting formula. Although this industry accounts for only 10 per-
cent of dutiable trade in the industrial sector, more than 50 percent of
our industrial sector exceptions have been taken on textile goods. These
exceptions have been designed to give the greatest protection to the
most import sensitive segments of the industry. Overall, we are pro-
posing to reduce textile tariffs from their present average level of 24
percent to approximately 18 percent over an 8 to 10 year period begin-
ning in 1980. This gradual phase-in will help to ease adjustment
problems in the industry.
A successful conclusion to the MTN is already in jeopardy over the
issue of the countervailing duty waiver extension. To completely ex-
empt textiles from our tariff cut offer, as required by H.R. 9937, would
only throw more fuel on the fire. The authorization for GSA to sell
silver dollars can be resubmitted at any time with good prospects for
passage. We will not have another opportunity to negotiate a compre-
hensive trade package in the foreseeable future.
2 The recommended veto message is not attached.
