550 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 92. Memorandum From the Head of the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks and Chief (Burt) to Secretary of State Baker1 Washington, April 2, 1990 SUBJECT Re: Nazarkin’s Preview on START Following our meeting yesterday afternoon,2 Nazarkin called me to say that he had just arrived from Moscow. Shevardnadze had dispatched him to Washington early to preview Soviet concerns and thinking about the Ministerial. Nazarkin’s main general point was that Shevardnadze wants to do a lot of START business at the Ministerial. The Soviet side, from Shevardnadze down to technical experts, will be geared up to engage on a range of issues. According to Nazarkin, these include the following: • ALCMs—Nazarkin said this is “item #1” and the Soviets really want to solve it this week. Nazarkin thinks that if we accept 600 km range, then the way will be cleared for resolution of all other ALCM-­ related issues, including conventional bombers and future ALCM attribution. But Nazarkin’s key message was that if we can’t solve ALCMs at this meeting, real problems would emerge. This is a “critical moment” for the START treaty, he said, and, in the absence of an ALCM deal, the Soviet military could try to walk back not only the ALCM deal but also other elements of the START package. Nazarkin stressed that this was not a threat but rather a reflection of the Soviet military’s anxiety over parts of the START treaty. I was non-­committal, but emphasized that you thought you went the extra mile in Moscow by going from 1500 km down to 800 km, I said that if Shevardnadze felt ALCM range was as important as Nazarkin was indicating, then Shevardnadze should raise it directly with you at the Wednesday3 night one-­on-­one.4 • SLCMs—The Soviets also are prepared to close out the SLCM issue at this Ministerial. Shevardnadze apparently will bring a new SLCM proposal with him. Nazarkin declined to preview the proposal but said that it was “not very simple”. I infer from Nazarkin’s comments 1 Source: Department of State, Policy Planning Staff, Lot 03D102, Dennis Ross Files, US/Soviet Ministerial April 4–6, 1990. Secret. Sent through Bartholomew, who did not initial the memorandum. Zoellick wrote in the upper right-­hand corner of the memorandum: “DR—­worth reading. Bob.” 2 Not further identified. 3 April 4. 4 An unknown hand drew a bracket to the right of this sentence.
