482  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
D. Major Recommendations
1. Greater flexibility should be built into the SIOP through the develop-
ment of more discrete building blocks which could break down the present 
target base into smaller increments and thereby give the President a 
broader range of options if he should ever have to consider SIOP type 
attacks. Each building block should have distinct targeting criteria 
which take into account not only the timing and damage requirements 
for attacking the objective target but also collateral damage to other 
target sets. Given the planning complexities, the development of build-
ing blocks requires an evolutionary approach with close interaction 
between policy levels and planners. Care must be taken to insure that a 
balance is struck between the quantity of useful options desired and the 
need to maintain a relatively simple and responsive execution process. 
(See Issue #1)4
2. The requirement for endurance should be considered a high priority 
requirement in the future planning of US forces, command, control communi-
cations and intelligence assets. Endurance—­the ability of strategic nuclear 
forces not only to survive the initial attacks but to remain an effective 
military force for a prolonged period afterwards—­is a key element in 
any strategy that pays attention to post-­exchange balances and/or the 
possibility of a drawn-­out series of exchanges. Specific recommenda-
tions for endurance measures involve acquisition policy, and thus are 
beyond the scope of this study. However, we can say that to carry out 
current employment policy effectively, much less the more demanding 
alternatives outlined above, the endurance of command, control, com-
munications and intelligence assets need to be improved substantially 
so as to make it possible to support the concept of a Secure Reserve 
Force and withhold attacks (e.g., on Soviet non-­military industry) so 
long as substantial US urban/industrial assets remain undamaged. It 
is important that modifications in employment policy and plans that 
rely on greater endurance proceed in phase with the improvements in 
our force posture and supporting C3I that are necessary for endurance. 
(See Issue #2)5
3. We should target Soviet nuclear forces and develop our own forces so 
as to maintain roughly equal counterforce capabilities. In particular, counter-­
nuclear targeting should be designed primarily so as to assure that the Sovi-
ets are unable to shift the balance of nuclear power drastically by attacking 
our forces, and so that it is clearly perceived they cannot. This objective 
cannot be achieved solely by attacking Soviet forces and thus is not 
solely a function of targeting policy. It also requires that we be able 
to hold in reserve forces comparable to reserved Soviet forces, so as 
4 Issue #1 in the report is titled “Flexibility.”
5 Issue #2 in the report is titled “Endurance.”
