1955  135
2. Following is text of agreed announcement which I would pro­
pose to him:
3. “For the past ..... weeks, the Ambassadors of the USA and the 
PRC have been seeking a settlement of item one on their agenda, the 
return of civilians of both sides to their respective countries. Ambas­
sador Johnson has informed Ambassador Wang that all Chinese in the 
US who desire to travel to the PRC are now free to do so. Ambassador 
Wang has informed Ambassador Johnson that all Americans in the PRC 
who desire to leave are now free to do so, with the exception of those 
involved in unfinished civil or criminal cases. With respect to the lat­
ter, Ambassador Wang has stated that his government is reviewing all 
cases and that he will report the results of the reviews to Ambassador 
Johnson.
4. “The two Ambassadors, with the approval of their governments, 
have also agreed in principle to a joint declaration to be made by the 
two governments which would formally confirm
(A) That all nationals of either under the authority of the other who 
desire to return home are now free to do so;
(B) That a third party in each country may be designated to assist 
such return if ever a national desiring to return believes that, contrary 
to declared policy, he is encountering official obstruction, and
(C) That such third party may also be the means of providing 
financial assistance to those desiring to return.
5. “However, Ambassador Wang has indicated the PRC is unable 
to subscribe unconditionally to this declaration pending completion 
of the review of all American cases by the PRC. In order to allow for 
the completion of these reviews, the two Ambassadors have agreed to 
recess their talks for ….. weeks. It is anticipated that when the talks are 
resumed it will be possible promptly to reach an agreement which will 
permit the departure from the PRC of all Americans who desire to leave 
and the issuance of a joint declaration along the lines of that referred 
to above.
Unquote.
Gowen
