Eastern Europe Region
65
you to the Admiral giving them a pat on the back. It also establishes
a requirement for reporting to us on what has been accomplished as
of 1 September so the program can again be reviewed this coming fall.
RECOMMENDATION:
That you sign the attached Memorandum (TAB A).4
4 Attached but not printed. The draft memorandum reads: “I am pleased to note
from your memorandum that this program has moved ahead successfully. It represents
good fulfillment of the SCC recommendation of 26 October 1977, approved by the
President on 1 November 1977. I would like to have a progress report on this program
by 1 September 1978 so that we can review its scope for 1979.” There is no indication
that Brzezinski signed the memorandum. An unidentified handwritten note at the bottom
of the covering memorandum indicates that action was suspended.
21.
Paper Prepared by William Odom of the National Security
Council Staff for the East-West Planning Group1
Washington, undated
EAST EUROPE IN THE CONTEXT OF U.S.-SOVIET RELATIONS
The United States2 has four general options in its approach to the
Soviet Bloc. First, it can pursue a more cooperative3 relationship with
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Unfiled
Files, Box 130, East-West Planning Group: 1–8/78. Secret. In his March 20 covering
memorandum to Brzezinski, Samuel Huntington, and Reginald Bartholomew, Odom
wrote: “The attached paper is an effort to provide an analytical framework for a discussion
of East Europe in the context of U.S.-Soviet relations on March 21. It is a product hastily
done this past week with the idea of treating another major area in the context of U.S.-
Soviet relations the way we discussed China at the last meeting. Is there an ‘East European
card’? If so, how can it be played?”
2 The West European states are not given separate attention in this discussion of
U.S. policy options for two reasons. First, space in a short paper does not allow. Second,
the U.S., if it moves firmly in either direction of cooperative or competitive relations
with the Soviet Union, can force the Europeans to follow the general trend. Admittedly,
in the middle ground, where there is a more even mix of competition and cooperation,
this is less true, but some of the implications for the West European role in those cases
are discussed. [Footnote is in the original.]
3 “Cooperation” can be thought of in three broad categories: 1) economic, technologi-
cal, and cultural; 2) political; 3) arms control. In the matrix here, the first category is the
major kind of cooperation meant in defining the options. The discussion following should
clarify the relationship to political cooperation. [Footnote is in the original.]
