World Hunger and Food Policy
665
the Foreign Assistance Act which prohibits direct financial assistance to
Vietnam. EA is not now advocating elimination of Section 411. How-
ever, if Congress were to propose elimination. EA believes the State De-
partment certainly should not object.
I believe, however, that we would have a much clearer view of
probable congressional reactions to these proposed changes, were you
to telephone Senator Humphrey and elicit his views. Given his mem-
bership on both the Agriculture and Foreign Relations Committees and
his great interest in the PL 480 program, he is likely to be able to add
considerably to our perceptions as to how these proposals could fare.
We have already contacted the Senator’s staff regarding these pro-
posed changes. They are sympathetic to them, but also recommend that
you telephone him.
Recommendation
1) That you call Senator Humphrey and seek a direct reading from
him of likely congressional reactions on these questions.5
2) If the reading is generally positive, that you authorize us to in-
form OMB that the Department of State favors deletion of Section 102
Vietnam, Section 103(d)(3) Cuba and Vietnam, and Section 103(d)(4) Egypt.
We would not take any action now on the other provisions of the law;
however, it should be understood that we might wish to go back to
OMB later regarding Section 411 if our evolving relations with Vietnam
so warrant.6
Alternatively, that we inform OMB that the Department of State
supports only deletion of Section 103 (d)(4) Egypt.7
5 Cooper placed a check mark on the approval line on April 8, according to a
stamped notation, and added the following handwritten note in the left-hand margin:
“Done. 4/7. HHH says clean it up by deletion, including Sec. 411. Leave * on p 2, but he
may ask the Committee to take it out.”
6 Cooper placed a check mark on the approval line on April 8, according to a
stamped notation.
7 Cooper placed a check mark on the disapproval line on April 8, according to a
stamped notation. An additional handwritten notation at the end of the memorandum
reads: “4/7—EB Dennis Jet informed. Advance copy sent to Jet. CS.”
