National Security Policy 421 (a) Prudence, not alarm, is the keynote. All of our best efforts will be directed toward avoiding nuclear war; but prudence and a concern for the Country’s future dictate the desirability of taking steps to improve chances of survival in order to rebuild and protect our national heritage if nuclear attack should occur. (We pay a lot of money for insurance of various sorts while doing our best to avoid the contingencies against which we are insuring ourselves.) (b) The national fallout shelter policy is based firmly on the philos­ ophy of the obligation of each property-­owner to provide protection on his own premises. The Federal Government will provide information on how to do it, backed up by example of providing fallout protection in its new buildings in the future. (3) Programs (a) Support of adult education programs to increase understand­ ing of (i) the effects of nuclear weapons, (ii) what can be and is being done to provide protection, and (iii) the place of individual prepared­ ness in the total national security program. (b) Combination of training films, instruction materials, magazine articles (popular, trade, etc.), newspaper features, TV programs, etc., aimed in appropriate combination at the following broad subjects: (i) Nuclear weapons effects on people, plants and animals. (ii) How to provide fallout protection. (iii) Family fallout protection (including simple “How-­to-­do-­it” information). (iv) Improvised home and basement shelters. (v) Protection of food and water. (vi) What governments (Federal, State, local) are doing about fall­ out protection. (vii) Radiological decontamination. (c) The use of national organizations to disseminate information. e. The elements of a base for rapid acceleration along the lines rec­ ommended in paragraph 4 of NSC 5807, which reads as follows: “4. Elements of a Base for Rapid $Millions

Acceleration $ 1.5 (annually) “The measures proposed above are designed to promote shelter construction without extensive financial participation by the Federal Government. The Committee recognizes, however, the possibility that these measures may be ineffective and that the Government might later wish to initiate a shelter program on an accelerated basis. Many of the other recommended measures will assist in preparing a base for rapid expansion, but in addition it is believed that specific attention should be given to the preparation of a “shelf” of plans and information which might save months of delay in an emergency.
