Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII RECOMMENDATION: That you approve the increase in support for the Afghan insurgents from [less than 1 line not declassified] to [less than 1 line not declassified], the cost to be shared equally with Saudi A second proposal was also unanimously supported, albeit with qualifications. It involves a finding (attached at Tab A for your signature) that would have us share with the Saudis the cost of up to [amount not declassified] for Soviet or other hand-held anti-tank and anti-aircraft launchers (100 each). CIA would provide necessary training. The Pakistanis want this covertly because of their earlier problems with our assistance offer. According to CIA, they see this as an integral and necessary part of their ongoing support for the Afghan insurgents. State and NSC expressed concern that the Pakistanis are using this method as a means of increasing our political commitment to them, and noted that there should be no major problem for the Pakistanis simply to buy the equipment. Nonetheless, in view of the urgent Pakistani desire (and the fact that they control distribution of our material and can skim off whatever they want anyway) it was agreed to recommend that you approve the finding. The finding was changed, however, to exclude the provision of US-origin equipment. The Pakistanis do not want it for political reasons and there is a real danger that it might find its way across the border. SA–7s are preferred, but these are in short supply; European equivalents may be available. (S) RECOMMENDATION: That you sign the attached finding.4 A third proposal, to provide jointly with the Saudis some [amount not declassified] in assistance to the refugee families whose breadwinners are fighting in Afghanistan, was found to have a number of problems and was withdrawn. The same effect can be achieved through other The SCC (I) also further directed that by next week DOD and CIA should come up with specific proposals for the manufacture of SA–7s. It is clear that we need an additional source since the supplies available in Europe are pretty well dried up. There are three apparent options 3 Carter approved the recommendation and initialed “J” in the right margin. 4 Not attached. Carter signed the Finding on July 8. Its scope was Pakistan, with the description: “Provide directly to the Government of Pakistan, or via third countries, lethal military equipment of Soviet or other foreign manufacture for defensive purposes along the Afghan border. As necessary, provide cash, procurement advice and weapons training. Encourage other countries to discreetly supply funds or lethal military equipment directly to Pakistan.” (National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence
