1977  73
Examination of the plots yields the following observations:
—For the next ten years, we can expect to hold a considerable edge 
over the Soviets in numbers of warheads; they can expect to hold an 
advantage over us in total equivalent megatonnage; they will have 
an advantage over us in total throw weight unless we increase the size 
of our bomber force dramatically—­i.e., build up to the level of 2400 
strategic nuclear delivery vehicles.
—Our advantages in warheads can be preserved pretty much 
equally well by either of the compromise options (2, 3 A/B).
—Only the options which add the B–1 to the B–52 force (1, 2, 3 
Variant B) prevent the Soviets from widening their advantage in equiv-
alent megatonnage.
—While the Soviets’ advantage in throw weight is reduced by the 
B–1 add-­on options, aggressive deployment of the cruise missile as 
done by Option 3 (Variant A) can keep this advantage from increasing 
significantly.
—To the extent that perceptions are satisfactory in the very near 
term (79), and to the extent that they are determined by these mea-
sures, perceptions of the strategic balance should remain acceptable or 
improve under either of the compromise options (2, 3 A/B).
—Though the delay option (3 A/B) falls somewhat behind Option 
2 (Harold’s tentative choice) by the very early 80s, if we decide that we 
need the B–1 after all, Option 3 (Variant B) can catch up and surpass 
Option 2 by 1984.
In summary, it appears that any of the compromise options should 
at least preserve current perceptions of the strategic balance; purchase 
of the B–1, or pursuit of even more aggressive cruise missile options 
than considered here, could begin to shift perceptions of the balance in 
our favor.
Modernization of US Strategic Forces
One argument commonly made in favor of producing the B–1 now 
is that if we don’t, we will have no immediate answer to the modern-
ization programs the Soviets are currently pursuing. This argument 
ignores several modernization programs that the US currently has 
underway—­the Trident program, the modernization of the MM III 
force, and the Navy and Air Force cruise missile programs.
This argument also ignores the fact that the initial deployments of 
ALCMs on B–52s can be made just as rapidly as the initial deployments 
of B–1s even if we continue with the current B–1 production program.
Interactions with the M–X
An argument can be made that failure to go ahead with the B–1 
would increase pressures to build the M–X. Perhaps so, but by the time
