674 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX income in 1978), and this decision has been pursued relentlessly. Regime believes, possibly correctly, that necessary concomitant is what Ceausescu terms “order and discipline”, i.e. maximum party/state direction of the process and control over social forces unleashed by modernization process to avoid any disruption of maximum national effort required for rapid development in a hostile world. Net result is a paternalistic authoritarian state whose official rhetoric is heavily flavored with appeals to all to produce and over-produce for the sake of the country and future generations, and whose repressive apparatus stands ready and is occasionally used to coerce recalcitrants into line. 4. While inefficiencies, misallocations, and uncertainties of industrialization program have triggered massive grumbling, apathy, malingering, passive sabotage and corruption among Romanian populace, except in such isolated instances as the Jiu Valley coalminers strike in August 1977, economic discontent has not to date been translated into overt protest or other political action. In spite of some indications to contrary (see labor section, para. 17), we do not believe it will do so in foreseeable future, at least to point of endangering regime stability. Part of explanation lies in “Romanian character” formed over centuries. Tradition of democracy as we know it, or of citizen initiative and individual action, is very weak here; on contrary, Romanians have learned the hard way to accommodate to demands of whatever regime is in power and to do the minimum necessary to keep the authorities off their backs. It is the ability of Romanians to outwit, distort, and subvert government edicts that makes life human and livable under this and previous regimes. In short, this is a nation of survivors, not heroes. 5. Massive economic failure caused either by domestic mismanagement, which we view as unlikely, or by external factors would create a new and much more explosive situation, especially if living standards actually began to drop instead of rising as they are now, albeit at a snail’s pace. More pertinently, a GOR failure to start providing workers and others with respite from constant government pressure upon and supervision over individual lives as well as visible and significant material benefits in 1985, the year Romania allegedly attains its “medium developed” status, could also lead to important instability unless GOR could convincingly put blame on external forces or circumstances such as a world-wide economic crisis. 6. Neither population growth nor urbanization constitute significant stress factors now or in foreseeable future. The former is low in spite of active GOR encouragement of bigger families, and the latter is rigidly regulated through an effective system of internal migration controls by a regime determined to avoid hazards of uncontrolled growth.
