3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1977
167
they see as a dichotomy between administration policies and actions.
For Moscow, the main issue is whether the US adheres to the detente
formulas which shaped relations over the preceding five-year period—
acceptance of parity, moderation of differences, etc.—or whether the
US’s numerous foreign policy initiatives, especially in the realm of
arms control and human rights, signify a new set of priorities, with the
US attempting to impose its view of these issues on the Soviets.
Whether or not the Soviets have now concluded that the latter ac-
tually is the case, their suspicions and doubts about Carter policies ex-
plain to a large extent the defensive—and relatively stand-pat—posi-
tions they have adopted during this period. With progress in SALT
their measure of the political temperature, they consistently blame
Washington for the present deterioration in relations and, conversely,
look to Washington to reverse the trend. Yet they may still anticipate a
turning point ahead; the virtual cessation of personal criticism of the
President following his Charleston speech seemed such a signal;2 it has
not, however, been matched as yet by any restraint in criticism of ad-
ministration policies.
Officials Claim Perplexity
How far and how fast the Soviets originally expected to move with
the Carter administration is open to question, but there is no doubt as
to their dismay and disappointment over the record of the administra-
tion’s first six months in US–USSR relations. Private observations on
the President by Soviet officialdom, though few and generally modu-
lated, have reflected perplexity or puzzlement, mainly about his stand
on human rights, which according to the Soviets, does not betoken a
forthcoming attitude toward the Soviet Union.
—In an unusually frank statement, Politburo candidate member
Solomentsev told a visiting Canadian official in June that the Soviet
leaders gave President Carter the benefit of the doubt the first few
months but could not understand how it was possible for a President of
the United States after only a few weeks in office to try to humiliate the
Soviet government by receiving Bukovskiy in the White House.3 How,
Solomentsev asked rhetorically, could Carter reconcile his statements
about wanting good relations with the USSR with his “constant inter-
ference” in Soviet internal affairs? The Soviets, he said, wanted to trust
the President but could not because he was using human rights as a
“weapon” to attack the USSR.
2 Carter delivered a speech in Charleston, South Carolina on July 21. See Public
Papers: Carter, 1977, Book II, pp. 1309–1315.
3 According to the President’s Daily Diary, the President met with Bukovskiy on
March 1 from 3:30 to 3:37 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials)
