934 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX We discussed briefly the bilateral outstanding issues and there was no problem which we could not solve. As I informed you in my oral message,7 we reached agreement that Egypt will sell Israel 2 million tons of crude oil annually at the market price. I indicated to him that we can not possibly give Israel any preferential treatment in this respect as we can not discriminate between oil buyers. With respect to the forces that would supervise the implementation of the Peace Treaty on the ground, we agreed tentatively on the general outline of a formula that could be employed until the United States forms the multinational force provided for in the Treaty. I made it quite clear to him that an American participation in this transitional arrangement would be very helpful. Of course, we do not mean to [initiate?] a physical American involvement that would cause you the slightest trouble. It is a symbolic presence through a limited number of officers, possibly in civilian cloth. At any rate, the subject will be discussed in length between Secretary Vance, General Ali and Dayan within a few days.8 I have no doubt that they will be able to reach agreement. Prime Minister Begin offered to put forward the date of Israeli withdrawal from the Saint Katherine area which contains Mount Moses. Their forces will withdraw from that area before November 19 so as to enable us to hold the planned celebration of the second Anniversary of my trip to Jerusalem.9 I agreed to allow the flow of tourist into this area without delay as a gesture of good will. I was quite touched by the response of the people of Haifa to my visit. It was overwhelming. This is a real guarantee for the coronation of our efforts. The Arab Israelis were also forthcoming and enthusiastic. They constitute a considerable proportion of the population in the City and its vicinity. They understand fully the nature of the situation and the peace process. I believe that they can be a positive force for peace. With this in mind, I have agreed to provide them with some cultural services they badly need since they were cut off from the Arab World for over three decades. It might interest you to know that they are very appreciative of your spirit and the role you are playing as the leader of a nation they greatly admire. With best wishes and regards.10 Mohammed Anwer El-Sadat 7 See Document 288. 8 See Document 295. 9 See footnote 3, Document 4. 10 Sadat added the following handwritten notation: “Jehan joins me in sending Rosalin and the children all our best wishes.”
