808 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III mid-May.3 The Mexicans disappointed us at CIEC, and played a far less constructive role than we had hoped on the basis of my bilateral conversations in Mexico City in mid-April.4 They apologized privately for this—Solomon chided Roel for the unconstructive role that they were playing in Paris—but explained, somewhat sheepishly, that for them G–77 diplomacy is different from bilateral diplomacy. We cannot make separation so clearly and should emphasize to other countries that only a certain degree of inconsistency between their bilateral and multilateral stance is tolerable for us. Our bilateral approach may have helped with the Indonesians and Algerians, and it certainly did with the Saudi Arabians. I come away from the experience with the conviction that we were right in going ahead with our bilateral discussions and that, if anything, on future occasions we should intensify them, although I admit it is difficult to be certain that they are helpful. It is difficult to assess CIEC as a whole. It ended with meager results, but with a very good tone. I believe we came out about as well as we could reasonably have expected to do. Certainly, the dialogue lacked the acrimony and even hostility that accompanied the North-South dialogue two years ago. It would be nice to credit CIEC with (1) having exerted a calming influence on North-South relations over 1975–1977, and (2) having led to moderation in oil prices. This would represent a plausible but not wholly persuasive assessment, and we will never really be sure. We will learn more about CIEC’s effect on the tone of North-South relations when the outcome is taken up in the UNGA. Perez-Guerrero is again out on the hustings for a New International Economic Order, which, he concedes, is necessarily a long process, with the threat that oil prices will be used as the instrument to attain it, albeit “reasonably and advisedly”. This is an instrument which is not at Venezuela’s disposal, and its actual use depends on how much pressure OPEC countries can bring on Saudi Arabia on NIEO and other grounds. As to the implications for multilateral diplomacy, we agreed that it would be desirable in the future to avoid negotiating on such a broad agenda as CIEC had. We will, of course, continue to have general discussions in the UN and elsewhere, but we should strive to drive actual negotiation into specialized forums where directly interested countries dominate on any particular issue, and where they are represented by 3 Telegram 120307 to selected posts, May 25, transmitted a message on the CIEC from Vance to G–19 Ministers. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770185–1212) 4 No memoranda of conversation of these discussions were found. According to telegram 6763 from Mexico City, May 6, Cooper conveyed the U.S. position on CIEC to Mexican officials when he was in Mexico City on April 14. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770162–0409)
