Covert and Overt Operations
785
cal treatment.4 At present, we are allowing visas virtually only for
deathbed cases. Each case should be examined carefully in terms of
need, but we should be more flexible in permitting cases of real need.
He also suggested that we apply more liberal standards on permitting
families to rejoin. At present this is limited only to mothers, fathers
and children. He would propose extending this to include brothers,
sisters, uncles and aunts.5 All agreed that some liberalization of the
rules was justified, with careful verification of each case. (C)
Approve some liberalization, with close verification of
each case
Maintain very tight restrictions as at present6
Iranian students are a special category composed of three different
groups. The vast bulk of Iranian students, perhaps 50,000, were admit-
ted on the basis that they could remain until they completed their
studies. They are not a problem from the visa point of view. About
7,000 students have visas with specific time limits, some of which are
expiring. Gary Sick noted that he had been contacted by the Provost
of MIT on behalf of the National Association of Foreign Student Affairs
pointing out several cases of students whose visas are expiring in the
near future despite the fact that they are about to complete work on
a PhD. The SCC asked for additional information to review this at a
later time. A third group of about 100 Iranian students had valid visas
for the duration of their studies but happened to be trapped outside
the U.S. (e.g. a weekend field trip to Canada) when the order was
imposed and they have not been able to return. Mr. Christopher found
the application of the rule in these cases capricious and recommended
permitting these individuals to return. The SCC agreed.7 (C)
3. Travel of U.S. Citizens to Iran. There are a number of possible
cases emerging, from individual family members wishing to travel to
Iran, to lawyers representing Iran who need to consult with their clients,
to Ramsey Clark who apparently intends to attend the forthcoming
conference in Iran related to the rescue mission. Dr. Brzezinski asked
State and Justice to examine the various cases, define some rational
distinctions, and provide recommendations to the SCC on those which
require high level decisions. (C)
4 Carter underlined the phrase “for medical treatment” and wrote in the left margin:
“ok, but only for serious cases where US offers unique treatment.”
5 Carter underlined “brothers, sisters, uncles and aunts” and wrote “no” in the
left margin.
6 Carter approved this option with a checkmark, crossed out the phrase “as at
present” at the end of the sentence, and initialed “J” in the right margin.
7 Carter approved this item with a checkmark and initialed “J” in the right margin.
