908
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
355.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, September 15, 1977, 11:06 a.m.–12:50 p.m.
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting with French Prime Minister Raymond Barre
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Vice President Walter F. Mondale
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Warren Christopher, Deputy Secretary of State
Arthur A. Hartman, U.S. Ambassador to France
George Vest, Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs
Robert Hunter, NSC Staff Member (Notetaker)
Alec Toumayan, Department of State Interpreter
Raymond Barre, Prime Minister of the French Republic
Louis de Guiringaud, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Jacques Kosciusko-Morizet, Ambassador of France to the United States
Francois de Laboulaye, Under Secretary for Political Affairs
Jean-Claude Paye, Advisor to the Prime Minister on International Affairs
The President and the Prime Minister met alone in the Oval Office
from 11:06 a.m. until 11:33 a.m., and together with the others in the
Cabinet Room until 12:50 p.m., as follows.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
The President said that this is a legitimate reason. He appreciates
France’s taking part in the fuel cycle evaluation. There had been some
problems, and he hopes that we have accommodated to France’s con-
cerns. When the U.S., Canada, and Australia decide on a policy, he
wants to understand France’s needs. We never try not to let others get
the breeder reactor. We are working on one, too. We should share expe-
riences on questions like the origin of uranium ore, and how to mini-
mize the “refining” of it for explosives. It would strengthen our hand in
the proliferation field, and our decision will not affect France ad-
versely. The fuel cycle meeting will be on October 21.
The Prime Minister said that the French position was decided in
their nuclear council by Giscard last October, and in December we
knew about it; Giscard talked about it clearly. France appreciated the
discussions to prepare the evaluation program. But they have some
conditions. First, there should be useful discussions with the Soviet
1 Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office
File, Box 12, France: 1977. Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room.
