Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II Two facts dominate this policy scene: 1. Human rights policy has clearly represented one of the principal personal policy commitments of President Carter. Therefore it has been operationalized virtually across the board. As an outsider, I observed an explosive but somewhat unguided takeoff in early 1977. Cy Vance’s Athens, Georgia speech of July 1977 provided the needful midcourse correction, explaining that of course the policy could not be applied without modulation everywhere, at all times, friend and foe alike. When security requirements crowd in, human rights take second place, being invoked pietistically rather than operationally. 2. The other central fact is that bureaucratically, the human rights policy is somewhat of an orphan child, or maverick, perhaps because by contrast with the HAK approach it was new, and controversial. Applying the “human rights criterion” still tends to line up the bureaucracy on predictable sides. Its central agency—HA in State—is clearly not staffed by the most promising FSOs. On the contrary, under Patt Derian—an activist if there ever was one—the whole HA team soon acquired the opprobrium throughout the buttoned-down elements of the bureaucracy as “the Human Rights Mafia.” Operationalizing and institutionalizing this new (restored?) component of policy includes codification into a variety of laws by the Congress (you will find all the legislative references on my shelves). The Congress in a sense outdid the President by writing into law the requirement that foreign economic assistance and, to a more limited degree, foreign military assistance, could not be given to countries whose governments were guilty of a gross and consistent pattern of human rights violations. The effect is that far from consisting of optional rhetoric, each specific aid decision has to be filtered through a human rights test, with the burden legally placed on those who would award grants, loans, aid, etc. to gross and consistent violators. The exceptions in the economic case are projects that would clearly benefit basic human needs in a given country, and in some other cases (e.g. OPIC investment insurance, FMS, etc.) a certification that national security considerations override. Needless to say, recent deterioration of the security situation has made the human rights criterion secondary in several recent FMS decisions. The instrumentality for dealing with economic assistance choices is the interagency committee on human rights chaired by Warren Christopher, involving wide representation of the bureaucracy (including myself). I have usually circularized my regional NSC colleagues to get their views on controversial cases prior to going to a meeting, and they have sometimes accompanied me. (On the military side, I have not been involved. Perhaps for that reason the system tends to operate by raison d’e´tat and force majeure, rather than droit de l’homme!)
