Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 365 • It was only in the 1960’s that the rise of the multinational corporations changed the policy focus of large U.S. firms so that today up to 30% of total U.S. corporate profits can be attributed to overseas operations. • It was also only in a recent period that our allies and some of the more successful developing countries began to compete directly with American industry in our internal market whereas before there was little that American business or labor had to fear. We can also look for another reason why foreign affairs and domestic affairs are becoming linked. In the past the domestic burden of foreign policy usually increased in the event of a foreign policy failure as when diplomacy ended and war began. Thus, the domestic burden of our foreign policy increased sharply during the Korean and Vietnam wars; as the burden increased, so did political division at home. Today, these burdens seem to increase not only in the case of a foreign policy failure but in the event of a foreign policy “success.” An arms control agreement may result in sharply increased defense expenditures as we are urged to redouble our efforts in areas not covered by the new compact or as we build costly verification equipment. A successful international energy policy may require drastic domestic reforms to succeed. An economic agreement may further shift the terms of trade against American business. In all three cases what might legitimately represent a diplomatic triumph, far from easing domestic burdens, could actually increase them. As a result, today when some foreign policy issue begins to shape, it is not just a few foreigners or key Senators who express the same view. Today’s State Department official can rest assured that he will hear from others. The very first may be his mother, who wants him to cut out whatever he is doing. Then he will take a phone call from a Senator who never before had taken an interest in the subject, then a letter from an irate American Legion member. His press officer will ask guidance to answer questions from the Associated Press. His former colleagues—either from Brookings or from the American Enterprise Institute, depending on their politics—will pay a friendly visit to express their views. Then a congressional hearing on the topic will feature distinguished citizens, including former officials of the State Department, leaders of nongovernmental organizations, and academic experts. Editorials will spring up like mushrooms in the New York Times, the Washington Post, and, of course, the Atlanta Constitution. Computerized letterwriting is a new development, the side product of the political campaigns of 1972 and 1976. It can produce hundreds of thousands of identical letters from all over the country, as we have seen in the case of the Panama Canal. The State Department, in turn, is providing computerized replies. Because the pressures are so
