Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
365
• It was only in the 1960’s that the rise of the multinational corpo-
rations changed the policy focus of large U.S. firms so that today up
to 30% of total U.S. corporate profits can be attributed to overseas
operations.
• It was also only in a recent period that our allies and some of the
more successful developing countries began to compete directly with
American industry in our internal market whereas before there was
little that American business or labor had to fear.
We can also look for another reason why foreign affairs and do-
mestic affairs are becoming linked. In the past the domestic burden of
foreign policy usually increased in the event of a foreign policy failure
as when diplomacy ended and war began. Thus, the domestic burden
of our foreign policy increased sharply during the Korean and Vietnam
wars; as the burden increased, so did political division at home.
Today, these burdens seem to increase not only in the case of a for-
eign policy failure but in the event of a foreign policy “success.” An
arms control agreement may result in sharply increased defense ex-
penditures as we are urged to redouble our efforts in areas not covered
by the new compact or as we build costly verification equipment. A
successful international energy policy may require drastic domestic re-
forms to succeed. An economic agreement may further shift the terms
of trade against American business. In all three cases what might legiti-
mately represent a diplomatic triumph, far from easing domestic
burdens, could actually increase them.
As a result, today when some foreign policy issue begins to shape,
it is not just a few foreigners or key Senators who express the same
view. Today’s State Department official can rest assured that he will
hear from others. The very first may be his mother, who wants him to
cut out whatever he is doing. Then he will take a phone call from a Sen-
ator who never before had taken an interest in the subject, then a letter
from an irate American Legion member. His press officer will ask guid-
ance to answer questions from the Associated Press. His former col-
leagues—either from Brookings or from the American Enterprise Insti-
tute, depending on their politics—will pay a friendly visit to express
their views. Then a congressional hearing on the topic will feature dis-
tinguished citizens, including former officials of the State Department,
leaders of nongovernmental organizations, and academic experts. Edi-
torials will spring up like mushrooms in the New York Times, the
Washington Post, and, of course, the Atlanta Constitution.
Computerized letterwriting is a new development, the side
product of the political campaigns of 1972 and 1976. It can produce
hundreds of thousands of identical letters from all over the country, as
we have seen in the case of the Panama Canal. The State Department, in
turn, is providing computerized replies. Because the pressures are so
