Chapter 4, February–April 1990  485
example, the Soviets had suggested using a special cassette with special 
seals, one for the U.S. and one for the USSR, so that the accuracy of the 
information could be verified by both sides. In this way the U.S. would 
get all the information. This would guarantee against circumvention of 
the limit on encryption.
Other questions also needed technical elaboration, Karpov contin-
ued, such as the broadcast of information, directed beams, low-­power 
transmission to satellites, what kind of waves, the angles of transmis-
sion, etc.
The Secretary asked Ambassador Burt, who had just rejoined the 
group, to give his comments.
Burt said that he agreed the remaining issues were complicated, 
but he thought there were really only two major issues. One was the 
kind of exemptions that would be allowed for encapsulating informa-
tion. The U.S. had allowed for the right to do this on one older missile, 
the Minuteman II. The Soviets had agreed and this was welcome. The 
exemption problem was different on the Soviet side since it referred 
to test programs for new warheads. The U.S. was prepared to work 
around this by allowing a limited number of encapsulations.
The second remaining problem was more complex, Burt contin-
ued. This concerned how much information we could exchange and 
how much assistance we would give the other side in assessing the 
data. The U.S. was prepared to provide the stream of data and even the 
frequency modulation on which data had been transmitted. We also 
were prepared to give the frame of the digital stream. The Soviet side, 
however, wanted more: the algorithm with which to translate the data 
stream into engineering values. This would require further discussion 
that evening or in the morning. Nevertheless, if we could resolve these 
two issues, all others could be put to bed. Burt would add that we had 
in principle solved all the issues. The only outstanding questions were 
technical ones. In our joint statement we could say that we had agreed 
on the framework of an agreement regarding data denial.
Karpov said he could agree with what Burt had said, but wanted to 
note that the sides were using different principles of transmitting tele-
metric information. The Soviets transmitted absolute measurements of 
absolute factors. The United States, on the other hand, only transmitted 
data concerning changes in baseline information that was not known to 
anyone. Therefore to find a common denominator was not so simple. 
Additional efforts were required.
Shevardnadze said that if the basic issues had been resolved and 
only technical questions remained, the experts should work that night 
in the hopes of finding a solution. The Secretary agreed, urging the 
experts to continue that night. Shevardnadze said the experts should 
get no sleep until they resolve the issue. Burt said that he would agree
