764
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
5. (S) In sum, we did not make progress on regional issues, but we
did make limited progress on the general criteria. We continue to be-
lieve that discussions about the regional application of criteria are es-
sential if arms transfer restraint is to be meaningful, and we hope that
these discussions about specific regions can be resumed in the next
round.
6. (S) However, regardless of how US-Soviet talks develop, there is
no reason why recipient countries cannot move ahead in developing
their own consensus on conventional arms restraint. They have a clear
mandate to do so from UNSSOD, and supplier countries have a man-
date to cooperate. FYI. Government of Mexico sought, as did US, a clear
statement of support for the Latin American initiative in the CAT IV
communique. The final language was as far as the USSR was prepared
to go, and it would not have gone that far were it not for threat by GOM
to denounce both powers publicly for their failure to respond to Mex-
ican expression of interest. End FYI.
7. (C) Accordingly, US has responded positively (Ref D) to Mex-
ican diplomatic requests for endorsement of its initiative and for an in-
dication of willingness to respect restraint agreements Latin American
States may reach. As secretary pro-tem of 20-nation group,6 Mexico
hopes to obtain agreement to a meeting for March 1979 in Quito to set
up a permanent consultative mechanism on arms restraint and begin
the identification of types of restraints that might be broadly accept-
able. Venezuela has told US that the Ayacucho initiative has been
folded into the larger effort and that it fully supports the 20-nation
group. (However, it would prefer a date other than March because of
the change of government that month in Venezuela.)
8. (C) Because the restraint initiative is a Latin American effort, and
must remain so if it is to succeed, the degree to which the US can be-
come involved, even behind the scenes, is limited. However, we con-
tinue to be interested in following developments closely and would
appreciate your reports of public or private comments by host gov-
ernments on either the US-Soviet talks or the Latin American initiative.
Vance
6 The Latin America and Caribbean Conventional Arms Restraint Group.
