August 8–September 17, 1978
31
within my power to help President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin
achieve the progress for which we are all searching.
As we move into this crucial new phase of the Middle East negotia-
tions, I wanted to share with you my reasons for taking this step and
thoughts about what we hope to accomplish. I am aware of your con-
cerns but I also hope that you will keep an open mind about the contri-
bution such talks might make. I would welcome your own thoughts.
With my best wishes, Sincerely, Jimmy Carter.
End text.
Christopher
12.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, August 17, 1978
SUBJECT
Camp David
The State Department will give you a comprehensive book2 re-
garding substance, procedure, and schedule. At this point I would only
like to make the following points:
1. The three leaders will not be truly in the same boat. Sadat cannot
afford a failure and he knows it; both Sadat and Begin think you cannot
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 51, Middle East: 7–9/78. Secret; Sensitive. Outside System. Carter initialed “C”
in the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum, indicating that he saw it.
2 Vance sent the briefing book, designed to be a “first round of reading in prepara-
tion for the Camp David meetings,” to Carter under an undated covering memorandum.
(Carter Library, Vertical File, Camp David Study Papers) In a second attached undated
memorandum to Carter, Vance outlined the eight parts of the briefing book, covering ob-
jectives, meeting scenarios, model documents, the conduct of meetings and the personal-
ities involved, building public support, the international environment in which the talks
will take place, possible outcomes, and the “Nine Points” paper presented to Begin and
Sadat in February 1978. Carter added the handwritten notation: “To Begin & Sadat:
Analysis of consequences of failure. More ambitious goals. Communications w/Hussein.
Inform Soviets at all?” (Ibid.) Quandt wrote in his account of the talks that Vance,
Saunders, Atherton, and himself worked out the basis of this briefing at the Middleburg
strategy meeting. (Quandt, Camp David, pp. 212–213) Quandt submitted an August 17
memorandum to Brzezinski analyzing the briefing book and outlining his “reservations”
with it. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box
51, Middle East: 7–9/78)
