192 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III (Following some French discussions), the Prime Minister said he would begin with economics. (The President said fine.) Yesterday, he had defined with Secretary Vance (the President said “he told me”) the importance of talking about world economics. (The President said: “It would be very valuable to me, sir.”) There are two points: general economic activity in the world and the main problems; and what Giscard and he had said on commercial negotiations—“organized freedom of trade.” General economic activity will be dull in the next two or three years. If three countries—the U.S., Germany, and Japan—are unable to sustain economic activity, then others will suffer, who have no margin of maneuver. The economies of Europe will go through a difficult period, with much psychological uncertainty. This is an inhibition on both economic partners and on governments. He has talked with Schmidt and his Government on this point. They are cautiously trying to avoid a relapse into inflation; but they understand the need to stimulate economic activity both to help Germany, and to benefit others. Germany’s new program is good, but it is important that the measures be implemented rapidly. Schmidt and Apel gave indications of their policy. But they have to discuss them with the L&auml;nder and the Bundestag to see if measures can be taken at once. If Germany takes measures that will only be effective in 1978, then this will be bad for Germany and for others. It would be better for Germany to take modest steps now, than more ambitious efforts that are hedged and work too late. The Japanese program is a good one. But its economy more directly affects the U.S. than Europe, though it can indirectly help induce economic activity in Europe. For France, the situation now provides a greater possibility to intervene. For one year now, there has been an effort to stabilize the franc, improve the balance of trade, and improve the current account balance of payments—with encouraging results. If inflation remains high, it is not because of a basic inflationary tendency, but rather because of the need for adjustment in public utility rates, and in prices charged by firms. Before, there were strong wage price rises, and rises in the prices of imported raw materials. These repercussions were included in the price rises of the first six months of this year. To the end of 1977, there will be a continued deceleration in price rises. They adopted measures at the end of August, to support economic activity: in housing, in building, in public works. They hope to avoid any recession this year. The rate of growth will be slightly more than 3%. The main problem is unemployment, deriving mainly from structural factors. This includes the growing number of women in the labor force, looking for part-time jobs. It is difficult to adjust this demand to jobs which are “firm.” There is also the problem of young
