1034 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 5. Under the normal operation of our Immigration laws, Chinese criminals have been deported to Communist China before and travel of criminals to Communist China, if any elect to go there, will not consti­ tute any new departure. 6. Chinese Government has regularly resisted deportation Chinese to Taiwan. In view GRC lack cooperation with INS this matter, we had assumed they would not be interested in taking these criminals. How­ ever, GRC is at liberty to receive any of them who may elect to go there, and prisoners will be given opportunity express this preference. 7. GRC was given complete list of criminals with description of sentences and addresses prisons where confined. They will of course be given access to these prisoners. US continues recognize GRC as sole protector of rights Chinese aliens including criminals. There is no change in this Government’s China policy, express or implied, actual or prospective represented in prisoner decision. 8. GRC has regularly been kept informed all significant Geneva developments. Consultation on Geneva moves has never been prac­ ticed or promised. We cannot undertake consult with GRC on moves which we are satisfied do not impair its rights and interests. We can see no reason for such marked concern on part of GRC at action of basically minor significance to its real interests as voluntary deportation of a few dozen undesirables. We are not aware any Geneva move which has prejudiced GRC rights or claims. 9. Contrary to your assumption, Department has not repeat not given any publicity to prisoner decision. Leaks from unidentified sources have reached press but Department has carefully refrained from confirming rumors or lending them any credence directly or indi­ rectly. Chinese Embassy was placed under injunction of secrecy when it was informed in advance US decision. Public comment attributed by press to Chinese Foreign Office appears to be in violation of this injunction. 10. We have obligation leave no stone unturned in our efforts obtain release our 13 imprisoned nationals. This is only promising remaining step open to us. We feel these prisoners cannot help ­Chinese Commu­ nist cause regardless whether they elect return or stay in prison. They are burden to any country which has them. We feel we cannot lose by confronting Chinese Communists with this act which either will result in release our maltreated nationals or further expose Chinese Commu­ nist inhumanity and failure to live up to their commitments. This we are satisfied is being accomplished without any injury to position GRC as only Chinese Government recognized by US. Dulles
