160
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
SUBJECT
Chemical Warfare
The President has directed that a United States Delegation under
the direction of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency should im-
mediately initiate bilateral consultations with the United Kingdom,
France, the Federal Republic of Germany and Japan, to be followed by
negotiations with the Soviet Union on the subject of a comprehensive
treaty to ban chemical warfare.
Talks with the Soviet Union should seek to reach agreement on a
joint US–USSR initiative to be presented to the Conference of the Com-
mittee on Disarmament along the following lines:2
—Definitions of important terms would be incorporated in the
agreement.
—To the extent possible, low-risk, more easily verified actions
would be undertaken at the earliest possible stage.
—Production, stockpiling, acquisition or retention of chemical
warfare (CW) agents and munitions would be prohibited.
—Development of CW agents or munitions would be prohibited,
but development of means of protection against chemical attack would
be permitted.
—Existing stocks of CW agents and munitions would be destroyed
over a period of at least eight years according to an agreed schedule. All
CW stocks would be declared at the time a State became a Party. As an
alternative to destruction, dual-purpose agents could be diverted to
peaceful purposes, subject to appropriate controls. Precursors would
be treated in the same manner as agents.
—All facilities designed or used for production of single-purpose
chemicals would be declared and immediately closed down. However,
under appropriate controls such a facility could be used for agent/
munition destruction operations. All declared facilities would be de-
stroyed or dismantled within two years after stockpile destruction had
been completed. Establishment of new production facilities would be
prohibited.
—The disposition of declared facilities and the destruction of de-
clared stocks would require on-site verification under independent, in-
ternational auspices.
—The agreement would contain agreed procedures for the car-
rying out of an investigation by representatives of a Consultative Com-
2 An unknown hand underlined the phrases “Talks with the Soviet Union should
seek to reach agreement” and “the following lines.”
