Chapter 4, February–April 1990 527 5. Finally, Nazarkin said he had returned to Geneva with new ideas on ALCMs and SLCMs. He said he was not yet ready to present these ideas because he needed to do some preparations, but that he would do so soon. 6. My initial thoughts on the above are as follows: — On one hand, I am encouraged that the Soviets want to finish off all major issues at the April ministerial and that they are even prepared to say that they will be “flexible and forthcoming”. That said, we also need to fill in the gaps in our own negotiating position and be ready to engage on all major issues at the ministerial—­less than four weeks from now. — As Reg knows, I think we should take the Soviets at their word on heavy missiles. I have pushed very hard on further reductions or limits but apparently the Soviet military is hard over on further constraints. We should not get ourselves in a box by tabling a non-­negotiable position on heavies. Instead, we should declare victory for having reduced Soviet heavy missiles by 50% and work to get a firm Soviet commitment to take further steps in START II. — I feel strongly that START II is a political winner at home and has the added benefit that it will score you points with Shevardnadze. At the April ministerial, you should accept Shevardnadze’s proposal to issue a joint statement of intent on follow-­on negotiations at the June summit and task Nazarkin and me to negotiate a text. 7. Cheers, Rick 86. Paper Prepared in the Department of State1 Washington, undated BUILDING ON START — There is now great momentum in every area of arms control, especially START. If we continue at the current pace, we will be able to initial the START Treaty at the June Summit. 1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, Brent Scowcroft Collection, USSR Chronological Files, START Files, OA/ID 91122–003, Soviet Power Collapse in Eastern Europe—Strategic Arms Control (October 1989–April 1990). Secret. A stamped notation indicates that Scowcroft saw the paper. A stamped notation indicates that Bush saw the paper. Bush wrote at the top of the paper: “1st Week in March.” He also wrote in the right-­corner: “Patty (1) save in personal files (2) Major Dramatic proposal—I told [illegible] go ahead GB 3–15.”
