472 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement internal affairs of China, a new page in relations between China and US would emerge. 48. Wang said if US could meet two points mentioned above, question how Chinese people will deal with Chiang clique is matter of China’s internal affairs. Chinese people have consistently expressed willingness deal with Chiang by peaceful means. That is to say, China also willing settle internal issues by peaceful means. 49. Wang said in same manner his side willing settle disputes between US and China. He was sure he had made his position quite clear. 50. Wang said any sovereign state must and should adopt such position. In past US always stated its desire maintain territorial integ­ rity China. US even made pledge it would not interfere China’s internal affairs. These two statements in US history are quite just and welcomed by Chinese people. Grave test facing US is implementing now two sol­ emn pledges made in past. 51. Wang said US has stated history of China full of humilia­ tions, foreign occupation, special privileges on part of foreigners, and encroachment on territory. Foreign countries encroached on and occu­ pied territory including Taiwan and Manchuria and explained as for­ eign encroachments Chinese sovereignty contrary to UN Charter. 52. Wang said such statement on part of US was in accord with his­ tory of China. However, breaches of Chinese sovereignty and integrity of Chinese territory have now become matters of Chinese history and these could only be inflicted on a weak government. Humiliation could only be inflicted upon weak state such as old China of past. Things have changed entirely. Today great, strong China will never allow that history to repeat itself. 53. Wang said his present requirement is a minimum one. What he sought was to preserve sovereignty and territorial integrity of his coun­ try. Such was his position. He hoped I would understand his position. 54. I replied that it was getting late and that I had two other matters I wished to take up. The discussion so far had been helpful. I would like to ask one question, not in an argumentative spirit but to see whether we were getting closer together. Did the Ambassador agree with me that whatever our differences of interpretation and views in regard to Taiwan situation may be, present factual situation is such that resort by either side to force in area would endanger international peace? 55. Wang replied that he agreed so long as China’s internal affairs were not involved, so long as disputes between China and US did not involve China’s internal affairs. In same spirit his Premier had stated Chinese people and American people were friendly, Chinese people do not want to fight American people, provided both respect sovereignty and territorial integrity of other side. His side was willing to reach a
