National Security Policy 843 to this Memorandum). After Mr. Gray had referred to the sentence in the draft mobilization paragraph dealing with planning (“Planning for opposition to local aggression will include arrangements for the timely provision of personnel and combat essential materiel to insure the con­ tinued maintenance of an acceptable general war posture.”) and had indicated that the Joint Chiefs of Staff proposed adding the words “cold war and” before “opposition”, Mr. Allen said he would like to find out more about the meaning of “cold war planning”, especially as it con­ cerned the timely provision of personnel. Mr. Gray said one illustration of cold war planning was the use made of the Sixth and Seventh Fleets in the cold war. General Twining pointed out that the Lebanon opera­ tion was another example of cold war use of military force. Mr. Gray then completed the reading of his Briefing Note and made some additional comments regarding the “split” between State, Commerce, and OCDM on the one hand and Budget and Treasury on the other. He said it would be possible for the US to develop a high state of readiness for (1) survival (2) survival and rehabilitation, (3) survival, rehabilitation and recovery, (4) survival, rehabilitation, recovery and reconstruction. Readiness for category (4) would permit stockpiling of anything anyone could think of. Perhaps the niceties of language did not sufficiently emphasize the “split”, which he hoped he had not char­ acterized unfairly. Secretary Herter felt the problem was largely a matter of seman­ tics, involving the difficulty of finding the right language. Providing for recovery was a matter of degree; and the degree was a pragmatic question affected by budgetary and other considerations, including the question or who stockpiles recovery items. Secretary Herter then said his experience in State government led him to raise another question, i.e., the relation of the National Guard to mobilization. He was unable to see where the National Guard fitted into the mobilization policy except in connection with minimum civilian needs and recovery. The princi­ pal function of the National Guard as a disciplined group would be to help salvage civilian resources. He wondered how the present concept of the National Guard conformed to a national point of view under nuclear war conditions. State Governors had often suggested that the National Guard be organized in regional commands on the ground that nuclear war would not follow State lines. Of course, the Guard could be “federalized”, i.e., placed under Federal jurisdiction. The US was now spending large sums to provide the National Guard with modern war equipment which it might not need if it performed a recovery role. Secretary Herter confessed that he was thoroughly confused as to the National Guard’s function in survival and recovery. Mr. Gates said the old mobilization base plan provided for forty to sixty National Guard divisions integrated with the Army. Some ves­ tiges of this kind of thinking still remained in the military services. In
