United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 87 Some discussion regarding detailed projects in the list prepared by Mr. Rosenson ensued.3 Mr. Brand said that the Honduran project is the only one ripe for decision. Mr. Brand recalled the earlier favorable attitude, as did Mr. Dillon, of President Black of the IBRD toward coordinated IBRD-DLF loan projects in Latin America, an attitude which seems to have changed to negative recently. Mr. Dillon adduced one reason for Mr. Black’s change was probably due to his desire that good economics require that the countries themselves furnish the local currency for any projects for which IBRD furnishes the foreign exchange costs. Mr. Brand recalled that DLF had had lengthy discussions with IBRD on their joint road project in Peru. The issue here was one of permitting the Government of Peru to select the U.S. engineering firm of its choice rather than being forced to accept a European engineering firm favored by IBRD whose qualifications did not appear as strong to DLF. It was agreed that this may have been a factor affecting Mr. Black’s current attitude. Mr. Dillon suggested that the problem was a fundamental one and required an additional meeting possibly with Secretary Anderson to which all the pertinent agency heads would be invited.4 Messrs. Dillon and Brand agreed with Mr. Rubottom that a stepped-­up consideration of viable loan projects in Latin America by any and all U.S. lending agencies, relative to their resources, was essential to improve our relations in the area. Mr. Brand noted that DLF has a positive and constructive attitude toward Latin American loan applications that meet the test of DLF’s statutory requirements. Mr. Dillon suggested that we undertake to prepare the “flow of funds” chart as a part of our campaign to achieve the above objective.5 We all agreed that one problem in our loan policies toward Latin America was that we had taken essentially the commercial bankers approach to the area, waiting for applications to come in, while our good relations with these countries now require that we take some initiative in stimulating worthwhile projects for loans. 3 No “list” matching the description here was found with the source text.
