United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  87
Some discussion regarding detailed projects in the list prepared by 
Mr. Rosenson ensued.3 Mr. Brand said that the Honduran project is the 
only one ripe for decision. Mr. Brand recalled the earlier favorable atti-
tude, as did Mr. Dillon, of President Black of the IBRD toward coordi-
nated IBRD-DLF loan projects in Latin America, an attitude which seems 
to have changed to negative recently. Mr. Dillon adduced one reason for 
Mr. Black’s change was probably due to his desire that good economics 
require that the countries themselves furnish the local currency for any 
projects for which IBRD furnishes the foreign exchange costs. Mr. Brand 
recalled that DLF had had lengthy discussions with IBRD on their joint 
road project in Peru. The issue here was one of permitting the Government 
of Peru to select the U.S. engineering firm of its choice rather than being 
forced to accept a European engineering firm favored by IBRD whose 
qualifications did not appear as strong to DLF. It was agreed that this 
may have been a factor affecting Mr. Black’s current attitude.
Mr. Dillon suggested that the problem was a fundamental one and 
required an additional meeting possibly with Secretary Anderson to 
which all the pertinent agency heads would be invited.4 Messrs. Dillon 
and Brand agreed with Mr. Rubottom that a stepped-­up consideration 
of viable loan projects in Latin America by any and all U.S. lending 
agencies, relative to their resources, was essential to improve our rela-
tions in the area. Mr. Brand noted that DLF has a positive and construc-
tive attitude toward Latin American loan applications that meet the test 
of DLF’s statutory requirements.
Mr. Dillon suggested that we undertake to prepare the “flow of 
funds” chart as a part of our campaign to achieve the above objective.5
We all agreed that one problem in our loan policies toward Latin 
America was that we had taken essentially the commercial bankers 
approach to the area, waiting for applications to come in, while our 
good relations with these countries now require that we take some ini-
tiative in stimulating worthwhile projects for loans.
3 No “list” matching the description here was found with the source text.
4 On April 8, 1960, at the request of Assistant Secretary Rubottom, Rosenson pre-
pared a draft letter from Under Secretary Dillon to Secretary Anderson proposing such 
a meeting. (ARA/REA Files, Lot 62 D 303, “Latin America, General Development and 
Investment, Feb 1959–June 1960”) There is no information in the Department’s files, how-
ever, indicating that the draft letter was approved and sent out, nor is there any record of 
a subsequent meeting with Secretary Anderson matching the description here.
5 A memorandum entitled “Flow of Public Loan Capital to Latin America” war sub-
sequently prepared by Rosenson under date of March 3. It showed, as of March 31, all 
loan applications from Latin American countries pending with the Export-Import Bank, 
the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and the Development Loan 
Fund, and it also gave the total amount of credits authorized during the three year period 
1957–1959 by each of these institutions to each country. A copy of Rosenson’s memoran-
dum is attached to a memorandum from Rubottom to Dillon, dated May 5, requesting 
approval to use it as a basis for discussion at a meeting of the National Advisory Committee 
on Inter-American Affairs scheduled for May 7. (ARA/REA Files, Lot 63 D 210, “National 
Advisory Committee on Inter-American Affairs”)
