721.2315/176: Telegram
[Document 294]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
WASHINGTON, March 2, 1925—2 p.m.
17. Peruvian Government will accept Procès Verbal only on following condition:
1. That in third proposal of Secretary of State the words “immediately after
the ratification of the above treaty” be deleted.
2. In the second sentence of the declaration of the Colombian Minister that
the words “should be ratified by the Government of Peru” be changed to read
“should be ratified by both Governments.”
3. That the following be substituted for the declaration of the Peruvian
Ambassador: “Doctor Velarde then stated that he also was authorized by his
Government to express its acceptance of the friendly suggestion which the
Secretary of State had just made and that as a consequence of the assurances
just given his Government would immediately advise the Peruvian Congress
thereof, repeating at the same time its recommendation that it approve the
above mentioned boundary treaty with Colombia.”
Colombian Minister definitely accepts on behalf of his Government second and third
modifications and also the first modification on the understanding that in the note of
the Secretary of State transmitting to the representatives of Brazil, Colombia, and Peru
the Procès Verbal it be stated with reference to the third suggestion of the Secretary that
it is of course understood that the signing of the Brazilian–Colombian convention will
follow the ratification by Colombia and Peru of the above mentioned treaty. The note
would add that the Colombian Minister has repeated to the Department the assurance
given by him in the Procès Verbal that his Government is ready to sign the Brazilian–
Colombian treaty immediately after the ratification by Peru of the Peruvian-Colombian
treaty.
Gracie unable to accept without instructions from his Government for which he is
cabling. As he may be delayed in sending his cable on account of luncheon at Pan
American Union in honor of Secretary of State followed by a meeting of the Board of
Governors of the Pan American Union, please communicate above as soon as possible
to Minister for Foreign Affairs. Department hopes that he will authorize Gracie to sign
on above conditions. It may be pointed out that while Peruvian Ambassador’s statement
omits reference to Brazilian condition for withdrawal of its objections to Colombian-
