138
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
effort. In East Asia, the nature of military ties with China will need
further definition.
In addition to these regional activities, some key functional area
reviews must be accomplished:
—A successful policy of containment depends on capable conven-
tional force projection. We have a modest beginning in the RDF.
—Security Assistance policy needs significant revision, budgeting,
and perhaps changed legislation.
—Our intelligence capabilities in each region must be improved
and expanded with all the speed possible.
—Military training assistance and advisory policy needs repair.
The most difficult area in the 1980s may prove to be Europe, West-
West relations. Overcoming the lag between our own recovery from
the hopes of the early 1970s and Europe’s recovery from its present
illusion of divisible detente, will not occur without political trauma.
How to defend Europe effectively cannot be dodged as it has been for
three decades. And until that is decided, arms control within that
theater will be difficult to implement in a way that is not politically
and militarily injurious to the West. The LTDP was a modest beginning
which must be turned into a major revolution in the 1980s.
c. Offers of politically conditioned economic benefits to the East.
The Soviet Union and East Europe will continue to look to the
West as a source of reprieve from their economic plight. The West
must exploit that need with offers of economic assistance based on
rigorous and measurable political conditions.
With the new COCOM policies,5 we have begun to control more
effectively the strategic technology transfers. The next step is East-
West trade coordination. Credits and trade must be coordinated on an
alliance basis. Such a step logically follows from our COCOM policy.
Otherwise, the “alternative supplier” problem will continue to deny
us the political advantages of our greatest edge over the Soviets—
economic advantage. In the “process know-how” proposal to COCOM
we have already moved slightly toward trade coordination. That is
why Europe resists it. The diplomatic efforts now in progress to prevent
the FRG (Kloeckner) and France (Creusot-Loire) from taking our
ARMCO and ALCOA deals with the Soviet Union can be the seed
5 In telegram 50188 to multiple posts, February 24, the Department explained that
“the ‘no exceptions’ policy advocated by the U.S. for exports to the USSR would not
apply to Eastern Europe or the PRC.” Because the policy differentiated between countries
of the Soviet bloc, “there may be a greater temptation to divert exports within the Warsaw
Pact. COCOM participating governments, including the U.S., should carefully examine
the potential for diversion from Eastern Europe to the USSR.” (National Archives, RG
59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800096–1230)
