240 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement of Defense and Civilian Mobilization in place of the Director of the Office of Defense Mobilization and the Federal Civil Defense Administration, in accordance with Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1958, effective July 1, 1958. NSC 5816, as approved by the President is transmitted herewith for the information of the National Security Council, and is being referred to the members of the Subcommittee for appropriate implementation. The enclosed Directive supersedes NSC 5728. Special security precautions should be observed in the handling of the enclosure, with access thereto limited to those individuals having a strict “need to know” in the performance of their official duties. James S. Lay, Jr. Executive Secretary cc: The Secretary of the Treasury The Attorney General The Director, Bureau of the Budget The Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff The Director of Central Intelligence The Chairman, Interdepartmental Intelligence Conference The Chairman, Interdepartmental Committee on Internal Security Enclosure DIRECTIVE on A NET EVALUATION SUBCOMMITTEE 1. Pursuant to the recommendations of the National Security Council in NSC Action No. 1260–­b (November 4, 1954) and my subse­ quent approval thereof, I hereby establish the following permanent pro­ cedure (superseding NSC 5605) to provide integrated evaluations of the net capabilities of the USSR, in the event of general war, to inflict direct injury upon the continental United States and to provide a continual watch for changes which would significantly alter those net capabilities. 2. Each integrated evaluation should: a. Cover all types of attack, overt or clandestine; b. Include consideration of the several courses of action which the USSR is capable of executing; and c. Take into account the estimated future status of approved mili­ tary and non-­military U.S. defense programs. 3. Each integrated evaluation report should estimate, from the prac­ tical standpoint, the extent and effect of direct injury, including radio­ active fall-­out, upon the continental United States, resulting from the most probable types and weights of attacks which the USSR is capable
