316 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV protection unless directly targeted. Spontaneous evacuation, a phenomenon often postulated for the automobile-­rich US, could reduce immediate casualties if the net result was movement out of risk areas. Long-­term prospects for the immediate survivors in both nations would be uncertain and would depend not only on the availability of subsistence levels of food, medical supplies, etc., but also on how quickly they could adapt to what would probably be a radically unfamiliar environment and severely damaged social structure. Specifically, properly implemented civil defense measures could: (1) enhance population survival against the immediate effects of a nuclear attack (blast, radiation, fallout). Given sufficient warning time (about a week) and a successful evacuation (80% was used in the analysis) from urban industrial targets, the majority of each nation’s population would survive the immediate effects of a massive US/USSR nuclear exchange. For a mid-1980’s massive nuclear exchange, analyses of the attack-­related effectiveness of civil defense show that: a. In the US, successful population evacuation (for which the US does not now have plans) would provide for initial survival of 60–90% of the population, compared with 35–65% survival for the population in-­place and protected only from fallout. b. In the case of the USSR, survival levels would be about 80–90% with the population evacuated, for which the USSR does now plan, compared to 60–80% survival with population in-­place. The differences between estimated US and USSR population survival rates are due primarily to the differences in megatonnage assumed to be delivered by each nation. (2) enhance work force survival against the immediate effects of nuclear war. Losses among those remaining in industrial target areas during an attack would be high; however, the losses among those who had been evacuated out of target areas would be low. In one sample of Soviet industrial facilities, however, hardened shelters existed for 12 to 24% of the peacetime work force. As in the case of a general population evacuation, the US does not currently have an operational plan to protect its work force through either evacuation or hardened shelters. (3) enhance leadership survival among those elements of national/local leadership not directly targeted. Leadership in shelters identified and targeted directly would not be expected to survive; however, leadership in shelters not targeted and reasonably hardened (as in the Soviet civil defense program) would have a good chance of surviving. On the other hand, civil defense measures would not: —­prevent massive damage to each nation’s economic, political, social, and military structure, that is, damage levels of 70–90% against the identified industrial target base of each nation. Protection of industrial and most military facilities against nuclear attack is virtually impossible or prohibitively expensive. Only in the case of extremely
