Bolivia 187 symbol of MNR unity, and on accommodation with Juan Lechin, leader of the leftist wing of the party. Alvarez Plata would almost certainly seek such an accommodation, but would not go so far to the left as to jeopardize the continuation of U.S. aid. Failing such an accommodation among the key leaders, a violent intra-MNR conflict would probably ensue. 3. What is the leaning of the Carabineros and the armed forces? The Carabineros (national police) and the armed forces are probably loyal to Siles. They, in conjunction with civilian militia units, would probably support the MNR government in sufficient numbers to put down any rightist or leftist attempt to seize power. However, if Siles had left office and a violent intra-MNR conflict were to occur, the action of the Carabineros and the armed forces would be uncertain. The bulk would be likely to support the MNR moderates as they have in the past, if there were a cohesive moderate group to support. 4. What would be the likely effect on the present moderate government of a withdrawal of U.S. aid? The withdrawal of U.S. aid probably would bring Siles’ leadership of Bolivia to an abrupt end. He has become so strongly identified with the policy of co-­operation with the U.S. that he would be completely discredited and probably could not remain in office even if he tried to do so. We believe it unlikely that he would try. There would be a strong upsurge of anti-American sentiment and the MNR left wing would become dominant in the party and in the successor government. These circumstances would enable the small orthodox Communist and the Trotskyite groups to increase their influence. 5. What would be the outlook for the successor government? The tenure of the successor government would depend largely on its ability to cope with Bolivia’s economic problems. If U.S. aid had been denied, the success or government would desperately seek aid from any available source, including the Soviet Bloc, as an immediate action necessary to avert internal economic collapse and political chaos. 6. What would be the likely attitude of the successor government toward the U.S. and the possibility of fruitful U.S. cooperation with it? Denied U.S. support, a successor government would adopt an extremely unfriendly attitude toward the U.S. and would seek to influence other Latin American countries to do the same. Internally, there would be a violent anti-American campaign which would probably involve acts of violence against U.S. property and persons. 7. What would be the effect of a withdrawal of U.S. aid to Bolivia upon U.S. relations in the inter-American community? In these circumstances, there would be a widespread sympathy for Bolivia in Latin American opinion. It would be contended that Bolivia
