embrace not only territory of the Peruvian provinces of Tacna and Arica but also a
portion of the Peruvian province of Tarata. Peru insists that Article 3 of the treaty dealt
solely with the Peruvian provinces of Tacna and Arica and that no part of the province
of Tarata was included.
It is not open to dispute that at the time of the signing of the treaty there existed under
Peruvian law, and had existed for several years, a Peruvian department known as the
Department of Tacna and that this department embraced three provinces known as the
Provinces of Tacna, Arica and Tarata. It is also clear that the reference in the treaty to
the provinces of Tacna and Arica must be taken to relate to the Peruvian provinces of
Tacna and Arica. If it were not for the description of the river Sama as a boundary no
one would suggest that any territory was included which was not within the limits of
the two Peruvian provinces named.
The argument for the inclusion of other territory is that the reference to the two
provinces must be deemed to be controlled by the described river line. The difficulty
with this argument is that there is in fact no such river line as the treaty describes.
There is no river Sama that has “its source in the Cordilleras on the frontier of Bolivia.”
The river Sama as known and defined is formed by the confluence of the River
Chaspaya and the River Tala, a confluence which takes place west of the town of Tarata
(the capital of the Peruvian province of that name). From that junction the river Sama
flows to its mouth at the sea cutting across the! northern portion of the Peruvian
province of Tacna. So that there was territory of that province lying south of the river
Sama and the Peruvian province of Arica lay to the south of the province of Tacna.
There is a dispute as to which of the tributaries of the river Sama east of the junction of
the rivers Chaspaya and Tala should be regarded as the main affluent or the
continuation of the river Sama, but neither the Chaspaya nor the Tala, nor their
tributaries, conform to the description of the treaty and enable’ the Arbitrator to
establish any line of the river Sama as described “from its source in the Cordilleras on
the frontier of Bolivia to its mouth at the sea.” The Chilean Case states that the Chilean
geographer, Alejandro Bertrand, in a report to the Government of Chile in 1903,
suggested “as a solution of the problem brought up by the fact that the River Sama does
not rise in the mountains bordering upon Bolivia,” the adoption of a line that would
unite the source of the Chaspaya or of the Ticalaco (which appears to be a tributary of
the Tala) with the intersection of the two old Peruvian departments of Tacnan and Puno
at the Bolivian border. In this uncertainty, Chile insisting upon a river line suggests that
the Arbitrator appoint a Special Commissioner to investigate and report for the purpose
of establishing a boundary line in the area intervening between the head of one or the
other of the tributaries of the river Sama and the frontier of Bolivia.
After the treaty was signed, Chile established her occupation on the line of the river
Ticalaco, a river which lies about midway between the northern tributary of the Sama,
the Chaspaya, and a southern tributary, (apparently through the Tala) the Estique, but
