Chapter 4, February–April 1990 611 — Each of the sides would make annual declarations of the planned stocks of long-­range SLCMs, with the maximum number specified for each of the next five years in advance. — Third, the sides would exchange information on the types of ships and submarines capable of carrying long-­range SLCMs. This information would be confidential. Bartholomew: I want to make sure these three points are saying what is here in the bracketed text. (He held up the Moscow bracketed text of the SLCM declaration. Nazarkin gave Akhromeyev a Russian language text of the same document.) Akhromeyev: The language might be different. Bartholomew: Do you see any difference with the bracketed draft declaration? Akhromeyev: In substance there is no difference. Akhromeyev (moving on to paragraph 4 in the Soviet paper): Agreement would be reached in the negotiating record (versus a Protocol to the treaty in the Soviet paper) on the number of long-­range SLCMs and the number of long-­range SLCMs per type of ship. Bartholomew: Our difficulty with this is not a lack of understanding. Our difficulty is with the concept of agreed numerical limits on the total number and the number by ship type. This is unacceptable. Akhromeyev: So you disagree with point 4 entirely. You are not supportive of an agreed number and number per ship type. So you are against this point entirely. Akhromeyev (moving on to paragraph 5): Only nuclear-­armed long-­range SLCMs in excess of 600 km would be limited. All current long-­range SLCMs would be regarded as nuclear SLCMs. Our agreement to limit only nuclear SLCMs is contingent upon US agreement to limit long-­range SLCMs with a range in excess of 600 km. Bartholomew: I assume the figure of 600 km applies only to nuclear SLCMs. Akhromeyev: We are confronting the same type of problem as in ALCMs. Here we have in mind only nuclear missiles. We can deal with conventional missiles in Geneva. Burt: Unlike the situation for ALCMs, the US is presently deploying long-­range conventional SLCMs. Are all of these counted as nuclear under your approach? Akhromeyev: That is true, unless they are made distinguishable. Burt: That is bad news. Bartholomew: Let me say this is a bomb. This would not just get me reassigned to a small, hot country. This would get me lynched. Akhromeyev: I am aware this is not acceptable to you today. But there is no other option. This is a point of difference between us. Bartholomew: The other option is our position that only nuclear SLCMs above a certain range be declared. Akhromeyev: I understand. You think conventional SLCMs are beyond the reach of agreement and you will be free to deploy as many conventional SLCMs as you want.
