Afghanistan 441 not mount a campaign against it and Pakistan does not make it a litmus test of our relationship.” Carter rejected selling the F–16 to Pakistan. He expounded on his decision in a handwritten note on an undated memorandum from the Department of Defense with an attached itemized list of military hardware for possible transfer to Pakistan. Both the list and the memorandum were attached at Tab C to Brzezinski’s January 8 memorandum. The Department of Defense stated: “we need to keep India in mind as we make military supply decisions for Pakistan. India will be concerned in principle about the resumption of a U.S.- Pakistan supply relationship, and in this sense whatever we supply will be troublesome for India; none of the items proposed for FMS funding, however, would in themselves pose a significant threat to India.” In the left margin, Carter wrote: “I agree,” and at the bottom of the page he wrote: “we should approve quickly: weapons which can be used to defend both Afghan & Paks as soon as possible—in general, however, not to attack India. J.” On the evening of January 8, Carter briefed Members of Congress on Iran and on the actions his administration had taken and planned to take after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, including his decision to strengthen Pakistan. See Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pp. 38–42. Agha Shahi met with Carter on January 12. For the memorandum of conversation, see Document 163. 152. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, January 9, 1980 SUBJECT A Long-Term Strategy for Coping with the Consequences of the Soviet Action in Afghanistan You have stressed—rightly so—that the Soviet action has created consequences which cannot be dealt with in only a few weeks or with a series of short-term measures. The Soviet action poses a test involving 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 1/9–31/80. Secret. Carter initialed the upper right corner of the memorandum and wrote: “cc Zbig.”
