Chapter 4, February–April 1990  601
while all had appeared clear before, now this new problem had emerged. 
The former problems existed before and still existed. The sides had not 
yet reached agreement on the minimum range for qualifying as a long-­
range SLCM: in the Soviet view, long-­range SLCMs had a range greater 
than 600 kms; the U.S. side believed the range should be less, around 
300 kms.
Akhromeyev noted that the second difference concerned counting 
just nuclear-­armed SLCMs or non-­nuclear-­armed SLCMs as well. The 
Soviets could accommodate the position of both sides: if the U.S. would 
agree to 600 kms, then the Soviets could consider counting nuclear-­
armed only.
Akhromeyev said the question of verification and inspections 
remained outstanding, that is, verification of submarines and surface 
ships with SLCMs and SLCM production facilities. Another differ-
ence was the maximum level of the number of SLCMs for both sides. 
Mr. Bartholomew held the view that this was not discussed in Moscow 
and therefore was resolved. But the Soviet position was that SLCMs 
must be constrained by an agreed limit; they were proposing establish-
ing that limit at a level of 600 cruise missiles. The U.S. side, on the other 
hand, believed there should be no limit at all; each side would notify 
the other of the number of SLCMs in the year of the declaration and for 
the next five years, but the two sides’ levels would not be related. There 
would be declarations but no agreed limit.
Under Secretary Bartholomew began by stating that the U.S. side 
admired Marshal Akhromeyev’s service to his country. Therefore he 
was pained to deliver a different assessment of the working group dis-
cussion. The sides had gone through the Soviet papers from the pre-
vious night as well as the Moscow elements of common ground on 
ALCMs, joint declaration on SLCMs and joint statement issued by the 
two Ministers; the U.S. view was that a great deal of good work had 
been done in Moscow that was critical to the work of the leaders. That 
work was done and mutually recorded in the common elements, SLCM 
declaration and joint statement. At the end of the Moscow talks, the 
sides understood that there was one ALCM issue (range) and two SLCM 
issues (range and nuclear vs. nuclear plus non-­nuclear) that were unre-
solved. The record clearly reflected this. Therefore all other differences 
identified in the Soviet papers and to which Marshal Akhromeyev had 
referred were not, in the U.S. view, differences but reopening of ques-
tions that had already been resolved in Moscow. This was a return to 
ideas that had been discussed and to which the U.S. could not agree. He 
could give many examples.
Bartholomew continued that Marshal Akhromeyev had called 
the discussion useful. But he had to express his personal concern that 
the sides were seven weeks from the summit and the Soviet papers 
had moved us backward from the goal rather than toward it. Marshal
