398 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI position. The Dobrynin memorandum (on page 3 line 10)4 should also state “. . . a necessary number of secure automatic seismic observatories . . . ,” not “unmanned, unobtrusive seismic observatories.” The words “unmanned” and “unobtrusive” could complicate the negotiations. The proposed strategy should further state that on-site inspections, whether “mandatory” or “cooperatively arranged” remain an integral part of the U.S. position. (S) While I fully appreciate the sense of urgency to take advantage of perceived opportunities in timing, I want to emphasize that an acceptable long-term resolution has the higher priority. On-going technical study and development of verification measures are essential but still incomplete; e.g., what nuclear experiments will be allowed, how should PNE be defined, what is the value of seismic monitoring, and what is the value of sub-kiloton testing? I also have reservations about presenting this package now from the tactical point of view. For example, by tabling this paper, we will be in a position of indicating some “give”—no matter how limited—on the crucial PNE issue. We would be compromising the on-site issue without assurance of Soviet acceptance of the requisite number of seismic stations. An alternative tactic might be to seek resolution with the Soviets of the verification, duration and participation issues, positioning the talks so that only Soviet insistence on PNE blocked agreement. At that point, we might have a better prospect of inducing Soviet acceptance by proposing the face-saving PNE deferral proposal. In any case, this is the kind of question which ought to be discussed at an SCC or an NSC meeting prior to presentation to the Soviets and not handled strictly on paper, since there are both substantive technical and tactical issues that should be addressed. (S) Finally, I presume that action will be taken to consult with our British colleagues on this matter. (U) My views on the above are shared by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.5 Harold Brown 4 See footnote 2, Document 166. 5 In a September 21 memorandum to George Brown outlining their views on the CTB negotiations. Slocombe and Joint Staff Director Vice Admiral Patrick Hannifin discussed the proposed strategy for the CTB negotiations. A typed notation on the memorandum indicates that Smith initialed the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff’s approval on September 21. (Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–80–0017, Box 63, A–400.112 TEST BAN (Aug–Dec) 1977)
