398
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
position. The Dobrynin memorandum (on page 3 line 10)4 should also
state “. . . a necessary number of secure automatic seismic observato-
ries . . . ,” not “unmanned, unobtrusive seismic observatories.” The
words “unmanned” and “unobtrusive” could complicate the negotia-
tions. The proposed strategy should further state that on-site inspec-
tions, whether “mandatory” or “cooperatively arranged” remain an in-
tegral part of the U.S. position.
(S) While I fully appreciate the sense of urgency to take advantage
of perceived opportunities in timing, I want to emphasize that an ac-
ceptable long-term resolution has the higher priority. On-going tech-
nical study and development of verification measures are essential but
still incomplete; e.g., what nuclear experiments will be allowed, how
should PNE be defined, what is the value of seismic monitoring, and
what is the value of sub-kiloton testing? I also have reservations about
presenting this package now from the tactical point of view. For ex-
ample, by tabling this paper, we will be in a position of indicating some
“give”—no matter how limited—on the crucial PNE issue. We would
be compromising the on-site issue without assurance of Soviet accept-
ance of the requisite number of seismic stations. An alternative tactic
might be to seek resolution with the Soviets of the verification, duration
and participation issues, positioning the talks so that only Soviet insist-
ence on PNE blocked agreement. At that point, we might have a better
prospect of inducing Soviet acceptance by proposing the face-saving
PNE deferral proposal. In any case, this is the kind of question which
ought to be discussed at an SCC or an NSC meeting prior to presenta-
tion to the Soviets and not handled strictly on paper, since there are
both substantive technical and tactical issues that should be addressed.
(S) Finally, I presume that action will be taken to consult with our
British colleagues on this matter.
(U) My views on the above are shared by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.5
Harold Brown
4 See footnote 2, Document 166.
5 In a September 21 memorandum to George Brown outlining their views on the
CTB negotiations. Slocombe and Joint Staff Director Vice Admiral Patrick Hannifin dis-
cussed the proposed strategy for the CTB negotiations. A typed notation on the memo-
randum indicates that Smith initialed the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff’s approval
on September 21. (Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–80–0017,
Box 63, A–400.112 TEST BAN (Aug–Dec) 1977)
