112
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
lobbied on the Hill (with a particularly crucial effort by Andy Young)
and was successfully achieved well ahead of schedule.
2. UN Speech—This was an NSC initiative. The human rights lan-
guage including the specific proposals was entirely drafted here by
Tuchman and later approved by State. It is worth noting that in State’s
original draft of this speech there were no human rights initiatives, and
very little attention paid to the issue at all.4
3. International Treaties—The proposal to sign and seek ratification
of the four international treaties was suggested by me in a memo-
randum to you on January 24th,5 and soon thereafter urged by Andy
Young in his first meeting with the President after the Inaugural.6 The
President delegated responsibility on this to Lipshutz who has held
several State/Justice/NSC meetings to decide on a course of action.
Several weeks ago, State and Justice lawyers reached agreement on lan-
guage for reservations, but there is disagreement between Lipshutz
and the agencies on whether to use one general reservation (“subject to
the laws and Constitution of the United States”) or whether to take the
more usual diplomatic course of specific reservations.7 Mondale is ap-
parently now involved in discussions with Congress on which ap-
proach would be preferable politically, and a final decision is still
pending. However, the substantive work is done, and these treaties
could go forward to the Hill within a few days of a final decision.
4 Reference is to Carter’s March 17 address to the United Nations General As-
sembly; see Document 26 and footnote 2 thereto. Documentation concerning Department
of State and NSC efforts toward preparing the President’s address is in the National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Director, Records of Anthony
Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 2, TL 3/1–3/15/77; Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 28, Human Rights: 2–4/77; and Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/Security Huntington, Box 37,
Human Rights: 2–3/77.
5 See Document 4.
6 Young, Vance, and Brzezinski met with the President on January 29 in the White
House Oval Office from 10 a.m. to 12:15 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials,
President’s Daily Diary) In an undated memorandum prepared prior to the meeting,
Brzezinski summarized several agenda items suggested by Vance, including the signing
of the human rights covenants, and provided talking points for Carter. (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, Box 16, State Department
(State): 1–3/77)
7 In a March 28 memorandum to the President, Lipshutz indicated that he had re-
ceived final drafts of “alternative reservations” to the four treaties and that the Depart-
ment of State had prepared a summary of “pros and cons” related to the use of general
reservations. Carter inserted a handwritten comment at the top of the memorandum:
“Bob—A) My suggestion is that we have general reservation ‘subject to U.S. Constitu-
tion’ & add specific reservations that conflict [unclear] US Law. B) Let V.P. handle this
(with you)—J.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—
Mathews Subject File, Box 11, Human Rights: Treaties: 3/77–10/78) Additional docu-
mentation regarding the drafting of reservations designed to protect the legal position of
the United States is ibid.
