Yugoslavia 853 the antiship missile defense system. Ljubicic said they were interested in rockets fired from submarines (probably reference to ASROC).4 Brown mentioned again that production will stop on the version of the Sparrow missile which has been offered. Ljubicic said they would like to have an Air Force team visit Yugoslavia to discuss air-to-ground missiles. He said his longest list of items is in the field of electronics but that could be discussed by General Popovic and his counterpart. Brown proposed that they adjourn, but Ljubicic said he wanted to explain their position on credits. He said they would not ask for “state credits”; if credit were necessary, commercial credit would be obtained for individual items purchased from individual firms. If credit were not available, he said, they would pay cash. Brown recalled that in the discussions in Belgrade credits had been prohibited but that now the policy had been changed so modest credits for Yugoslavia could be sought from Congress for the next fiscal year. He said that if commercial credits were preferred, however, the US would not press a government loan on them. Ljubicic said this question had been decided in Belgrade, but that, if bigger arrangements were entered into, they would reconsider. Brown said they would talk more about the loan question at lunch, and the meeting ended. (The question was not raised at lunch, but Major General Bowman raised the issue several days later. Ambassador Belovski took the lead in responding and said it was not worth the effort this year; they would wait until they really needed some money.)5 4 Anti-submarine rocket (ASROC) is an all-weather, all sea conditions, anti-submarine rocket. 5 The discussions were continued in Belgrade on December 11–12 by Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for European and NATO Affairs James Siena and Assistant Federal Secretary of National Defense for the Military-Economic Sector Colonel General Dusan Vujatvic. The two agreed on a memorandum of understanding on the formation of the Joint Committee for Military-Economic and Scientific-Technical Cooperation in the Field of Military Technique and discussed several weapons systems the Yugoslav military expressed interest in. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Larrabee Subject File, Box 68, Yugoslavia: Military: 11/77–12/78) See Document 261.
