436  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Recommendation No. 3
(15 c (7)
As previously stated, economic relations between Costa Rica and 
the Soviet bloc are not as yet very significant. Nevertheless, the threat 
of economic penetration by the communist is always present and can-
not be ignored. It is public knowledge that the threat elsewhere in 
Latin America seems likely to become serious soon. I have suggested 
to the Secretary that there be a re-­examination of my memorandum to 
him of January 12, 1958 (see Tab D)7 in which I proposed, in substance, 
that we call Russia’s “bluff” by inviting her to compete on a 50-50 
basis straight across the board (aid, technical assistance and trade), at 
the same time stating we will not stay in the game at all in any country 
on a 90-10% basis.
A couple of months ago I talked personally with the Secretary about 
my memorandum of January 12, 1958 and he instructed me to discuss 
it further with Assistant Secretary Mann, who in turn had called a con-
ference of himself, myself, and a representative of Mr. Terrill’s8 office 
(presumably now Ambassador Bohlen’s9 office). I reiterated at the time 
that my memorandum was principally devised to be provocative of 
thought and I requested a counter-­memorandum which I have never 
received.
Recommendation No. 4
(18 e) Visa Policy
The Intelligence Division of the Department, [text not declassified] 
should send special task forces to the field to weed out improper allega-
tions of communism or other subversive activities currently cluttering 
up Embassy files. The Embassies themselves (at least the smaller ones) 
are not staffed nor do they have the facilities to carry out this work. 
Under the policy of not keeping files for more than five years much of 
the basic materials that led to these old allegations are no longer in the 
Embassy and all we have is a note on some file card.
One of the most embarrassing situations in my experience as an 
Ambassador arose because of this problem. The wife of the first freely 
elected President of Honduras in all its history, Señora de Villeda 
Morales, wanted to make a trip to New Orleans to buy her inauguration 
“trousseau” and sought visas for several of her lady friends to aid her 
in this project. As I recall, at least one of these ladies showed up with a 
commie mark on her file card, which is quite natural since Villeda was 
7 Not printed
8 Robert P. Terrill, Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State.
9 Charles E. Bohlen, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State.
