Yugoslavia 941 strongly reaffirmed U.S. support for Yugoslavia and stated that we will do what we must to provide that support.9 The Ambassador also expressed appreciation for a public statement by Deputy Assistant Secretary Barry on April 22 pointing out that the U.S. would view with grave concern any Soviet or Warsaw pact efforts to undermine Yugoslav territorial integrity, unity and independence.10 The Soviets attacked Barry’s statement as an effort to cast doubt on Soviet policies. Yugoslav relations with the countries of Western Europe have also improved during the past few years. In the present situation we have urged the Western European governments to demonstrate their support for Yugoslavia at this time by appropriate policy statements, by greater attention to anti-Yugoslav emigre activity, by economic measures including successful conclusion of the Yugoslav-EC trade agreement, and by meeting Yugoslav requests for arms sales. Yugoslavia’s increasing distrust of Soviet motives over the last year reflected Tito’s personal disenchantment with Moscow. His successors may well tread a more cautious line, attempting initially to take a more “balanced” position. Such a shift would be designed to bolster Yugoslavia’s credentials among the nonaligned and to reflect Yugoslav concerns about growing East-West tensions. However, we suspect that a more “evenhanded” approach would be largely tactical. The Yugoslav people and leaders see a real threat in the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and Soviet support for the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea.11 The flagrant nature of Moscow’s intervention in Afghanistan may have eased the pressures on Yugoslavia within the Nonaligned Movement, however. The 1979 Havana Nonaligned Summit turned out to be a stand off between the radicals led by Cubans and the moderates 9 On May 4, in a statement on the death of Tito, Carter noted that “for more than three decades, under administrations of both parties, it has been the policy of the United States to support the independence, territorial integrity, and unity of Yugoslavia.” Noting the international situation, Carter stated: “America will continue its longstanding policy of support for Yugoslavia and do what it must to provide that support.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, p. 827) 10 Published in Current Policy, No. 169, U.S. Department of State, May 1980. Barry’s statement in front of the Cleveland Council on World Affairs received no media attention in the United States, but was immediately attacked by the Soviet press. In telegram 6702 from Moscow, April 25, the Embassy reported that the Soviet press described Barry’s statements as “‘slandering’ Soviet policy” and “barely stopping short of threatening the USSR.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800205–0262) 11 In the briefing material prepared for Mondale’s trip to Belgrade, the Department noted that the “Yugoslav leaders perceive Soviet foreign policies—e.g., support of the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea, opposition to an improvement in Yugoslav-Chinese relations, manipulation of the Yugoslav-Bulgarian dispute over Macedonia, and attempts to gain greater influence and control over the international communist and nonaligned movements—as part of a ‘grand design’ threatening Yugoslavia’s vital interests.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 87, Yugoslavia: Briefing Book for Tito Funeral, 5/80)
