Yugoslavia strongly reaffirmed U.S. support for Yugoslavia and stated that we will do what we must to provide that support.9 The Ambassador also expressed appreciation for a public statement by Deputy Assistant Secretary Barry on April 22 pointing out that the U.S. would view with grave concern any Soviet or Warsaw pact efforts to undermine Yugoslav territorial integrity, unity and independence.10 The Soviets attacked Barry’s statement as an effort to cast doubt on Soviet policies. Yugoslav relations with the countries of Western Europe have also improved during the past few years. In the present situation we have urged the Western European governments to demonstrate their support for Yugoslavia at this time by appropriate policy statements, by greater attention to anti-Yugoslav emigre activity, by economic measures including successful conclusion of the Yugoslav-EC trade agreement, and by meeting Yugoslav requests for arms sales. Yugoslavia’s increasing distrust of Soviet motives over the last year reflected Tito’s personal disenchantment with Moscow. His successors may well tread a more cautious line, attempting initially to take a more “balanced” position. Such a shift would be designed to bolster Yugoslavia’s credentials among the nonaligned and to reflect Yugoslav concerns about growing East-West tensions. However, we suspect that a more “evenhanded” approach would be largely tactical. The Yugoslav people and leaders see a real threat in the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and Soviet support for the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea.11 The flagrant nature of Moscow’s intervention in Afghanistan may have eased the pressures on Yugoslavia within the Nonaligned Movement, however. The 1979 Havana Nonaligned Summit turned out to be a stand off between the radicals led by Cubans and the moderates 9 On May 4, in a statement on the death of Tito, Carter noted that “for more than three decades, under administrations of both parties, it has been the policy of the United States to support the independence, territorial integrity, and unity of Yugoslavia.” Noting the international situation, Carter stated: “America will continue its longstanding policy of support for Yugoslavia and do what it must to provide that support.” (Public Papers:
