National Security Policy  679
The United States is, of course, building the foundation for such 
a retaliatory force through its missile programs. It seems to us, in fact, 
on technical grounds, that a force of the right kind of missiles, ade­
quately dispersed and protected by sheltering or mobility, can always 
be relied on as a prime deterrent: it is relatively insensitive to attack and 
to defensive action, and is therefore able to react deliberately and—­if in 
sufficient force—­decisively.
In the meantime, major reliance must remain upon aircraft. Here 
we feel that there are some further simple steps that the United States 
can take to increase the certainty of its retaliation.
First, we have already mentioned the possibility of sheltering air­
craft to increase the Soviets’ force requirements. Sheltering also increases 
the survivability of a useful fraction of the force, and decreases depend­
ence upon haste.
Second, we can rather easily do more toward getting, or toward bet­
ter insuring, warning. It may be possible to hasten the Ballistic Missile 
Early Warning System; it appears possible, and indeed attractive, also 
to supplement this radar system with an airborne infra-­red system 
capable of detecting missile launchings. We refer here to a simple sys­
tem that might be implemented soon—­not to more remote satellite-­
borne system. The United States can also simply, and therefore soon, 
provide SAC bases and other key centers with automatic bomb alarms 
tied together by communications to warn all bases immediately and 
certainly when any one base is attacked. This could be a very simple 
system indeed. It appears that it could be available by the end of fiscal 
1960; there is no funded program for such a system at the present time.
The Panel also recognizes the value of more certain strategic warn­
ing and would encourage any steps in this direction.
Third, we can increase the ability of SAC to take off rapidly by the 
simple step of providing more runways.
Such further measures as these just mentioned pay off well. In 
talking earlier of hardening, for example, we noted that each hardened 
aiming point, when added to our target system, costs the Soviet from 10 
to 20 or more missiles to negate. This rate of exchange would apply, for 
example, to every new missile that we could add to the force in a hard­
ened configuration.
We can also estimate the effect of better warning in the same 
terms used to develop the present chart. For example, and to set 
the scale, in 1963 the difference between having a fully functioning 
BMEWS system—­as postulated for the chart—­and no such system, is 
about 450 aircraft. A similar difference prevails on the lower curve as 
early as 1961. Presence of an infra-­red system alternative and supple­
mentary to BMEWS is therefore insurance for a precious possession. 
It also insures against under-­shooting BMEWS on low angle trajecto­
ries. Furthermore, since an infra-­red system is alerted by launchings,
