224
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
tional period as described is so vague, it could result in an unacceptable
end result in five years.
Three: Apart from some insubstantial changes in the Israeli posi-
tion, the Camp David framework does not assure Israeli withdrawal to
its pre-1967 borders, self-determination for the Palestinians, a resolu-
tion of the refugee problem or the future role of Jordan. It is, therefore,
not possible to conclude from Camp David that these questions will be
answered affirmatively at the end of five years of negotiations. This is
precisely the situation that we have faced for the past eleven years with
respect to resolution 242.
Four: The two documents are also extremely different. The Israeli/
Egyptian document is extremely explicit as to terms and end result in
contrast to the vague nature of the other document, particularly as con-
cerns the end result.
Five: Jordan is asked to participate in West Bank security arrange-
ments aimed against Palestinian subversion, yet without knowing if
there will in fact really be an end of the Israel occupation (that the sub-
version is presumably aimed at terminating).
Six: President Carter seems to be departing from positions earlier
in his Administration on the Palestinian question.
Seven: If Jordan is expected to participate, the basis for it must be
clearer and more balanced. We are not tempted to participate in the im-
plementation of the Begin Plan.7 If the Begin Plan will be implemented
anyway, with U.S. assent, why then involve Jordan? It would appear
this Plan could be unilaterally implemented.
Pardon us for our frankness. I feel bad personally after your long
ordeal at Camp David to discuss things in this manner. However, it is
my duty to ensure that there are no misunderstandings in our position
regarding problems of such magnitude.
We studied the results of Camp David but because of their gravity
we had no choice but to make our statement8 of yesterday in which we
said that Camp David does not constitute a binding legal document for
us until a lot is cleared up and that we were not involved in bringing
this document about. To tell the truth, we feel less let down by the
United States than by our sister Arab state (Egypt), since there is no
linkage between the two documents of Camp David. But this is some-
thing between us and Egypt and not for us to discuss at this point. We
have received many requests from you to keep quiet on Camp David.
However, we have a public opinion including many persons who have
suffered the most regarding the Palestinian problem. We have been
7 See footnote 2, Document 5.
8 See Document 63.
