3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 318 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI sist they will not go beyond their “good will” unilateral statement— though they accepted our proposal for an oral response stating that we are signing the SALT agreement in part in reliance on the Soviets’ Backfire statement, and recognized that it would be given to Congress. However, in the text of the statement as they read it to us, they said they were giving us the production rate assurance only “as a matter of information.” They insist that phrase was in their September statement, but it is not in our memcons. As to the rate itself, Gromyko refused to offer a number, but proposed that we state the rate in our oral response and they would not contradict it. 6. On the whole, I am convinced they want an agreement, that we can solve the numbers/duration issue and that we cannot settle the Backfire question here. We may know their reaction to the conclusion of the new ICBM ban in the treaty tomorrow. 7. My next private meeting with Gromyko is at 11 a.m. Moscow time Friday5 (3 a.m. Washington time). 8. Action requested: A. I recommend that you authorize me to accept the 2250/1200 package,6 if it includes a Soviet agreement to the duration/timing position I presented this morning, that is reductions beginning January 1, 1980 and proceeding at a steady pace to completion not later than Dec 31, 1980, on which date the protocol would expire. B. Dismantling and reduction of excess systems: Gromyko has indicated a Soviet willingness to consider an arrangement whereby systems to be dismantled or destroyed might be rendered inoperable before the end of the protocol period if we could accept a longer period for complete dismantling or destruction. Should we indicate an interest in extending the period for complete dismantling or destruction beyond Dec 31, 1980, in the context of such earlier “deactivation?” This is clearly a political decision, particularly if we were to get responsible, verifiable assurances regarding early deactivation of systems to be destroyed at the outset of the period. I recommend I be given authority to exercise my judgment in light of the then existing circumstances. Vance 5 April 21. 6 In Secto 4132 from Moscow, April 21, the Embassy noted that Vance had received a message from Brzezinski, which contained Carter’s response. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840153–1717)
