falling under the general heading of extra-territoriality can be carried into
effect even in present conditions without great delay. There is, however, one
step of more immediate importance which in the opinion of His Majesty’s
Government the Powers should agree to take at once. His Majesty’s
Government believe that an endeavour should be made to undo the evil
results which have flowed from the failure of the Tariff Conference to
implement the promises as to tariff increases made by the Powers to China
nearly five years ago, and they propose, therefore, that the Powers should
agree to the immediate unconditional grant of the Washington surtaxes.
By the China Customs Treaty signed at Washington on the 6th February,
1922,96d the Powers promised to grant China certain tariff increases
(commonly known as the Washington surtaxes) “for such purposes and
subject to such conditions” as the special conference might determine. That
special conference is the Tariff Conference which, after a delay of nearly
four years, met in Peking on the 26th October, 1925, and has now to all
intents and purposes definitely failed. The promised surtaxes have not been
granted. The foreign delegations were not satisfied with the assurances
which the Chinese delegation offered at the session of the 18th March as to
the purposes to which the Chinese Government would themselves devote
the proceeds of the surtaxes. They were prepared to grant them only upon
conditions which ensured that the proceeds would be placed under foreign
control and applied—in great part—to the liquidation of the unsecured debt.
From the very outset His Majesty’s Government were opposed to the
question of the unsecured debt being dealt with by the Tariff Conference at
all, and they frankly expressed this view in a confidential memorandum
communicated to the Consortium Powers early in 1923.96e They foresaw
that it might defeat the intentions of the Washington Conference, which
were to assist the economic and political development of China and to relax
—not to tighten—foreign control. They held that, the object of the
concessions proposed at the Washington Conference being to benefit China,
the principal purposes to which the customs surtax should be devoted ought
to be productive objects, such as railway construction, and social or
economic reforms which would be a permanent benefit to China as a whole.
The most promising of these reforms was in their opinion the abolition of li-
kin, which moreover, was expressly contemplated in the treaty itself.
