1957  1363
have to be careful not to appear to relax our demands that the Chinese 
Communists release forthwith all the prisoners without regard to their 
status or any other distinction.
In the above connection, William Worthy has been stirring up a 
good deal of trouble among the American relatives of the prisoners. 
He tried to lead Mrs. Fecteau on into saying that the Department 
had for two years failed to permit her to send parcels to her son. 
Fortunately, Mrs. Fecteau issued a refutation of this allegation through 
her Congressman, Mr. Lane, to whom CA also supplied a statement 
summarizing our efforts to get parcels to Fecteau and all the other pris­
oners and making the point that, almost as soon as we learned of the 
fact that Downey and Fecteau were alive and in prison in Communist 
China, we commenced efforts to make it possible for their families to 
send them parcels. Worthy has also been in touch with Mrs. Redmond 
trying to convince her that the Department has not done everything in 
its power to get her son’s release, and advising her that she might speed 
up Redmond’s release if she made a trip to Peiping.
A Yonkers citizens committee for the release of Redmond has also 
been very active lately, demanding an interview with the Secretary, 
and protesting the relaxation of CHINCOM controls as a sign the 
Department is “aiding Red China while our boys are rotting in prison.” 
The committee claims to have been responsible for sending Mao 
­Tse-­tung over 300,000 “polite” letters on behalf of Redmond. It also 
appears to be under the misapprehension that the Department made 
some sort of “deal” with Red China whereby Father Rigney was put 
at the head of the list to be released. The committee apparently attri­
butes the success of this “deal” to the efforts of Rigney’s Congressman, 
Mr.  MacCormack, and it appears they may use this allegation in attack­
ing Congressman Gwinn, in whose district Yonkers is. Naturally, this 
adds to the complications of the matter.
4. Case of Daniel Kelly: We have had some correspondence lately 
with an American who is interested in assisting Daniel Kelly, the son of 
an American father and a Chinese mother, all now living in Peiping, to 
come to the States to complete his pre-­medical training. It would appear 
that the boy has a valid claim to American citizenship, but the Chinese 
Communists probably consider him also Chinese. We have recom­
mended that Daniel Kelly be advised to apply for an exit permit, and 
if it is refused, to notify the Office of the UK Chargé. We did not want 
to make an issue of this case at Geneva, as we would naturally prefer 
to have it settled without having to cite the Agreed Announcement. It 
would be out of line for us to insist upon the application of the Agreed 
Announcement to a dual national, unless he were trying to leave in 
order to accompany his parents. This is apparently not the case in this 
instance.
