792
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
3. In delivering letter, please confirm that we would anticipate spe-
cific exchange on sensitive nuclear issues with France prior to more
general consultations later this month, although latter would not ex-
clude further informal discussion of sensitive issues, if desired. You
should also seek GOF confirmation that it does not plan to transfer any
reprocessing technology or equipment to Pakistan pending further
consultations with US, in conformity with understanding previously
reached between former Secretary Kissinger and de Guiringaud at their
December 10 meeting in Brussels.6
Vance
6 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. E–15, Part 2, Documents on Western Europe,
1973–1976, Document 342.
322.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, February 16, 1977
SUBJECT
Funding for the Clinch River Reactor
I understand that you have spoken with Jim Schlesinger and are
considering approving the ERDA request for Clinch River funding. I
feel that you should know that such a course could have extremely serious ef-
fects on the success of your non-proliferation efforts in the critical next six
months.
We are asking other nations to make profound changes in their
own energy plans because of our concern with the proliferation risks of
the global trend toward a plutonium economy. The only way in which
we can demonstrate our willingness to share in the sacrifices we are
asking of others is by clearly slowing down our breeder program and
that we no longer look upon it as the centerpiece of our energy strategy.
This is entirely consistent with your campaign statements to “minimize
our efforts in the breeder field.”
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues,
Oplinger/Bloomfield File, Box 42, Proliferation: Clinch River Breeder Reactor, 2/77–
9/79. Confidential. Sent for information. At the top of the memorandum, an unknown
hand wrote “NOTE: Delivered to the Pres. Via Rich Hutcheson [illegible.]”
