Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  373
The negotiators in Geneva have been developing a detailed “joint 
working paper” on mobile ICBMs, separate from the Treaty text. This 
procedure has permitted us to negotiate detailed provisions on limiting 
and verifying mobile ICBMs while preserving the U.S. ban on mobiles 
in the formal Treaty text. This distinction has eroded over time, espe-
cially as the level of agreed detail in the joint mobile paper has grown. 
Today, the joint mobile paper contains the two sides’ detailed proposals 
in legal language, but it remains separate from the Treaty text.
State, ACDA and DOE believe that Baker’s announcement means 
that we should remove our formal ban on mobiles and agree to incor-
porate the joint mobile paper into the Treaty text. They believe that we 
have no significant leverage on mobile verification issues since the two 
sides’ proposals differ largely on details. Moreover, they argue, a failure 
to follow-­up in Geneva on the Baker announcement and Ministerial 
Joint Statement would be seen by the Soviets as a cynical attempt to 
take public credit for making no change in the U.S. position. Finally, 
they argue that the mechanics of incorporating some 25 pages of mobile 
provisions into the Treaty would sharpen the remaining issues and 
facilitate their resolution.
OSD, Joint Staff and Ambassador Rowny favor retaining the sep-
arate joint mobile working paper until Congress funds Peacekeeper 
Rail-Garrison and Small ICBM. They argue that this course accurately 
interprets Baker’s statement and that a formal move now would leave 
us in a weakened position vis-­a-­vis the Soviets if Congress fails to sup-
port ICBM modernization.
NSC staff believe that no substantive issues are at stake. Rather, the 
question of how to proceed turns largely on judgments about the politi-
cal and bureaucratic consequences of alternative symbolic moves. First, 
we need to choose between underscoring in Geneva our decision to lift 
our proposed ban on mobile ICBMs, and underscoring in Washington 
the fact that lifting the ban is contingent on Congressional funding of 
mobile ICBMs. Second, and with an eye on likely winners and losers 
on more substantive START issues down the road, we need to decide 
which side to take in this bureaucratic fight.
In making these decisions, it is useful to bear in mind that (a) 
we are likely to have a defense bill enacted—­and therefore a clear 
decision on mobile ICBM funding—­within the next few weeks, (b) 
the current consensus is that we are in reasonably good shape on this 
issue on the Hill, and (c) whatever we do in Geneva on this issue 
is unlikely to be noticed by, much less influence, what the Congress 
does on mobile ICBM funding. In brief, it is very unlikely that we will 
encounter any Congressional action that would cause us to reverse 
our decision to drop our mobile ban, but within a few weeks we are 
likely know for certain.
