Dominican Republic 525 and Trujillo is not likely to make the concessions which would mollify them. Although he has permitted several members of his family to leave the country, the Generalissimo himself will probably remain to the bitter end. How this end will come is uncertain. Assassination is an increasing possibility—perhaps a probability, considering the desperate temper of the opposition. Alternatively, economic and political conditions might deteriorate to an extent where the military would intervene and attempt to dismiss Trujillo, merely to preserve their own interests. In any case members of the Generalissimo’s entourage will not be able to retain power. The transition will probably be chaotic and bloody, a situation ripe for exploitation by pro-Castro and other radical elements. Such tendencies are well-­represented among the exiles, although anti-­Castro factions do exist. However, any external forces, including Cuban, must rely on a protracted period of disturbance to make their influence felt. The immediate successor regime would probably be a military junta with civilian participation, moderate and not anti-U.S., especially if we provided sympathetic assistance at an early date. There are civilian elements however, which might prove somewhat antagonistic: U.S. prestige, previously high among the moderates, has been declining steadily and these moderates have been losing influence to the pro-Castro extremists. The United States is being criticized for not taking a strong stand against Trujillo—­specifically, for not applying the import-­export restrictions which they are sure would soon topple him. The bitterness of this group is due largely to disappointment with the widely-­heralded OAS actions of last August, and there is some question as to the depth and permanence of these anti-U.S. sentiments. However, the tide is now running against the U.S. and the longer the current impasse continues, the more unfavorable to U.S. interests the outcome is likely to be when the Dominican pressure-­cooker finally explodes.
