1956 1095 676. Telegram 22 from Geneva1 Geneva, July 10, 1956, 5 p.m. 22. From Johnson. 1. I opened 53rd today with following prepared statement: A. You and I have disagreed about many things during course our discussion on renunciation use force. However, there is no question but that we do agree both your country and mine are dissatisfied with and concerned about certain aspects of existing situation in Taiwan area. Although we approach matter from greatly differing premises I believe we are agreed it would be in our mutual self-­interest peacefully resolve our disputes. B. Yet you have rejected, at past meetings, steps I have proposed to this end. If you accept peaceful resolution our difference as being something equally desirable for both of us, I cannot understand why you reject steps necessary realize this principle. C. I have proposed as first step two of us declare unequivocally on behalf our governments we are not rpt not going to go to war over any our disputes. Surely you agree this step essential to truly peaceful negotiations. What is alternative? To declare we are going to war over our disputes? Or that we may do so, if our desires are not met within specific period of time? Could any negotiations be peaceful if held in shadow such pronouncement? D. I have proposed that two of us make it clear declaration cannot be distorted into abandonment by either side its inherent right pursue its policies by peaceful means. Is it not rpt not to our mutual advantage have it perfectly clear that declaration is not designed prevent either our countries from defending itself if attacked? E. I have also proposed declaration be made expressly applicable to Taiwan area as well as elsewhere. Again, I find it hard undersand how this could be regarded as “one sided” provision. Is it not rpt not desire your country as it is of mine, make possible peaceful resolution our differences? If your government does share desire my government in this regard, it is difficult for me understand how it persists in its attempt to haggle and bargain over Taiwan area reference? Since Tai­ wan area reference clearly to our mutual advantage, how can your gov­ ernment continue establish preconditions for its inclusion? 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/7–1056. Confidential; Limit Distribution.
