666 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Baker: I want to settle these issues, and I am going to give you a package on ALCMs and SLCMs that represent the maximum effort on our part to close these issues out. I would appreciate hearing your reaction now, but I understand that you may well need to go home to think about it before you give me a formal answer. But I will ask you to come back no later than the beginning of next week, given the shortage of time. If you say you’ve got a major step, I believe you. Baker: Well I hope you’ll say that. What I’m about to say is enough to make a deal because I need to know where we are before I go to Moscow. Here are the elements of common ground that are in our package. Let me tell you what’s in our package, and what’s left out of the package that Karpov gave to us. The fact is there are only two things that we did not include in our package that Karpov presented in his. First, is that we do not want to count tactical aircraft carrying conventional ALCMs in START. As you know Akhromeyev raised this. This is one of the two things we simply cannot go along with. START is about nuclear weapons, not about conventional weapons and if you insisted on this, this would be a treaty blocker. Indeed, if it were the only issue that was outstanding, we simply couldn’t agree to it even then. Second, the only other thing that was in the Karpov package that is not in our package is that we cannot go along with a limit on the number of ALCM-­carrying heavy bombers. We think this is a request that is really walking back from the agreement we made in Moscow and that it will not add to stability. Having said that, let me now go through this new package. I’m going to hand over a piece of paper that outlines it all, but let me simply go through it quickly and make it very clear that it includes most of the new Soviet proposals that Karpov had brought and it reflects an effort on our part to be as forthcoming as possible. — Attribute eight ALCMs and a maximum of 12 for future Soviet ALCM heavy bombers. — Adding B–2 to the list of existing US bombers in the counting rule. — 107 converted heavy bombers, versus our 115. — Only heavy bombers of types in service for at least 10 years can be converted to conventional bombers. — A minimum separation distance between bases for converted bombers and nuclear weapons storage areas. — Exchange of information and exhibition of non-­nuclear ALCMs as well as nuclear ALCMS. The most important of all of these to us, and I hope to you as well, is that while the package talks of 800 kilometers, if you could tell me that you accept all the rest of the package as it is and you can tell me
