800
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
5. Should the IMF Compensatory Financing Facility (CFF) be further lib-
eralized? Drawings from the CFF played a significant role in meeting
the financing needs of the LDCs in 1976. The chief advantage of ex-
panding compensatory financing to offset downward fluctuations in
LDC export is that it operates through income mechanisms rather than
market intervention.
Recommendation: That we would sympathetically consider, with-
out a prior commitment, liberalization of the IMF’s CFF if quota limits
become a binding constraint and IMF resources have been expanded.
LDC Position: The CFF should be liberalized by: (a) calculating
shortfalls in real terms, (b) relaxing or abolishing quota limits, (c) re-
quiring repayments only from export earnings above norm, just as
drawings are now based on “shortfalls” in export earnings, (d) al-
lowing LDCs to draw without “basing claims entirely on balance of
payments criteria,” (e) compensating for increased import volumes due
to climatic or other factors beyond a country’s own control, and (f) pro-
viding drawings in the form of grants in some cases.
Industrial Countries Position: This issue has not been actively dis-
cussed since the 1975 liberalization. The Germans are reported to be
considering recommending a liberalization of the CFF in the Interim
Committee.
CIEC Action: Let it be known that the U.S. would sympathetically
consider, without prior commitment, increased compensatory fi-
nancing once the two conditions outlined in the recommendation are
met.
Options Considered and Rejected: Liberalize the CFF at this time.
6. Should there be an expanded STABEX15 Facility outside the IMF? We
could consider globalization of an European STABEX-type scheme and
expand its coverage to more commodities.
Recommendation: That we not pursue a globalized expanded
STABEX on the grounds that it would: (1) require additional Congres-
sional appropriations; (2) lead to recurring LDCs’ pressure for replen-
ishment; (3) work outside the IMF framework—thus avoiding balance
of payments need, IMF quota limits and mandatory repayment
schedules.
LDC Position: The LDCs want compensation on highly conces-
sional terms based on shortfalls in all commodity export earnings.
They have expressed interest in CIEC in a Swedish proposal for a
15 An EC facility which lends money to countries when commodity earnings are
below normal. It contains a highly concessional element for the low income countries.
[Footnote in the original.]
