236 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Senator Salvador Allende, presidential candidate of the extreme-­ left, is closely allied to the communists and follows much of their line. He has indicated that, if elected, he would “reject the prohibition which prevents us from placing our products in any country and accepting the best condition of the market”. In a four candidate race, Allende is now running strong second to the right-­wing candidate, Jorge Alessandri. It is far from inconceivable that Allende might win the election. Our Embassy reports that Allende’s compaign derives advantage from any exacerbation of issues involving U.S. relations. He obviously benefited from the violent anti-U.S. reaction in Chile to the Department of Interior’s press release on the copper excise tax.2 From the viewpoint of U.S. interests, it would be better if any of the candidates other than Allende won the Chilean elections. Were Allende to win we could be faced with a pro-­Soviet, anti-U.S. administration in one of the important countries of the hemisphere. An insight into Allende’s orientation is contained in his recent speech (Text attached—Tab A).3 At the very least, we would have to deal with an Administration opposed to much of what we stand for in the fields of political and economic policy. The position of the $750 million worth of U.S. investment in Chile would be endangered. Allende has indicated he plans to introduce a bill to change the copper law in ways which have the American companies greatly concerned. Moreover, if Allende carried out his announced intention of dropping strategic controls on trade with the Soviets, we would be faced with the necessity of a Battle Act determination with all that would imply for our relations with the entire hemisphere. It is speculative, of course, whether anything the U.S. might do at this time could in any way affect the outcome of the Chilean elections. I believe, however, one action we could take, which would dramatically deprive Allende of one of his strongest talking points and would wipe out an issue that has long beclouded our relations with Chile, would be an announcement by the U.S. that it no longer objected to trade in copper in all forms with the bloc. I understand that the downgrading of international strategic controls on copper is already being urged by several countries in the COCOM meetings now going on and that there is a good possibility that eventually 2 The Embassy reported in telegram 714 from Santiago, April 22 (825.2542/4–2258), and in despatch 1117, May 13, 1958 (825.2542/5–1358), that, following Seaton’s press release, Allende announced that he would introduce a project to modify Chile’s new copper law by, inter alia, re-­establishing a Government monopoly over copper sales. In despatch 1207, June 6, the Embassy reported that at a large rally in Santiago, May 29, Allende spoke vigorously in support of Chile’s right to sell its products to any country in the world depending upon where it could receive the best market terms, and criticized Chile’s domination by the United States on such matters. (725.00(W)/6–658) 3 Not printed.
