863.51 Relief Credits/96
[Document 762]
The Secretary of State to the Honorable Willis C. Hawley49a
WASHINGTON, April 11, 1928.
MY DEAR MR. HAWLEY: In connection with consideration by the Ways and Means
Committee of H. J. Resolution 247 concerning the Austrian debt, I desire to
call attention to certain aspects of the situation which are of special concern
from the stand point of our international relations.
The relief indebtedness of Austria was contracted for humanitarian reasons
under authority of the Act of Congress approved March 30, 1920,50 which
authorized the furnishing of flour on credit “to relieve populations in the
countries of Europe or countries contiguous thereto suffering for the want
of food”. Austria’s relief debt to the United States, in the principal amount
of $24,055,708.92, is only about one-fifth of her total relief debt, the other
four-fifths being owed to European Governments, namely, Denmark,
France, Great Britain, Italy, The Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and
Switzerland.
Inasmuch as Austria’s relief indebtedness aggregating about $120,000,000
plus interest thereon, will mature in 1943, and since the relief bonds enjoy a
prior lien on Austria’s assets and revenues, Austria can not obtain the funds
necessary for continuation of the program of economic recuperation except
by agreement of the nine creditor governments. All of these Governments
but the United States have agreed to defer their liens, not only in the belief
that the procurement of new capital by Austria is necessary to permit
Austria to continue her difficult but successful efforts for economic
progress, but also with the thought that well-considered measures for
strengthening Austria will facilitate the repayment of the relief debt.
Austria, for her part, has offered to commence the payment of the relief
indebtedness on the basis of a plan which has already been found
acceptable to most of the creditor governments and which conforms to
Austria’s capacity to pay. The proposed legislation provides that the terms
