Chemical and Biological Weapons 271 Alternative (4). This requires extensive investment, both in detoxification equipment not now at RMA, and in nerve agent loading equipment not now at Tooele. It would take almost as long to detoxify and rebuild the old bombs as it would to build new binary bombs to replace them. In summary, let me emphasize that DoD is sensitive to the difficult military, environmental and political issues involved in retention of Weteye at RMA. Having spent considerable time and effort again reviewing the subject, I still believe that the most responsible position is to retain Weteye at RMA until the binary facility is in operation or conditions are more favorable for movement. There is no decision we can take without drawing significant opposition from some source. Changing our decision will please some, anger others, and make us susceptible to a charge of vacillation. Our best course of action is to stick with the decision we have made, which is most defensible from an objective viewpoint (because it minimizes the risk) and is no worse than other alternatives from a political viewpoint. Harold Brown 125. Editorial Note Per the instructions contained in telegram 109665 to London and other posts, April 26, 1980 (See Document 122), the Chemical Weapons Briefing Team briefed their North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies, as well as the Swiss and the Norwegians, in May 1980 about the alleged use of chemical weapons in Afghanistan and Indochina. The team subsequently informed the Department of State that the Europeans believed that the United States had not provided sufficient proof that the Soviet Union and/or it allies had used chemical weapons against civilians. Any investigation, the Europeans argued, should be undertaken either by the United Nations or by a group of Non-Aligned nations whose impartiality could be guaranteed. For more on the Europeans’ misgivings, see telegram 9401 from Bonn, May 19, and telegram 2368 from Stockholm, May 23; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800246–0547 and D800253–0469 respectively.
