1382  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
who were there on a lawful mission under the authority of the U.N. It 
was his authorities who had supported and fomented rebellion in the 
territory of countries friendly to the U.S. I would not take time further 
to review record but that record clear one of undisguised hostility of his 
country toward my country.
8. I continued it was with hope bringing about fundamental change 
in that situation and thus opening of way to peaceful settlement in 
those disputes that I had made my proposal for peaceful settlement of 
disputes between us. It not possible to ignore the fact that one of basic 
obstacles to progress our talks here and peaceful discussion and settle­
ment of our problems continued to be unwillingness of his authorities 
to agree to this simple proposition. It was a source of deep disappoint­
ment and concern that they continued to insist on their intention to 
use force if necessary to achieve their policy objectives. This was basic 
cause of tension in the whole Far East which imposed a heavy burden 
on the people of the area. Neither those people nor the United States 
and its allies could ignore this threat nor fail to take such steps as were 
within their power to meet the possibility of its implementation. It was 
absurd to say that the steps taken by the U.S. and other like-­minded 
countries to meet this threat were the cause of tension. The cause of ten­
sion came not from those who took reasonable and sensible precautions 
to defend themselves against the publicly announced threat of attack 
but rather from those who refused to renounce such threats. It was 
equally absurd to say that if those subject to such threats would only 
not take any precautions and supinely leave themselves defenseless 
against such threats there would be no tension. Of course, there would 
be no tension if all who were subject to threats in this world would 
meekly surrender to those who attempt to arrogate unto themselves 
the authority to tell peoples and countries how their lives should be 
ordered. However, it hard to believe that those who take such point of 
view understand the meaning of negotiation and settlement of differ­
ences by peaceful means between self-­respecting sovereign countries.
9. I continued therefore essential first step remained removal of 
this threat, and tension it caused, by a reciprocal renunciation of force. 
This step was of such transcendental importance to the peaceful settle­
ment of our differences that I considered that it deserved discussion as 
long as necessary to reach agreement rather than ignoring it or pretend­
ing that the problem did not exist. Neither can the problem be evaded 
by submitting numbers of drafts which reflected no serious attempt 
squarely to face the issue and then shift the discussion to other.purely 
corollary problems. Such a course could not contribute to progress in 
our talks here.
10. I continued, as Wang knew, I had just returned from trip to 
U.S. I want him to know that my conversations there not only with
