1620 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement We see further evidence in the effort to improve the yield-­to-­weight ratio of atomic weapons, and in the developing program for using space and space vehicles for military purposes. The possibilities for military technology in modifying the geophysical environment of the earth are illustrated in the possibilities (remote) now envisaged for weather modi­ fication and by the results of Argus and other high-­altitude experiments. As military technology moves toward more systems operating on a global scale, and as it begins to make use of extraterrestrial space and effects, and as the time-­scale becomes more condensed, we face the requirement for weapons systems, offensive and defensive, of increasing performance and complexity. Because of rapid technological change, we see the new systems overlapping with quickly obsolescing older ones and we see the consequent possibilities of systems being piled upon systems. As complexity increases, the chances for error or aberrations on the part of humans and machines grow greater, and the consequences of such errors and aberrations (e.g., accidental war) become enormous. The shortened time-­scale also reduces the opportunity for careful judg­ ment by increasing the rewards for spontaneous response. The overriding technological fact, however, is the continued build-­up of improved high-­performance nuclear weapons on both sides to make possible catastrophic effects if they are used in massive attacks. Another technical factor involving uncertainties is the problem of fallout. The biological effects of radiation involve uncertainties, partic­ ularly in the genetic area, and we may possibly face a growing body of sober scientific judgment that the fallout hazard is greater than we now believe. The profound over-­all effect of these trends points to the great urgency and importance of our diligently and creatively seeking meth­ ods of arms limitation—limitation which will not weaken our position relative to the Soviets. Some Technical Aspects of Arms Limitation If progress is to be made in any kind of arms limitation (such as reducing the hazard of surprise attack or limiting the production of fis­ sionable material or any other form of limitation), the agreements for such limitation will have to be accompanied by some form of monitor­ ing to assure both sides that agreements are being carried out. We have so far held steadfastly to the principle that arms limitations agreements must be monitored. If we are to achieve such agreements and preserve this principle, then we will certainly be faced with the design of moni­ toring and inspection systems that will have to fulfill technical, military and political requirements.
