Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 675 I will do my utmost as President to keep America strong and to keep our Nation secure, but this cannot be done without sustained effort and without some sacrifice, which our Nation can certainly afford. The best investment in defense is in weapons that will never have to be used and in soldiers who will never have to die. But the peace we enjoy is the fruit of our strength and our will to use this strength if we need to. As a great nation devoted to peace, we must and we will continue to build that American strength.6 Thank you very much. 6 On the last page of the outline that Brzezinski sent the President in October (see footnote 1 above), Carter added: “a) Record of peace b) Peace depends on recognition of our military strength and national will c) Security of U.S. paramount responsibility d) Best investment in defense is weapons never used and soldiers who never die—because we are strong.” 132. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, December 29, 1979 SUBJECT Our Response to Soviet Intervention in Afghanistan (U) One of our basic problems with the Soviets, as has been the case with all our recent predecessors in office, is maintaining our credibility in Moscow. We have frequently protested Soviet actions (bases in Vietnam, Cubans abroad, etc.). Since we have not always followed these verbal protests up with tangible responses, the Soviets may be getting into the habit of disregarding our concern. (C) Warren Christopher will be meeting with our major Allies in London on Monday.2 They will be looking to us for leadership, for specific evidence that we are unwilling to let the Soviets get away with this invasion with impunity. With this in mind, you may wish to instruct 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Historical Material, Geographic File, Box 17, Southwest Asia/Persian Gulf Afghanistan: (12/26/79–1/4/80). Secret; Sensitive; Outside System. Sent for action. Brzezinski added the date to the memorandum by hand. The Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan on December 25–27. 2 December 31.
