1955  333
251.	 Telegram 797 from Geneva1
Geneva, September 28, 1955, 11 p.m.
797. From Johnson.
1. Re paragraph 4 my telegram 793. Following is draft of type of pre­
sentation I feel should be made on subject missing military personnel.
2. I desire to discuss with you today the question of what I have 
termed missing US military personnel. With respect to those missing 
from the Korean War there have been many discussions of the subject 
in the MAC. I have no desire or intent to repeat or duplicate those dis­
cussions with which I assume you are fully familiar but only to discuss 
with you those aspects which clearly come within the category of a 
practical question between the two of us.
3. I simply want to point out the fact the responsible leaders of the 
forces on your side entered into an armistice agreement which clearly 
provided that full and complete accounting be provided on all pris­
oners of war and deceased combatants of which they had knowledge. 
When the prisoner of war exchange was completed there remained 
many hundreds of US personnel of the United Nations Command who 
it was definitely known or there was solid reason to believe were at one 
time prisoners of your side but who were not returned or otherwise 
accounted for. The military authorities of my country have by tremen­
dous effort gradually accumulated information with regard to many 
of these individuals so that the number unaccounted for has been 
gradually reduced. In some few cases this information was obtained 
from your side or determined upon the basis of bodies returned by 
your side. However, there remain about 450 persons on whom it has 
not been possible to obtain any firm information whatever concerning 
their fate or present whereabouts. There is no way that the military 
authorities of my country can definitely inform the families of these 
men whether they are dead or alive or what their fate may have been.
4. In many of these cases their names were at one time listed as 
prisoners of war in publications in your country, the names of others 
have in various connections been broadcast over your radio, some were 
actually identified as having spoken over the radio, some had at one 
time written letters from prison camps and others were known and 
seen in prison camps by prisoners who were subsequently returned.
5. However, even more important from the standpoint of my dis­
cussion with you, it is quite possible that some of these persons were 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–2855. Secret; Limited 
Distribution.
