3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1979
713
in that area. Mal’tsev concluded with the hope that, when I had studied
the text carefully, I would find all the answers to the questions we had
raised. He then said abruptly this was all he could say on the matter
and that he was under instructions only to convey the basic statement
he had handed me.
6. I told Mal’tsev I would convey the statement to my government
and to the President, but made clear that the Soviet statement did not
answer the questions we had raised, specifically regarding the size and
suddenness of Soviet troop movements and military equipment to Af-
ghanistan. Also, it did not explain the substantive change in Soviet in-
tentions toward Afghanistan which all these military actions implied. I
also made it clear that if I could have had an opportunity to discuss
with him the serious issues these actions raise, I would have asked who
are these outsiders interfering in Afghanistan’s affairs? Mal’tsev re-
peated that he believed the Soviet statement was responsive and fully
covered our questions. I repeated that I considered the Soviet response
inadequate.
Watson
247.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
Moscow, December 28, 1979, 1900Z
28119. Subject: Ramifications of the Soviet Move into Afghanistan.
1. (S-entire text)
2. Summary: The Soviet action in Afghanistan appears to mark a
major watershed in Soviet policy: for the first time since World War II
the Soviet Union has intervened militarily outside the Warsaw Pact
area to install a regime of its own choice. The move against Amin ap-
parently resulted from Soviet perceptions that:
—Amin’s removal was necessary to broaden domestic political
support for the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (DRA), but could
not be accomplished without the introduction of Soviet combat troops;
and
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the
Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109,
Box 17, Afghan-US Steps. Secret; Niact Immediate; Nodis.
