1366
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
gust/September, the nine political directors, working with experts, are
now proceeding to develop common positions on issues related to a
settlement. These efforts will evidently be revealed by Foreign Min-
isters shortly before the nine Heads of Government/State decide at the
December 1–2 European Council meeting6 on a possible EC–9 Middle
East initiative.
3. European diplomat who calls upon us frequently told NEA re-
cently the chances now had to be rated good that the EC Summit would
result in a European declaration setting forth principles for a Middle
East peace going well beyond the Venice Declaration. Source said the
declaration would spell out four basic principles for a peace settlement:
Israeli security; self-determination for the Palestinians; Israeli with-
drawal; and international guarantees. He believed there would also be
a “procedural aspect” to the European declaration in the form of an in-
vitation to the parties to come to a European-organized peace confer-
ence for negotiations based on these principles. Source said that there
was now solid support from Italy, France, Belgium and Ireland for pro-
ceeding in this manner. Holland would be opposed; the Germans
would drag their feet because they didn’t want to displease the US; and
the British were divided among themselves, with Carrington favoring a
strong European initiative but Thatcher holding him back.
4. We have repeatedly made clear to the Nine our views on
achieving peace in the Middle East through the Camp David process
and the need for their support of this process, as well as our concerns
about a separate EC–9 initiative. The Secretary discussed these matters
with several EC Foreign Ministers at the UNGA, and Ambassador Li-
nowitz presented our views to the EC–9 Ambassadors in Washington
on September 15.7 Most recently, Deputy Secretary Christopher, at a
meeting with several major European Ambassadors on October 9,
stressed very strongly that the EC–9, as they consider their Middle East
plans for their December 1–2 Summit, should not complicate our Camp
David efforts, in particular the President’s upcoming meeting with
Sadat and Begin which may be held at about that same time. FYI. Our
specific concern is that the EC–9 Summit may produce a European plan
for a Middle East settlement that could draw Palestinians and other
Arabs away from the Camp David process and undercut agreements or
6 The text of the Middle East sections of the European Council’s declaration, re-
leased at the end of its December 1–2 meeting, was conveyed to Washington in telegram
1739 from Luxembourg, December 2. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D800575-0321)
7 On September 15, Linowitz provided a briefing to EC Ambassadors on his most
recent visit to Israel and Egypt and the developments he saw as likely to follow. The
briefing is summarized in telegram 248377 to multiple posts, September 18. (National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800444-0759)
