Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I of economic development is to help the world’s poor lift themselves out of misery.”4 He called upon that Assembly to join together the concepts of economic development and social justice: “We must also devote our common energies to economic development and the cause of social justice. Benefits of the world’s economy must be more fairly shared, but the responsibilities must be shared as well.” To share responsibility is to make more participation possible. The more participation, the wiser will be the government. Prime Minister Manley made a stirring affirmation of his own faith in democracy when he spoke to us in October. He was, you will recall, urging us to united efforts in the struggle against apartheid. He said: “We believe that any government which has the courage to mobilize its people and tell the truth will receive the overwhelming support of its citizens.” I also believe that. We must let our people hear the truth, the whole truth. And we must not be afraid to mobilize our citizens to participate more fully in the political and economic processes. Expanding participation should not be limited, however, to government initiative. There is an important role for nongovernmental organizations. For the last year the Government of India has been reminding us of the importance of autonomous—and I stress that word— autonomous national human rights institutions. We need not fear change if we build into it more equity and more participation. Indeed, fear of social change is the thing we need to fear the most. If we are afraid of it and try to preserve that which is already eroding beneath our feet, we will fail, because the dynamic of history is to widen the circle of those who participate in society. Whether the struggle is for medical care for those who do not have it, bread for those who are hungry, freedom from prison for those imprisoned for conscience’s sake, freedom of the press to print dissenting opinions, a job for those who are unemployed, the right to self-determination of majorities oppressed by minorities, the right of workers to organize, the right to speak one’s own language in one’s own school—all of these are demands for more participation and more dignity. If we invest just half as much energy and imagination in building a world community of the people as we have wasted in resisting the aspirations of the people, we will overcome. I believe that we are at the end of the period of cold wars, in the middle of the era of detente, and just beginning to find ways to build the structures of cooperation. Cooperation will demand a different sub- 4 The President’s remarks are printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book I, pp.
