1086  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
4. SecDef stated that everybody agreed with this but Admiral 
Burke and that he felt very much concerned about it and had asked to 
see the President.
5. I then used my handwritten paper as a basis for discussion with 
the President and followed it very closely.
6. The final result, after two hours of discussion, was that the 
President stated he did not want to make a final decision now and 
perhaps later have to revise it just before he left office. He did want to 
make the final decision before he left office if it were in any way pos­
sible. He in general agreed with Mr. Gates’ ideas, but he agreed with 
my concept that we should try and see what it is before a final decision 
was made. CINCSAC, with a joint staff and with the help of the Unified 
Commanders, is to draw up a national target list and a plan in the same 
manner, and using the same data to present to the Joint Chiefs of Staff by 
the middle of November or first of December. The Joint Chiefs of Staff, 
the Services, and everybody else will be given an opportunity to com­
pletely analyze, check and correct this plan. After that, if there is dis­
agreement, it may be brought before the President for a decision again.
7. Coming back in the car the people from the Department of 
Defense wondered how this could be done, and I stated by simply 
ordering the people in there and asking them to do it.
COMMENTS:
I fear there will be attempts to make the final decision now to do 
it, and with the idea of making corrections in the procedures in three or 
four months but not change the method.
8. There were a great many comments most of which I probably 
have forgotten. The following comments are not in the order that they 
were made.
9. First, the President said that this was apparently an emotional 
issue because he could see both from General Twinings remarks and 
mine that there was emotion involved in this, and he hoped that objec­
tive men could arrive at some satisfactory answer.
10. The President believed that this was not a problem which really 
should have come to him because he felt it was merely a procedural 
problem. He said Burke agrees that there should be a single integrated 
operational plan and he agreed that the people have to follow it. He just 
disagrees on who makes it out. He wants it made by the Joint Staff and 
the SecDef wants it made by CINCSAC.
11. I said, no, that’s not quite it. I think that if SAC makes these 
two there will be completely different target lists and completely differ­
ent operational plans than if the Joint Staff makes it. That’s one point. 
The other point is that we, the Joint Chiefs, can exercise control and
