268 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement the copper it wanted, chiefly from the U.K. and West Germany. The switching of Communist China’s purchases to Chile would in no way affect world copper demand. The Chilean Government might ask itself whether there was any commercial reason for Communist China suddenly to offer to switch the bulk of its copper purchases to Chile. We were inclined to believe that this offer was largely or entirely motivated by political considerations. Mr. Rubottom pointed out that the sale of even 30,000 tons would represent in value considerably more than the total of Latin American exports to Communist China in 1958. Since we had made special efforts to assist the new Government of Chile, as one closely identified with our own principles, we would undoubtedly be called on—­if this sale went through—­to explain why the Chilean Government had apparently become so deeply involved with the Communist Chinese. Not only would this complicate relations between Chile and the U.S. but it would also weaken the opposition of other Latin American countries to the growth of Chinese Communist influence in this hemisphere. When he had been in Santiago in May, Mr. Rubottom had expressed to the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Minister of Justice and others, our concern over the obvious campaign the Chinese Communists were waging to develop relations of all kinds with Chile. Ambassador Muller said his Government was aware of the Communist bloc interest in Chile and that it was trying to deal realistically with this situation. He gave a brief resumé of his earlier conversation with Acting Assistant Secretary Snow concerning the Chilean Government’s proposal to send a trade commission to the bloc countries (see memcon August 26).2 He also mentioned that Communist China had arranged to buy 10,000 tons of nitrate from Chile and that the Chilean Government had not received any indication that we might object to this. If 30,000 tons of copper seemed to us an excessive amount for Chile to sell to Communist China, what would we consider a reasonable amount? Mr. Rubottom replied that it was not our purpose to try to tell the Chileans just how much copper they might reasonably sell to Communist China. We hoped they would realize that this was a sensitive political situation in which any sale might create a problem for them and for us. The Chilean Government should not be under any illusion that our China policy might be changing. As the Ambassador knew, the U.S. distinguished between Communist China and the European Soviet bloc. Even though the CPR and the USSR shared the same ultimate aim of Communist domination of the world, the CPR has been 2 Not found in Department of State files.
