146
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
El-Reedy referred to Atherton’s statement that sovereignty will be
decided in the peace treaties. He asked whether this means that we
cannot now know what a peace treaty will look like. Atherton com-
mented that the peace treaty will be based on the principles of UN Res-
olution 242, including withdrawal. El-Reedy commented that eleven
years after the passage of 242, why is it not possible to say that the Is-
raeli claim to sovereignty is not acceptable. This should by now be
clear. El-Araby asked whether that if the assumption is made that the
Palestinians will wish to join Jordan at the end of five years, will Israel
be able to veto this and continue proposed arrangements for five years
to fifty years. Egypt is not against a limited choice. El-Baz said that
when Egypt accepted the right to a limitation on self-determination, it
never thought that the sovereignty issue would be involved. Egypt
cannot accept anything that keeps the sovereignty question open for
five years.
Quandt observed that there is no such thing as absolute sover-
eignty. Two elements must be worked out: (a) borders, which may re-
quire adjustments, and (b) security, which may dilute some aspects of
sovereignty. El-Baz said that Egypt considers that sovereignty rests
with the Palestinians. Ghorbal noted that we are coping with two dia-
metrically opposed viewpoints—that of the Israelis and that of the
Egyptians. The United States is trying to put off the issue. It cannot be
put that way. Egypt agreed to a limited exercise of sovereignty in order
to satisfy the security needs of Israel. Egypt said it would direct the Pal-
estinian entity into a link with Jordan. But Egypt cannot accept dissolu-
tion of the Palestinians into a greater Israeli state. The Israelis want the
West Bank and Gaza to satisfy their expansionist ambitions. We cannot
paper over the differences. He likened the issue to the UAR/Syrian
union,10 which was “an act of sovereignty.” Egypt cannot accept a link
of the West Bank and Israel. It cannot accept what it has put forward for
Israel’s security, namely Israeli expansion in five years. The Secretary
asked how the question of sovereignty should be resolved. Ghorbal re-
sponded that the United States had worked on Sadat to make peace
and to normalize relations. Now there must be a political decision also
to press the Israelis.
El-Baz observed that the Israeli claim to sovereignty does not mean
anything. Sovereignty rests with the Palestinians in the West Bank and
Gaza, he reiterated. The type of entity and self-determination can be re-
solved. But on sovereignty in the West Bank there can be no legitimate
problem. If Israel agrees to withdraw, it is a renunciation of the Israeli
10 Reference is to the 1958–1961 political union of Egypt and Syria, known as the
United Arab Republic.
