696 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I historic event when Israel makes another major withdrawal from the Sinai and when Ambassadors will be exchanged between Israel and Egypt.6 We’ve also expanded our own sphere of friendship. Our deep commitment to human rights and to meeting human needs has improved our relationship with much of the Third World. Our decision to normalize relations with the People’s Republic of China will help to preserve peace and stability in Asia and in the Western Pacific. We’ve increased and strengthened our naval presence in the Indian Ocean, and we are now making arrangements for key naval and air facilities to be used by our forces in the region of northeast Africa and the Persian Gulf.7 We’ve reconfirmed our 1959 agreement to help Pakistan preserve its independence and its integrity.8 The United States will take action consistent with our own laws to assist Pakistan in resisting any outside aggression. And I’m asking the Congress specifically to reaffirm this agreement. I’m also working, along with the leaders of other nations, to provide additional military and economic aid for Pakistan. That request will come to you in just a few days.9 In the weeks ahead, we will further strengthen political and military ties with other nations in the region. We believe that there are no irreconcilable differences between us and any Islamic nation. We respect the faith of Islam, and we are ready to cooperate with all Moslem countries. Finally, we are prepared to work with other countries in the region to share a cooperative security framework that respects differing 6 On January 25, Israel returned a portion of the Sinai Peninsula to Egypt; the two nations were scheduled to exchange ambassadors within in a month. (Christopher S. Wren, “Israel Returns Biggest Part of Sinai So Far to Egypt, Finishing First Stage,” The New York Times, January 26, 1980, p. A–1) 7 Documentation on these arrangements is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East Regional; Arabian Peninsula. 8 On March 5, 1959, at Ankara, the United States signed defense agreements with Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan. For additional information, see Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. XV, South and Southeast Asia, Document 346. 9 Brzezinski and Christopher traveled to Pakistan at the end of January in order to meet with Zia and Shahi to discuss security concerns. Following 2 days of talks in Islamabad, Brzezinski announced on February 3 that the aid package the President proposed would be postponed. In the interim, the administration would seek support from other nations in assisting Pakistan. (Stuart Auerbach, “U.S. to Seek Help From Other Nations on Aid to Pakistan,” The Washington Post, February 4, 1980, p. A–18) The White House did announce on January 31 that the President had pledged $5 million to the UNHCR Afghan relief program, designed to aid Afghan refugees fleeing to Pakistan, and $300,000 in grant aid to voluntary organizations for use in their relief programs. (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pp. 256–257)
