412
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
have always recorded with satisfaction the repeated assurances and
statements by the United States Government that what it sought was a
comprehensive and just settlement. Despite this, one was led to believe
that what emerged from the Camp David meeting was essentially the
outline of a peace agreement between Egypt and Israel not connected in
any legal or binding way with a comprehensive settlement on other
fronts. If such a course is pursued, I fear that this might lead to a more
radical polarization in the area leading ultimately to the isolation of
Egypt and the causing of a major setback to the peace process on other
fronts.
Furthermore, there was a major difference between the two docu-
ments which emerged from Camp David regarding the question of the
future status of the occupied areas. While the Egyptian-Israeli Accord
was explicit on the question of Egyptian sovereignty over Sinai, the fu-
ture of the West Bank and Gaza had been left open to negotiations. I be-
lieve that there was no balance in this, particularly as the document
dealing with the West Bank and Gaza was very explicit in its provisions
regarding the transitional agreements and the Jordanian role and re-
sponsibilities in them. Jordan was invited to participate in arrange-
ments of administrative, legal, military and political character during a
“transitional” period before knowing the shape or outline of the future
settlement it is invited to conclude. We fear that at the end of the pro-
posed transitional period, the results reached might be totally unac-
ceptable. This particularly in view of the fact that Israel is repeating
continuously its categorical claims about the final annexation of Arab
Jerusalem, the expansion of the settlements in the occupied areas and
the rejection of Arab sovereignty in the occupied Arab lands. Jordan
was called upon to participate in security arrangements with Israel and
for Israel, against potentially Palestinian subversion. Without any as-
surances that, as a result of the transitional period, there would be a just
Palestinian solution based on self-determination and an end to the oc-
cupation. As I indicated to Secretary Vance, we feel in Jordan that the
Agreements have not provided clear answers regarding the four main
issues of a comprehensive settlement, namely withdrawal and future
borders, Palestinian self-determinations, the basis for the solution of
the problem of the Palestinian refugees and the future of Jerusalem. I
also indicated to him, to your other envoys and repeatedly in public
that Jordan will not close any doors which may lead to the termination
of the occupation and the emancipation of the people under occupation
in the context of a peaceful settlement. Our interest in the cause of
peace is genuine and it has for long been a cherished objective of ours.
In this spirit we formulated the questions that we addressed to your
government for the clarification of the unclear aspects of the Camp
David Agreements and the United States positions. I am very grateful
that your government responded quickly to these questions and that
