366 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX move an inch without the PLO, Jordan, Syria and Saudi Arabia,” Freij said. 5. Mayor Shawwa noted that democratic principles insured rule of majority, and most people in occupied territories supported the PLO. “How could Israel force another representative on them?” he asked. He mentioned that during recent meeting with Arafat he had proposed a transition period followed by complete Israeli withdrawal and a link with Jordan. Arafat had proposed this suggestion to executive committee and gained approval, Shawwa said. 6. Saunders said he was hearing same thing but in reverse from Arab states. Saudis said they couldn’t move, but Jordan could. Jordan said it couldn’t move, but West Bankers/Gazans could. Question was who would take first step. As for PLO, a new situation had arisen. CDA clearly recognized political character of Palestinian problem. In new situation, should PLO decide it could accept 242, USG would talk with it, but, he wondered, given Israeli attitudes whether that would much advance peace. 7. Al-Masri concurred that PLO must be involved, but “with a new formula; we could be the PLO.” The important thing, al-Masri continued, was to change the CDA to stipulate an end to settlements and guarantee self-determination for Palestinians. With that, Palestinians could go to PLO and Arab countries for support. 8. Saunders said he could guarantee continued US participation as a full partner, but not the final outcome. USG would certainly consider any reasonable counterproposal from a representative group of Palestinians, but the CDA itself could not feasibly be changed. Any proposal would have to take into consideration political realities. From his experience at Camp David, Israel had gone about as far as it could for the moment. There was no way the Americans could simply dictate sweeping alterations. Palestinians, he suggested, should consider tackling their problems in a logical sequence, making progress where that was possible, e.g. on powers of SGA, and use success at one stage to open new possibilities at another. “I am amazed that you are telling me, and I shall have to report to President Carter that you prefer continued occupation to self-government,” Saunders said. 9. Abu Ghazallah protested that Saunders was thus asking an unfair question, but Bakerjian asked: “Do we all want to reject even this modest step forward?” 10. Bakerjian asked whether USG could declare that sovereignty lies with Palestinian people in West Bank/Gaza, but, for practical reasons, there would have to be a transition period and an SGA. “In situations like this where sovereignty is historically confused, the USG holds that sovereignty resides with the people on the land and that their will must be expressed through an agreed method of
