Arms Control and Disarmament  1621
While the discontinuance or limitation of nuclear tests are not, 
except in a limited way, disarmament measures, they do have a special 
importance in establishing the principle and techniques and practice 
of monitoring agreements. On the technical side, and perhaps on the 
military and political sides too, we have given more study and thought 
to monitoring and inspection systems for the control of nuclear tests 
than we have for any aspect of arms limitation. We probably have a 
better chance for arriving at some acceptable arrangement for monitor­
ing and inspection of nuclear tests than we have for any other form of 
arms limitation. This was illustrated by the difficulties encountered in 
the Geneva Conference on Surprise Attack. A monitoring and inspection 
system for nuclear tests is likely to be simpler and more achievable than 
a monitoring and inspection system for surprise attack. We are not only 
further advanced in the technical aspects of the problem, but we have 
large pressures of world opinion favoring the achievement of such an 
agreement.
What Do We Do About the Geneva Negotiations?
Let me now turn specifically to the problems associated with 
our negotiations on the limitation or discontinuance of nuclear tests. 
We must recognize that new data secured in the Hardtack II tests, 
together with conclusions reached in recent studies on underground 
testing and on testing in outer space, leave us in a position where the 
system agreed to last summer at the Conference of Experts involves 
more substantial and significant uncertainties than believed at the 
time. While the Panel on Seismic Improvement has concluded that 
the Geneva system can be substantially restored to its originally-­
conceived capability, they also concluded that by deliberate conceal­
ment it would be possible to reduce the signal from an underground 
explosion by a factor of 10 or more and that, in theory at least, the 
signal might be reduced by a much larger factor than this. It is, there­
fore, impossible—without further tests—to give any firm estimate of 
the capability of the Geneva system for underground tests. This does 
not mean that such a firm estimate may not be achievable in the fore­
seeable future.
The Panel on High Altitude Detection indicated the technical fea­
sibility of testing in outer space, as well as the technical feasibility of 
a system to detect these tests. Such a system would have a detection 
threshold which would be as high as a few hundred kilotons if the vio­
lator of the agreement resorted to very expensive measures to try to 
achieve concealment.
The reports of these two panels represent as good a discussion of the 
technical possibilities as could be achieved in the time available. They 
emphasize that continuing studies and experiments on a reasonable scale 
are needed for the further understanding of test detection and for the
