International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
535
Powers Act could be invoked to postpone any collection of counter-
vailing duties for 60 days, thus allowing the Congress time to act. He
points out that this course would engender a strongly negative reaction
on Capitol Hill.3 He is not recommending this course, only pointing out
that it will then be the only alternative to serious MTN delay, since he
believes that calling a special session of the Congress to extend the
countervailing duty waiver would be undesirable.
Bob says that he will seek your guidance early next week.
3. State, Treasury, and CEA favor Option #1.4 They have various
ideas about how to make it more attractive.
—State suggests assuring the Europeans that we will strongly re-
sist any Congressional pressures for renegotiation of the MTN agree-
ment that we would submit to the Congress in January.
—Treasury believes that Bob should assure the Europeans we will
submit a waiver extension bill to the Congress January 2. (The bill
could then be dropped if it attracted undesirable amendments.)
—CEA recommends that whatever subsidy code is included in
MTN be made retroactive to January 2, 1979, so as to protect our
trading partners against economic damage from countervailing duties.
All of these agencies have strong reservations about Option #2—
on legal, political and foreign policy grounds. CEA would preclude it
altogether; Treasury would only consider it in case of dire necessity.
The State and Treasury memoranda are attached at Tabs B and C.5
4. RECOMMENDATION: That you tell Bob Strauss if you talk with
him—or authorize me to tell him if you do not—that:
a. You give him authority to speak on your behalf in assuring the
Europeans that we will follow the course that he describes in Option
#1—with such of the improvements suggested by State, Treasury, and
CEA as he believes have merit.
b. If this trip fails to persuade the Europeans, he should then
submit to you his considered view regarding invocation of the Interna-
3 In his November 1 memorandum to Carter (see footnote 2 above), Strauss noted
that the International Emergency Economic Powers Act “was enacted by Congress in
1977 to revise and delimit Presidential authority to regulate international economic trans-
actions during wars or national emergencies.”
4 Cooper commented on Strauss’ November 1 memorandum in a November 3
memorandum to Owen; Solomon discussed it in a November 3 memorandum to Owen;
and Nordhaus in a November 2 memorandum to Schultze. Cooper’s and Solomon’s
memoranda are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Sub-
ject File, Box 65, Trade: 11/77–4/79; Nordhaus’ is in the Carter Library, Staff Office Files,
Council of Economic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Subject Files.
5 Tabs B and C are not attached.
