Human Rights
119
1. USIS Wireless File 4/29 will provide complete text of Secretary’s
human rights speech to be delivered 4/30 (1600Z) at University of
Georgia Law School.2 This is not only his first major speech in office, it
is also comprehensive administration statement of the President’s de-
termination to place human rights considerations at the center of US
foreign policy.
2. This speech should be given broad distribution to public and
press (where possible) and to host country officials at all levels. Posts
may wish to supply high-ranking contacts with full text at time of de-
livery or shortly in advance. Department will obviously be interested in
receiving reactions.
3. Speech indicates policy will be implemented by positive steps,
such as encouragement through public statements and economic assist-
ance, or other measures, such as public or private expressions of con-
cern and withholding aid when necessary. Mission representations can
emphasize our interest in seeing practical results.
4. Human rights considerations will enter into our overall foreign
policy, but policy implementation will be flexible, depending on details
of each specific case.
5. While entire speech obviously merits careful review, high points
are:
A) Human rights are defined as:
1) The right to be free from governmental violation of the integrity
of the person, such as torture, etc;
2) The right to the fulfillment of such vital needs as food, shelter,
health care and education; and
3) The right to enjoy civil and political liberties, such as freedom of
thought, etc.
B) Our policy is to promote all these rights. While there may be dis-
agreement on the priorities these rights deserve, we believe that, with
work, all of these rights can be complementary and mutually
reinforcing.
C) US policy will be implemented on case-by-case basis, according
to sets of criteria and questions spelled out in text.3
2 Vance’s April 30 address at the University of Georgia School of Law, entitled
“Human Rights and Foreign Policy,” is printed in Department of State Bulletin, May 23,
1977, pp. 505–508, and is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980,
volume I, Foundations of Foreign Policy.
3 In his speech, Vance referenced three sets of questions relating to the nature of
human rights cases, prospects for effective action, and the maintenance of perspective,
adding, “In the end, a decision whether and how to act in the cause of human rights is a
matter for informed and careful judgment. No mechanistic formula produces an auto-
matic answer.” See also Bernard Gwertzman, “Vance Asks Realism in U.S. Rights
Policy,” The New York Times, May 1, 1977, pp. A–1 and A–12.
