Colombia 313 Foreign Minister accordingly. We have given consideration to the latter’s proposal that the U.S. finance the purchase of the two destroyers which have been built for the Colombians in Sweden2, and he was sorry to have to tell the Ambassador frankly that there is no possibility of doing this, regardless of any merits that the plan might have. We still have hopes that the two destroyers allotted to Colombia in the “ship bill” will be made available before the end of the year, however. Mr. Rubottom added that he plans to visit Caracas and Bogotá next week, leaving Washington on Wednesday, February 26, and arriving at Bogotá on Saturday, March 1.3 He said his plans were made somewhat hurriedly and he had not had an opportunity to inform the Ambassador sooner. The Ambassador said he was glad to hear that this trip was planned, and was sure it would have most beneficial results. 2 Ambassador Cabot had transmitted the Colombian proposal to the Department in despatch 632, January 27, 1958, not printed; The Colombian Government suggested that of the total $27 million cost for the two destroyers the United States pay with grant aid funds $7 million still owed to Sweden and refund the $20 million Colombia had already paid to Sweden on account by paying off Colombian debts in the United States to that amount. A briefing memorandum on the military assistance program in Colombia, prepared for Assistant Secretary Rubottom’s visit by Weldon Litsey of the office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs, dated February 25, read in part as follows: “Defense and the Navy strongly oppose paying for the Swedish destroyers. They point out that the ships were purchased over strong United States recommendations against such purchase: that in no way can it be substantiated that we have any obligation to pay for the Swedish destroyers under our MDAP agreement with Colombia, as Colombia claims; that there would be no justification on the basis of current MAP objectives to use MAP funds in this way; and that we have two destroyers for Colombia in the pending Ship Loan Bill. “ARA agrees that the United States should not pay for the two Swedish destroyers with grant aid funds. If the Ship Loan Bill is passed, Colombia would do well to try to sell the Swedish destroyers (but not in the hemisphere) and should be encouraged to do so.” (ARA/WST Files, Lot 62 D 106, “Visits to Colombia”) 3 Assistant Secretary Rubottom visited Caracas, February 26-March 1, and he was in Bogotá, March 1–3, 1958. Documentation concerning his trip is in file 110.15–RU.
