Eastern Europe Region
23
the GDR’s capital, East Berlin, are not likely to significantly ameliorate
the yearning of many East Germans, particularly those in the technical
and professional classes, to travel or emigrate to the West. Detente in
central Europe has created internal pressure on Honecker that will not
go away unless detente goes away. Honecker can impose measures
that will significantly curtail the GDR’s contacts with the West and
will dampen the expectations of the East German people for a Western
“life style,” but such measures would quickly add up to a significantly
changed atmosphere between the two Germanies and in Europe as a
whole. Neither Honecker nor the Soviets want this to happen, and
therefore they have adopted palliatives rather than remedies in dealing
with the unrest in East Germany. This could change if the East German
situation gets worse, and that is why the Soviets must be watching
events there closely and must be concerned that dissident activity and
unrest elsewhere in Eastern Europe will adversely affect East Germany.
The variety of approaches in Eastern Europe to the dissident prob-
lem is prima facie evidence that Moscow has foregone imposing any
set line on its allies. The Soviets feel uncomfortable with the more
permissive approaches of the Hungarians and Poles, but they have
permitted both Kadar and Gierek to fashion their tactics to fit their
own circumstances. Moscow’s forebearance is dependent on:
a) Confidence that, whatever their deviations from the Soviet
model, Kadar and Gierek are essentially good Communists who will
not be metamorphasized into social-democrats and who will not forget
the special relationship with the USSR.
b) A measure of stability and order in Hungary and Poland. Kadar’s
most powerful argument for his policies is also the simplest: that it
works, i.e., that Hungary does not have a dissident problem, and is
still a Marxist state faithful in its own way to the USSR. Gierek clearly
argues from a weaker base and is compelled to make the case, not
without merit, that if things are bad in Poland now, they would be a
good deal worse if he tried to crack down on dissidence. If they get
worse anyway, Gierek will be in deep trouble with Moscow.
There is evidence that Moscow’s attitude toward the problem of
dissidence in Eastern Europe may be changing. For one thing, the
Soviets have become tougher with their own dissidents since the first
of the year. This makes it easier for Moscow to call upon their allies
to take a harder line. As a result, permissive approaches are pushed
further from the norm and hence less acceptable.
There are reports the Soviets leaned on both the Poles and the
Hungarians at an ideological conference in Sofia early last month. So
far, we see little evidence of a toughening line on the dissidents in
either country, or for that matter, in Czechoslovakia or East Germany.
One report claims that the Soviets have told the Poles that they
must adopt more orthodox economic policies. The Soviets clearly have
