244
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
human rights developments, particularly outside the U.S., as well as
the record of continuing violations of human rights.
2. Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (RFE/RL).
RFE and RL have played a key role in the rising awareness that has
accompanied the expanding human rights movement in the Soviet
Union and Eastern Europe. Human rights activists in Moscow, Warsaw
and other cities frequently cite RFE/RL’s extensive coverage as a vital
source of information. In the future, the Radios will utilize the expan-
sion of their technical facilities which has been proposed by the Presi-
dent to extend their human rights coverage to larger audiences.13 An-
other priority is to augment news-gathering and research capabilities,
especially in Western Europe, for more detailed reporting of CSCE de-
velopments. The Radios also seek to give increased attention to human
rights developments affecting the non-Russian nationalities of the So-
viet Union.
3. Cultural and Educational Exchange.
The international exchange of persons program administered by
the State Department’s Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs
(CU) conveys a human rights message to all foreign leaders who partic-
ipate in it. Experience indicates that the overwhelming impression left
with most visitors to this country is that the American people do care
about human rights and that the United States does seek to protect and
foster them. CU intends to give additional, more specific attention to
human rights concerns. Objectives could include encouraging in-
creased international activity among American non-governmental
groups which have an interest in human rights, especially groups from
the academic and journalistic communities, and strengthening CU rela-
tions with activities of the legal profession in international human
rights endeavors.
E. Improved access to the U.S. for refugees and dissidents.
In keeping with our overall objectives, we should demonstrate a
generous, humanitarian policy of providing refuge to victims of repres-
sion. We should continue to support provisions in H.R. 717514 that
would increase the authorized global number of conditional entries
13 In a March 22 message to Congress transmitting a report on international broad-
casting required by Section 403 of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act for Fiscal Year
1977 (S. 3168; P.L. 94–350; 90 Stat. 823–850), the President noted that his review of U.S. in-
ternational broadcasting efforts led him to conclude that current efforts were “inade-
quate” and that VOA and RFE/RL required 16 additional 250 KW transmitters for broad-
cast to the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, in addition to 12 VOA transmitters for
broadcast to Asia and Africa. (Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, March 28,
1977, pp. 423–24)
14 See footnote 9, Document 62.
