December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
559
How these issues are dealt with in the documents of the treaty
package is discussed in greater detail below.
How the Negotiations Have Been Conducted
To understand where the negotiations stand as of December 17, it
is important to understand several points about how the negotiations
have been conducted.
First, it is essential to understand the process by which agreement is
reached in a negotiation of this kind. The Egyptian and Israeli Govern-
ments sent to Washington highly qualified negotiating teams headed
by Cabinet Ministers. These two teams came empowered to negotiate
but not to give final approval. Each could and did frequently accept
certain provisions ad referendum—that is, subject to later approval by
their governments. In a few instances provisions that were agreed to by
each of the negotiating teams were disapproved when referred to the
home government. This is a normal and accepted part of the negotia-
ting process. When the recommendations of the negotiators are over-
ruled, the solution is further negotiation to settle the unresolved issues.
Second, it is important to understand the U.S. role in these negotia-
tions. As at Camp David, we have worked separately and together with
the negotiating Parties. We have served as communicators between
them, helping each to understand the other’s positions. We have
helped them to crystallize and write down the positions that evolved
from their discussions. At the beginning of each phase in the negotia-
tions at Blair House, we put to the Parties draft texts to be used as a
basis for negotiation. These texts were not intended to be binding upon
anyone; their aim was simply to give the Parties a point from which to
start. In later instances, when the Parties had negotiated for some time
but found themselves unable to reach agreement, we proposed drafts
that we thought represented fair and reasonable compromises which
would advance the negotiations without prejudicing the fundamental
interests of either Party. In short, most of the documents now in the
Treaty package have resulted from a combination of all of these
methods and from intensive discussion of the issues after a prolonged
period.
Third, it may be useful to have in mind a simple chronology of events
during the period of these negotiations:
October 12:
Negotiations begin at Blair House.
October 20–21:
Intensive sessions with President Carter.
October 22:
Ministers Dayan and Weizman return to Is-
rael to consult the Cabinet.
November 11–12:
U.S. effort to present a complete text of the
Treaty, of Annex III, and of a letter on the
West Bank/Gaza negotiations.
