Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 561 Let me make that point again. The SALT agreement we hope to present to the American people is not a gift to the Soviets; it is an agreement which serves the security interests of our nation and of the world. It does not weaken us; it strengthens us. We have watched carefully the steady growth of Soviet military power in recent years. In some areas, the Soviets are ahead of us; in others, we are ahead of them. What matters for us is not whether the two forces are identical, but whether they are in an overall balance—for that is the basis of security today. For example, the Soviets have always had a larger land army. But we do not need to match them man-for-man because of the strength of our more numerous allies. The Soviet Union has always had more tanks. But we have three times as many antitank weapons in Western Europe as there are Soviet tanks in Eastern Europe. The critical question is not whether we match the forces the Soviets have built to meet their own security needs but whether we meet U.S. and allied security needs. Without question, our forces meet those needs. U.S. Strategic Advantages To begin with, the United States has certain strategic advantages. • We have friendly neighbors on our borders. The Soviet Union has far longer and far more vulnerable borders. • We have only one major adversary. The Soviets face two. Fully 25% of its combat forces are deployed on the Soviet-Chinese border. • We have easy access to the sea. The Soviets are restricted by narrow straits, by a long and icy winter, and by other natural barriers. Our military capabilities today are enormous and growing stronger. And our allies and friends significantly increase our overall strength. Nor are we standing still. Because of steady growth in Soviet defense spending and capabilities over the past decade—particularly in central Europe—we have had to reverse the pattern of shrinking American defense efforts. We and our allies committed ourselves last year to increasing individual defense expenditures.3 The defense budget President Carter submitted to Congress last month reflects that commitment.4 3 The NATO allies expressed the commitment in the final communique´ issued at the end of the May 30–31, 1978, summit meeting of the North Atlantic Council. See Document 83 and footnote 1 thereto. 4 See footnote 3, Document 109.
