950  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
had some discretion in awarding contracts for carriage of persons and 
goods by air. The President remarked that if a list of qualified airline 
bidders were maintained, account could be taken of the experience fac­
tor. General Quesada said some airline companies which submit low 
bids for Defense business had no planes, no pilots and no money; they 
had only an idea.
The President felt that if the Government could determine how 
many persons and how much cargo it wished to move by air, normal 
commercial competition should result in building the airplanes and 
putting them into operation. He felt that a good war reserve could not 
be maintained unless MATS could operate in time of peace. However, 
he would like to simplify the whole problem. Mr. Stans said economic 
comparison between MATS operation and “contracting out” was not 
simple. He suggested that the paper should go back to the Planning 
Board for resolution in the light of the recommendations in the 
Department of Defense study. The President said he would like to see 
the interested parties get together and come up with a single recom­
mendation. He had the impression there was plenty of cargo space on 
airlines at the present time, and apparently there was a great deal of air 
freight business.
Secretary Mueller observed that the commercial carriers were not 
developing uncompromised cargo planes because of the competition 
from MATS. Secretary Gates thought that an uncompromised air cargo 
plane might have to be developed by the Government. The President 
wondered whether it was good business to insist on a completely 
uncompromised air cargo plane. General Quesada said all aircraft at 
present had been designed basically for the purpose of carrying pas­
sengers. If it were possible to design a cargo plane from the ground up, 
that is, an uncompromised cargo plane, the cost of carrying cargo by 
air could be reduced by one-­half. The air transport industry was now 
in the position which the highway transport industry would be in if 
all cargoes were carried by modified buses rather than by trucks. The 
President observed that it might be a mistake to design planes solely 
for the purpose of carrying cargo; he thought perhaps on the analogy 
of ocean freighters, provision might be made even in a cargo plane for 
carrying a few passengers.
Mr. Gray felt the Council had drifted into a discussion of techni­
calities. He believed two questions should now be answered: (1) does 
the Council want the Planning Board to revise NSC 5919 and (2) what 
should be done with the Department of Defense report on the role of 
MATS. The President said the Department of Defense report should 
be made available to the Planning Board, which should coordinate 
this report with NSC 5919. He felt we must try to arrive at a better
