1979  733
follower rather than the leader. We will have said that our alliance is 
like a convoy in which the speed of all is set by the speed of the slowest 
member. We must continue to lead and continue to spend what is truly 
required if we are to maximize the incentive for our allies to hold up 
their end. If we fall back, there is, in my opinion, no chance that they 
will carry on without us.
We must not look at this issue as making sure that no slacker takes 
advantage of the United States. Rather, we must continue to recognize 
that the common defense is not only in our own interest—­even if we 
should have to bear an extra measure of the load—­but is actually a 
matter of the survival of our world. I urge that you not let recitations of 
our allies’ performance distract you from the real issue. We will work 
on our allies, and have been far more successful during the past thirty 
months in pushing them to greater efforts than ever before. But we 
must maintain our leadership to be able to do so, or for there to remain 
any point in our even trying.
I mentioned that we held a PRC meeting last week on the Defense 
budget and program. With the exception of Jim McIntyre, whom I did 
not press because I recognize that doing his job requires him to take 
a different perspective, every participant at that meeting agreed that a 
growth in defense significantly higher than the earlier projected 3 per-
cent per annum is needed. I think that view has also become a consen-
sus of the country at large. It clearly is shared by some key members 
of the Congress and other persons of influence. Yet the position rec-
ommended by the OMB staff in this paper is wholly at odds with such 
a view. I recognize that the OMB has its own responsibilities to you, 
and that they must play the Devil’s advocate. But the contrast between 
their position and the vast majority of other responsible voices, my 
own included, is very great. Moreover, I remain concerned that we will 
be correctly seen as justifying inadequate defense program growth by 
using questionable arithmetic.
I feel quite sure, were you to adopt anything like the OMB staff’s 
recommended analysis, budget level or program, that all chance for 
the ratification of SALT II would vanish. The consequences, political, 
military, and international, would be many and damaging. As one of 
them, I have no doubt that in the aftermath our requirements for stra-
tegic forces would rise. We would then face the choice between paying 
for them by cutting back on our general purpose forces, or increasing 
the defense budget, or some combination thereof. Given the unsat-
isfactory nature of our general purpose force balances as outlined 
above, the former would, in my opinion, be unacceptably risky. The 
latter would face you with a far greater economic problem than the 
one before you now.
