1 Chapter 1, 1988 1. Memorandum From the Vice President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Gregg) and the Vice President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Watson) to Vice President Bush1 Washington, March 18, 1988 SUBJECT START: Much Tougher than INF The elimination of all INF missiles means there is no requirement to collect intelligence on, and monitor numbers of missiles, ALCMs, non-­deployed missiles, mobile missiles, test-­firings, or research and development of permitted new types of weapons. Nor is there the requirement to agree on counting rules that allow us to indirectly (and imprecisely) count warheads. A START agreement will require us to do all these. START will build on INF but will have to go much beyond it in detail, intrusiveness, and difficulty if it is to effectively constrain Soviet military capability. Because we have to assume they intend to cheat monitoring becomes all the more important. Obviously, the deeper the reductions of strategic arms the greater would be the negative effect on us of cheating. Secondly, Soviet cheating negates the effect of reductions. The attached letter to the President from Ambassador Anne Armstrong came to us yesterday. In it she expresses the Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board’s serious misgivings about our ability to monitor the START agreement. She may be seeking an appointment with you and wanted to be sure you knew her concerns. Her letter coincides with a vigorous interagency work program to devise monitoring provisions for a START agreement. Attached are two sensitive arms control papers which are still in draft.2 1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Vice Presidential Records, Office of National Security Affairs, Donald P. Gregg Files, Subject Files, OA/ID 19863–001, START [1]. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Watson initialed the memorandum on Gregg’s behalf. Bush wrote in the top right-­hand margin of the memorandum: “good paper. Sam: see question on page 2 of Anne’s letter ?? also p. 3 GB 3–19.” 2 Attached but not printed are two papers drafted by the Arms Control Support Group: GRIP 34 H (Mobile ICBMs), dated March 12, 1988; and GRIP 59A (Suspect Site Inspections), dated March 7, 1988.
