National Security Policy  129
38.	
Letter From Eisenhower to John Foster Dulles1
Washington, March 26, 1958
Dear Foster:
I called you on the phone, but find you are still on the Hill. I wanted 
to talk to you about your conclusion that I was becoming a pessimist.
In trying to produce a draft of a talk before the Editors, an effort 
which I am now disposed to postpone, I deliberately wanted to stress 
the difficulties now confronting the world. Of these, the greatest are:
(a). The costs of relative security with the attendant possibilities 
of, either:
(1). Seeing the American people get so tired of these huge expen­
ditures as to cause them to refuse to support necessary appropriations 
and thus expose us to unacceptable risks.
(2). Imposing upon our people such political and economic con­
trols as would imply a dangerous degree of regimentation.
(b). The task of reaching some reliable agreements with the Soviets 
that will make it possible, with confidence, to reduce armaments.
To my mind this transcends all other objectives we can have. 
Security through arms is only a means (and sometimes a poor one) to 
an end. Peace, in a very real sense, is an end in itself.
It is, of course, quite comforting to recite all of the international 
difficulties that have, over the five years, been either surmounted or 
ameliorated. I’ve personally recited these in a number of speeches.
But these specific successes cannot blind us to the most potentially 
dangerous of all the situations now developing. This is the credence, even 
respect, that the world is beginning to give to the spurious Soviet protes­
tations and pronouncements. As their propaganda promotes this world 
confusion, the tone of Soviet notes and statements grows more strident. 
The more the men in the Kremlin come to believe that their domestic 
propaganda is swallowed by their own people and by the populations 
of other countries, including some we have counted upon as allies, the 
greater the risk of American isolation. One great step we can take to 
counter­act this trend is to make sure our own people are not deceived.
It is not pessimistic to face up to difficulties and to seek ways to 
overcome them. We must never confess that we have gotten to the bot­
tom of the barrel in searching for ideas to stem and turn the tide of 
Soviet propaganda success.
1 Source: Thoughts on dealing with Soviet threat. Personal and Confidential. 3 pp. 
Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries.
