Preface
V
of modern typography. A heading has been supplied by the editors for
each document included in the volume. Spelling, capitalization, and
punctuation are retained as found in the original text, except that ob-
vious typographical errors are silently corrected. Other mistakes and
omissions in the documents are corrected by bracketed insertions: a
correction is set in italic type; an addition is in roman type. Words or
phrases underlined in the source text are printed in italics. Abbrevia-
tions and contractions are preserved as found in the original text, and a
list of abbreviations is included in the front matter of each volume.
Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate omitted text that
deals with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classi-
fied after declassification review (in italic type). The amount and,
where possible, the nature of the material not declassified has been
noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of text that were omit-
ted. Entire documents withheld for declassification purposes have been
accounted for and are listed by their headings, source notes, and
number of pages not declassified in their chronological place. All
brackets that appear in the original document are so identified by foot-
notes. All ellipses are in the original documents.
The first footnote to each document indicates the source of the doc-
ument, original classification, distribution, and drafting information.
This note also provides the background of important documents and
policies and indicates whether the President or his major policy ad-
visers read the document.
Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent
material not printed in the volume, indicate the location of additional
documentary sources, provide references to important related docu-
ments printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide sum-
maries and citations to public statements that supplement and eluci-
date the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs and
other first-hand accounts has been used when appropriate to supple-
ment or explicate the official record.
The numbers in the index refer to document numbers rather than
to page numbers.
Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation
The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documenta-
tion, established under the Foreign Relations statute, reviews records,
advises, and makes recommendations concerning the Foreign Relations
series. The Advisory Committee monitors the overall compilation and
editorial process of the series and advises on all aspects of the prepara-
tion and declassification of the series. Although the Advisory Com-
mittee does not attempt to review the contents of individual volumes in
