detailed statement of the views of the Japanese Government on the
proposals of the Chinese Government (See p. 8, et seq., of Minutes of
October 30, 1925). Mr. Hioki stated that his remarks were a continuation of
the statement made by him at the opening session of the Conference. At this
point Sir Ronald Macleay sought the views of the Chairman on the question
of Likin, but Dr. Wang, before passing to that question, preferred to hear
from all the Delegations on the subject of Tariff Autonomy. Mr. Strawn
responded on behalf of the American Delegation, saying that he assumed
that each of the Powers represented at the Conference recognized the
sovereign right of China to enjoy tariff autonomy, when conditions should
warrant it. He voiced the view that the American Government would be
glad to see the time arrive when China should enjoy full tariff autonomy.
Mr. Strawn, like Sir Ronald Macleay, requested the views of the Chairman
on the question of the abolishment of likin, especially since it appeared that
this question was so closely related to Tariff Autonomy that the latter could
not be discussed without some knowledge of the plans of the Chinese
Government for the abolishment of likin. He stated also that the American
Delegation was prepared to act immediately upon anything which came
within the purview of the Washington Treaty, but that matters outside that
category would have to be referred to his Government for instructions. He
reiterated that the American Delegation had come to the Conference with
open minds in the hope of arriving at an understanding which would be to
the mutual benefit of all. The Chairman, in reply, stated that the Chinese
Government was determined to abolish Likin as soon as possible and that
the plan contemplated its abolishment within three years, or not later than
January 1, 1929, and even possibly by the first part of 1928. At this point
the Chairman announced that after the Powers represented at the
Conference should agree to tariff autonomy the Chinese Government, for its
part, would agree to the abolition of Likin. Thereupon Mr. Strawn remarked
that he did not think it would be very satisfactory to have a statement from
each of the Powers that it was willing to concede tariff autonomy to China
unless it could be known when and how tariff autonomy was to be enjoyed,
whether likin was to be abolished and how that would affect the Treaty
Powers. He pointed out that the mere statement by the Powers that they
respected and conceded the right of China to enjoy tariff autonomy was
easily made, but this did not, in his opinion, advance their position to any
great extent. He reiterated the statement that the American Delegation was
