September 18–December 16, 1978
407
119.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Status Report on Egypt-Israel Treaty Negotiations
Secretary Vance met separately today with both the Israeli2 and
Egyptian3 delegations. Substantial differences still remain, and the Is-
raelis want to discuss with us a number of bilateral issues.
Israel
—Treaty Text. Problems with preamble, reference to Gaza, pro-
posed review clause, and “priority of obligations.” All other articles
have been agreed. Awaiting Israeli comments on Annex III (“normali-
zation”); trying to accelerate drafting of Annex I (security and with-
drawal); US proposal required to break deadlock in oil talks.4
—Exchange of Letters. Israel will send a letter to Sadat agreeing to
begin negotiations with Egypt within one month of ratification of the
Egypt-Israel treaty on the modalities for establishing the self-governing
authority. Israel will not, however, discuss the “powers and responsi-
bilities” of the self-governing authority with Egypt alone.5 Israel will
also insist that Sadat commit himself in writing to an exchange of “resi-
dent ambassadors” within one month of the completion of the interim
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 55, Middle East: Peace Talks Between Egypt and Israel, 10/19–31/78. Secret.
Sent for information. At the top of the memorandum, Carter initialed “C,” indicating that
he saw the memorandum, and wrote, “Zbig—cc Cy.”
2 No memorandum of conversation of this meeting has been found.
3 Vance summarized his meeting with the Egyptian delegation in an October 30
memorandum to Carter. During the meeting, Vance informed the Egyptians that the Is-
raelis were prepared to accept a solution to the problem of exchanging ambassadors
through a letter from Sadat to Carter and a letter from Carter to Begin; the Egyptians,
Vance reported, also found this acceptable. Vance also reported that Ali and Weizman
agreed that Egypt would have an early warning station in Zone A in lieu of air defense
missiles. Lastly, Boutros Ghali asked Vance for help persuading the Israelis that Egypt
needed “help from Israel on the West Bank/Gaza/Palestinian set of issues.” In the
margin next to this point, Carter added a handwritten comment: “Israel will try to ob-
struct progress on W[est] B[an]k/Gaza.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brze-
zinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 71, Brzezinski, Chron:
10/20–31/78)
4 Carter wrote in the margin next to this section: “Cy work out.”
5 Carter underlined “Egypt alone” and wrote in the margin next to this phrase: “I’m
sure Egypt can recruit some Gaza Palestinians. We can help w/Jordan, etc.”
