334  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
I. BACKGROUND FOR DECISION
A. The Military Balance
Our military capabilities relative to the Soviets’ are still in the zone 
of “essential equivalence” that you directed in PD–18,6 but the general 
trend of the military comparison is quite unambiguously against us, 
and is widely recognized as such both here and abroad.7
This degradation is not due to any sudden surge on the part of 
the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union has been increasing its defense 
expenditures in real terms at a steady rate of 3% to 4% every year, com-
pounded, for the past 20 years.
What we are seeing today is the cumulative payoff of those many 
years of steady effort on their part—­an effort whose persistence is 
matched only by its breadth. In strategic offensive forces, the Soviets 
have deployed new ICBMs, SLBMs, and manned bombers, with a 
large and continuing R&D program for the future. In strategic defen-
sive forces, they have a serious civil defense effort,8 are deploying new 
SAMs and interceptors, and continue R&D in the ABM field. Their the-
ater nuclear forces now include camouflaged mobile SS–20s, able to 
strike all the capitals of Europe, deployed in the Soviet countryside. In 
land forces, they have deployed large numbers of new tanks, armored 
personnel carriers, self-­propelled artillery, and attack helicopters. Their 
tactical air forces used to be limited primarily to defense; but now they 
are being equipped with offensive aircraft more nearly like ours. The 
Soviet Navy, having moved well beyond coastal defense, now is taking 
tactical aircraft to sea, and developing modern ships and landing craft 
for amphibious assault. The pattern of growth seems to touch all areas 
of the Soviet armed forces, and though there may be doubt as to its pur-
pose, there can be no doubt whatever as to its presence.9
The Soviets now spend substantially more on defense than we do—­
this year 20% to 40% more, depending on how the calculation is made. 
In terms of that portion of defense spending that represents investment 
in military weapons and R&D, the Soviets are outstripping us even fur-
ther. Much more of our Defense budget than of theirs, of course, goes 
simply for pay and retirement. Their investments in military forces, as 
6 “The United States will maintain an overall balance of military power between 
the United States and its allies on the one hand and the Soviet Union and its allies on the 
other hand at least as favorable as that that now exists.” [Footnote is in the original. For 
PD–18, see Document 31.]
7 Brzezinski underlined “general trend,” “is quite unambiguously against us,” and 
“is widely recognized as such both here and abroad,” and drew a vertical line in the left 
margin next to the second half of this sentence.
8 Brzezinski underlined the words “serious civil defense effort” and wrote “?” in 
the right margin.
9 Carter drew two vertical lines in the left margin next to this sentence.
