World Hunger and Food Policy
683
staffed for a task of this magnitude . . . and probably shouldn’t be. In
addition, the task is a continuing one that should be organized for the
long-pull rather than the quick show.
Next Steps
There are several steps that could be taken, including the
following:
—Clarification of the leadership responsibility. I am inclined to give
USDA more of the action. Assistant Secretary Dale Hathaway is partic-
ularly well equiped for the responsibility.
—Consolidation of Effort. The various activities described above
need to be tied together. Whoever is given the lead responsibility in this
field should also be given this charge.
—Presidential Message. As a means of bringing the pieces together,
we might aim for a Presidential message in the fall or winter.
217.
Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, June 27, 1977
SUBJECT
Some Thoughts and Suggestions for the World Hunger Meeting
This Administration has not yet developed an integrated policy on
world food and nutrition. This is a difficult subject both because it is so
intertwined with highly political domestic issues, and because on the
foreign side it involves so many different agencies and kinds of issues.
While there are no short term deadlines to force adequate attention to
be paid to it, in the medium and long term there is probably no other single
issue that will more affect global peace and security than the availability and
distribution of food.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 92, Food: 1977. No classification marking. Sent for ac-
tion. A handwritten notation on the memorandum reads: “OBE.” Attached but not
printed are a copy of Bourne’s June 11 memorandum (See Document 213) and an NSC
Correspondence Profile indicating that Brzezinski received the memorandum on June 28
and that copies were sent to Hormats.
