1084
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
325.
Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for International Organization Affairs (Maynes) to Secretary
of State Vance1
Washington, May 14, 1979
Personal Message from the Secretary of State to all Chiefs of Mission
on Worldwide Status and Rights of Women
Issues for Decision
As we approach the mid-points of the United Nations Decade for
Women and the International Year of the Child, and the onset of the
Third Development Decade (1981–1990), and the UN Mid-Decade for
Women’s Conference scheduled to be held in Copenhagen in July 1980,
it is essential that we and other nations intensify our efforts toward pro-
moting the status, rights and well-being of women throughout the
world. Even though women and girls represent over half of humanity,
they are the most frequent victims of discrimination and deprivation.
While most of the nations of the world are committed through
various UN and other instruments to uphold the rights of women and
to improve their conditions, there may be a tendency on the part of
these nations to regard their agreement to those resolutions as dis-
posing of the problem. Therefore, a considered effort is needed to fulfill
the letter and spirit of international obligations.
What we do at home to advance the status and well-being of
women has a material bearing on our ability to influence other nations.
Internationally, our Ambassadors and their staffs have a particularly
important role since they are aware of conditions in the countries
where they serve, can judge what can be effectively done, and are in a
position diplomatically to further our policy through discussions with
leaders and other influential persons in those countries. Oftentimes,
this can best be done on an informal basis.
Recommendations:
Since the State Department and its overseas missions have a
leading responsibility in our worldwide efforts to advance the status of
women, it is recommended that:
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P790085–0875. Un-
classified. Drafted by Good, Baer, and Green on May 8; concurred in by Dalley, Bleakley,
Goott, Montgomery, Vogelgesang, Graham, Cheshes, Schwebel, Jennone Walker,
Fleisher, Schuker, Lee, Barbara Thompson, Lollis, Hanley, Arvonne Fraser, Becker, Rein-
hardt, and Mary King. Dalley initialed his concurrence; Good initialed for the other
clearing officials. Tarnoff also initialed the memorandum.
