Afghanistan
329
willing to pay the international costs for its actions, but it probably
calculates that its losses will be short-lived. Besides, it may assume
that eventual success will bring exploitable dividends in the form of
a more respected image as a decisive and powerful actor on the
world scene.
To reduce the insurgency, as a follow-up to their drastic moves of
this week, the Soviet leadership will heighten military pressures against
the insurgents, including some Soviet combat involvement. Thus far,
the USSR has brought to bear in Afghanistan a large airborne force,
sizable numbers of additional fighter aircraft, helicopters, military air
transport, and two motorized rifle divisions. Several other ground force
divisions are being readied at least as a backup reserve. These deployed
forces can assure the security of Kabul, of the three other largest cities,
of several strategically located towns, of roads near the Soviet frontier,
and of the land lines of communication from the USSR to Kabul and
Herat. If the Soviets were to plan general and large-scale combat actions
of their own against insurgent positions throughout Afghanistan, they
would need ten to fifteen divisions and major logistical bases. Up to
now, we can see nothing initiated in the USSR on that scale.
Accompanying the military moves, it must be expected that Mos-
cow will now start experimenting with new political approaches to
lure a respectable proportion of the dissidents away from the insurgent
camp. However, we judge that Babrak Karmal’s chances of gaining
substantial popular support are as poor as Amin’s and Taraki’s. His
words are meant to sound promising to disaffected Afghans, but his
predecessors used almost identical language without result. Tribal
groups detest the Marxist trappings of the regime, which seems
doomed to a very narrow base of followers—and these almost exclu-
sively in urban areas. Political gains for Babrak would require major
political concessions and a reduction of the Soviet presence, but neither
he nor the Soviets can afford to go far enough to satisfy the opposition.
We do not yet know how the USSR plans to use the Afghan army
in the future. For one thing, the army’s loyalty to the new regime is
highly suspect. For another, it is demoralized and understrength, while
its recruitment prospects are poor. Still, if it manages now to hold
together as a viable institution after Babrak’s further purges, Soviet
intervention, together with new training and equipment, could help
to rebuild it to a point where, in the spring, it may be able to score
some initial successes against the insurgents, provided that there were
some Soviet combat involvement alongside.
Regional reaction to the Soviet intervention will be overwhelmingly
disapproving. Iran will be very alarmed, but it will remain wrapped
up in its own troubles, and will not be distracted from continuing to
give priority attention to its confrontation with the U.S. Pakistan will
