Yugoslavia 987 Soviets had been restrained in their behavior and their propaganda. The fact that events in Poland had not turned into an East-West confrontation had contributed to a positive evolution in Poland. Yugoslav PermRep Komatina chimed in to point out that a very important East European official had recently commented that what had happened in Poland was incompatible with Marxism/Leninism, but that it was hoped that these new developments would “melt” as the economic situation improved. 10. Markotic case.3 Under Secretary Newsom brought up the Markotic case in the name of the Secretary, urging that the Yugoslavs find a solution to this problem compatible with our good political relations. Vrhovec reacted without emotion and said he wished devoutly that Markotic had never come to Yugoslavia. He pointed out that he had been forced to “engage” the Yugoslav leadership to get information on this case. While the sentence they handed out was severe, it was understandable. Vrhovec pointed out that while the sentence was within the framework of Yugoslav law, the authorities had interpreted the law as harshly as possible. The case had not yet reached its final stage, and he hoped the higher courts would take a different approach. Newsom said we did not want to interfere in Yugoslav law, but that given the number of Americans who also held Yugoslavian citizenship, he hoped for a resolution which would not interrupt the movement of people back and forth, and would recognize American interest in this type of case and consider leniency. 3 Mirko Markotic was a naturalized U.S. citizen of Yugoslav (Croatian) descent. He traveled to Yugoslavia in May 1980 and was arrested immediately after his arrival. The Yugoslav Government tried and sentenced him to jail time for “anti-government activities,” and refused to allow U.S. officials visitation rights, arguing that Markotic was a Yugoslav citizen. On September 1, Eagleburger wrote that Washington “must exact a price, even though to do so will certainly affect the course of what has been over the past three years an increasingly warm and cooperative bilateral relationship.” However, Eagleburger cautioned, the United States should not allow the Markotic case to affect Washington’s attitude toward assisting Yugoslavia with its balance of payments challenges. (Telegram 6817 from Belgrade, September 1; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800416–0995) On January 11, 1981, the Presidency of Yugoslavia granted amnesty to Markotic “in consideration of the excellent overall state of our bilateral relations.” (Telegram 186 from Belgrade, January 12, 1981; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D810015–0788)
