828  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
spuriously began introducing random 2’s into the output message. The 
result was a display of false missile warning data at the command cen-
ters other than NORAD.
—Although after the June 3rd incident an automatic interrupt was 
installed in an attempt to prevent transmission of spurious data, it did 
not prevent the June 6th recurrence; consequently, NORAD is now 
using its back-­up computer system to avoid the use of the minicom-
puter altogether. This is an appropriate temporary expedient, but we 
need to take much more extensive actions than that.
WHAT CORRECTIVE ACTIONS ARE BEING TAKEN?
—A team including members of my staff and the OJCS spent June 
5th at SAC and NORAD reviewing the incident. The source of the tech-
nical problems was verified and the conduct of operations during the 
incident was reviewed.
—NORAD has been instructed to use a different computer, the 
Mission Essential Backup Computer, as their primary computer. This 
computer uses completely different hardware and software from the 
system which caused the problem. All of the command centers will 
receive the same information in this mode of operation. NORAD will 
have the key displays necessary for its mission; however, some of the 
displays that they use to assist them in detailed attack assessment will 
not be available.
—All command centers involved in missile attack warning now 
have special voice circuits continuously operating, over which we 
quickly identify false displays.
—A special task force has been organized to review in detail the 
computer and communications systems at NORAD. This team consists 
of national experts in large scale computer systems. Their objective will 
be to identify the problems with the present system and recommend 
corrections and improvements. The task force will have its first meeting 
next Wednesday and Thursday4 at NORAD.
—The JCS is conducting a review of missile warning opera-
tional procedures and the CINCNORAD is conducting an internal 
investigation.
—In parallel I will have my staff conduct a comprehensive review 
of the entire surveillance and warning system to determine if any basic 
changes are needed in order to fulfill its mission.
4 June 11 and June 12.
