March 27–December 31, 1979
965
was Arafat’s position that it should be understood to mean confedera-
tion. Sharaf said Arafat also wanted a conference to settle this. Secre-
tary said that this was true, according to Romanians but not very spe-
cific. Newsom said he understood it meant a conference to handle those
Arab-Israel issues which are not yet settled. Sharaf asked if this was Ro-
manian view or Arafat’s? Secretary interjected that all this was more
than Arafat seems to have shared with King; USG would be following
this closely.
10. Ambassador’s comment: Hussein appeared taken aback by
Secretary’s detailed description of Arafat’s position as reported by Ro-
manians. He might really be ignorant of any such specific, serious PLO
positions; it is more likely he was unaware of such a detailed exchange
and surprised Arafat would jump the gun with the Romanians on such
sensitive issues before they were settled by other Arabs. On the other
hand, Hussein might conclude that Arafat is doing his usual thing—
telling different people different things. In any case, Hussein should
react by becoming even more wary about how far he can trust Arafat as
they go down the road of cooperation and address the—for Jordan—
jugular issue of Jordan’s future relationship to the West Bank and Gaza.
In discussing this and related subjects in subsequent conversation,
Sharaf made clear Jordan’s cautious approach to this subject—i.e. will-
ingness only to respond to PLO suggestions, was calculated as best way
to proceed for both tactical and longer range strategic reasons. Without
being specific, Sharaf was clearly signalling that Hussein sensed he
might be on threshold of achieving goal of Arab legitimacy for at least
shared mandate re negotiating on behalf of Palestinians and he is going
to be very cautious in next few months. End comment.
11. Newsom asked how King saw Assad’s position. Hussein re-
plied that his position is not good but that he is in no immediate
danger. Lebanon is in part cause of his troubles. Secretary asked if Hus-
sein thought, as we did, that Lebanese Army is gaining strength and
cohesion. Both Hussein and Sharaf replied that Lebanese leftists and
Palestinians are still not satisfied with Army’s confessional balance.
Hussein said that some major Lebanese factions are still opposed to
GOL, that Syrian presence in Lebanon is lowering effectiveness of
Syrian Army, but that major problem in the situation is Israeli behavior.
12. Secretary said he wanted to raise Maqarin Dam. He was
looking forward to report of new AID Administrator Bennet’s talks in
Amman on Maqarin and other aid issues, noting he had recently testi-
fied in the Congress to assure that the funding for the Maqarin project
is carried over. Secretary said he felt that the project was in good shape
as far as Congress is concerned. Hussein said talks with the Syrians are
moving along but that a different Syrian Prime Minister would help;
present incumbent not really attentive to business.
