732
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
oil-exporting and industrial countries.” To improve the ability of
food-deficit LDCs to feed themselves, the Summit countries proposed
to help LDCs prepare comprehensive long-term food strategies, to im-
prove national and international research services, to support new
IBRD and FAO programs to improve LDC grain storage and distribu-
tion systems, to provide increased food aid, and to replenish on an eq-
uitable basis the International Fund for Agricultural Development
(which was initially to be financed half by OPEC countries and half by
industrialized Western countries; the final division of the contributions
to the one billion dollar fund was agreed at 43 percent OPEC, 57 per-
cent Western countries).
11. With respect to aid to developing countries, the Declaration
gives strong support to the replenishment of the multilateral develop-
ment banks. It ends the North/South section with a strongly worded
paragraph (no. 26) calling attention to the need for the oil-exporting
and the industrialized Communist countries to share equitably with
the industrial democratic countries the responsibility for aid and other
contributions to LDCs.
12. Follow-up action. As hitherto, the Personal Representatives of
the Heads of Government (Ambassador Owen for the US), will meet
periodically to review actions necessary to give effect to the Declaration
and to prepare for the next Summit meeting. The first such meeting
after the Venice Summit will be in September. In addition, the Declara-
tion itself sets up two groups for specific follow-on work. The first
(para 16 of the Declaration) calls for “a high-level group of repre-
sentatives of our countries and of the EEC Commission” to review peri-
odically the results achieved in the energy area. The Tokyo Summit
Declaration also set up such a group. This is necessary because France
is not a member of the IEA. The second (para 26 of the Declaration) in-
structs the Personal Representatives to review aid policies, procedures,
and other contributions to LDCs and report back their conclusions to
the next Summit. With respect to the energy group, it will likely be at
Assistant Secretary level; it will meet after the IEA Governing Board
meeting in July, and then again in September in conjunction with the
first meeting of the Personal Representatives on Summit follow-up ac-
tion in general, and thereafter as necessary. The mission of the aid
group (para 26) is really two-fold: to consider (i) what might be done to
make the North-South dialogue a more useful process and (ii) how to
get OPEC surplus countries to do more for the developing countries in
view of the enormous burden their oil price policies have imposed and
the income transfer from the oil-poor LDCs to the oil-rich they entail.
13. Further follow-up action. The Declaration refers in para 6 to the
need to understand better the long-term effects (on the environment,
the climate, and natural resources) of industrialization and economic
