Hungary to make extraordinary shipments of grain to Hungary and other East European countries. (C) I recommend you support Option one for the following reasons: —We have no evidence that Hungary or other Eastern European countries are diverting grain to the USSR although there are still numerous possibilities for swaps or transshipments. —It would be exceptionally difficult to define “traditional” or “normal” Hungarian or East European trade with the USSR. For example, in the past five years, Hungarian grain exports to the USSR have ranged from 137 to 854 thousand tons. —Option 2 would require a greater degree of cooperation from Hungary than we would expect from our allies and third world countries. —Western grain exporters will not agree to quantitative limits on exports to East Europe as proposed in Option 3. —We have a strong a political stake in treating East Europe differently from the USSR so long as these countries limit their involvement in Afghanistan or in other future Soviet ventures. (C) Whatever option the SCC chooses, State should reemphasize to the Hungarian government that we consider this a critical issue and that efforts by Hungary or other East European countries to circumvent our controls will have a serious, long-term impact on overall relations.3 (C) 3 On March 21, Brzezinski informed the Secretaries of State, Defense, Agriculture, the Treasury, Commerce, and the Director of Central Intelligence that the President had “approved the recommendation of the SCC as follows: We should deal with the Hungarian case on its own merits, without attempting to expand it into a universal set of guidelines. We should inform the Hungarians that we consider sales of 800,000 tons to the USSR this year to be excessive by about 200,000 tons and inform them that sales in that amount—as well as diversion of high technology items—would be seen by the U.S. as unfavorable and would be taken into account in our future sales of grain and other items to Hungary.” (Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box
