792
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
sensitive to any proposed conditions which do not already apply to
other recipients of U.S. fuel. They have in particular focused on U.S.
willingness to ship fuel to India—a non-NPT party with a “bad
record”—and argue that Yugoslavia should in no case be asked to
provide more, in the way of assurances, than did India.
Although the existing agreements on Krsko give the U.S. most of
the assurances required immediately by our pending nuclear legisla-
tion, they fail to provide us with prior approval rights over reprocessing
of U.S. fuel and they cover retransfer of only the first fuel core. We
have been seeking additional Yugoslav assurances which not only
satisfy these immediate criteria but which also would be consistent
with the legislative requirements for new agreements, i.e., U.S. approval
rights over disposition of any fuel used in a U.S.-supplied reactor. We
have explained to the Yugoslav Government that since we expect to
continue to cooperate with Yugoslavia in nuclear energy programs,
we would prefer to resolve the entire issue now rather than to work
out a “quick fix” on U.S. fuel only and then have to renegotiate that
agreement within the 18 month time limit of the legislation. Further-
more, an agreement on U.S. fuel only would be more difficult to sell to
the NRC. Should the Yugoslavs resist our proposed long-term solution,
however, it may be necessary to work out a compromise combining
approval rights on U.S. fuel with a provision for exclusive use of U.S.
fuel in the Krsko reactor.
Following discussions in Washington in late December, we will
resume negotiations in Belgrade February 16–18 in the hope of resolv-
ing this issue before Tito’s arrival2. However, the Yugoslavs—who
have already indicated that Tito will personally make the final decision
on what additional assurances can be given—may decide to raise this
problem in the Presidential talks in March.
Peter Tarnoff3
2 During a meeting in Belgrade February 17–18, the U.S. negotiating team met with
the Yugoslav team and reached a tentative understanding on dealing with the nuclear
fuel issue for the Krsko reactor. (Telegram 1407 from Belgrade, February 21; National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780079–0755) A final agreement consisted
of an exchange of letters among the Department of State, the Yugoslav Foreign Ministry,
and IAEA covering the disposition of spent fuel from the Krsko plant. (Telegram 49293
to Belgrade, February 25; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780087–0054)
3 David Anderson signed for Tarnoff above this typed signature.
