Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX most productive impact. But we will be in no position, at that late date, to influence events or forestall mistakes unless we have taken full advantage of whatever time we still have to build the bridges of understanding, confidence, and—most important—common interest, that will give us meaningful access to the forces that will shape post-Tito Yugoslavia. Those who will lead, when the old man is gone, must not be left to feel isolated from the West, or that the Soviet Union is the only nation whose interests must be taken into account. 6. Nor should we lose sight of the fact that the chances are relatively good after Tito, for a slow transformation from what must now be classed as a repressive (yet by no means highly repressive) regime. Tito has moved Yugoslavia a long way from the Stalinist state it once was; indeed the process of liberalization over the course of the past 30 years has been remarkable. But so long as he remains, the pace of further improvement in the rights enjoyed by Yugoslavs—whether human or political—will be strictly limited. He is too much a product of his past, too much a victim of the cult of hero-worship that has grown up around him, ever to permit much more freedom than now exists. But the seeds have been planted, and there will be substantial elements in the society, after Tito departs, that will want to move toward something more akin to the realities—if not the forms—of Western democracy. They will need support, encouragement, advice and guidance. And we ought to be among the first to whom they turn, out of a confidence born of the experience of having known and worked with us in the time before Tito exited. 7. These not-so-long-term aims are far easier to describe than to achieve. But if they make sense, then our objective ought to be to define and implement programs that will build a web of relationships which will create, first, a better understanding of the interests and actions of each side, followed by growing shared interests, the loss of which would be painful to both parties, and, eventually, access to critical elements of the society that have thus far been largely closed to us (e.g., the Party and the military). 8. We should, therefore, take full advantage of the opportunities the Tito visit offers to establish that web of relationships. The work is already well begun; the months of the Carter administration have seen a steady improvement in our relations to a point where they are as good as they have been since the end of World War II. The visit should be seen as an affirmation of that progress and a commitment to its continuance. Tito should return home convinced that the United States is a friend, that we understand the imperatives of Yugoslavia’s peculiar international circumstance, and support its independence and nonalignment, even though we will sometimes disagree on the specific positions that circumstance and Yugoslav prejudices dicate.
