International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
111
is my belief that the way to combat protectionism is to make progress in
the MTN.
Fukuda: There are three questions that must be addressed in the
Tokyo Round—tariffs, non-tariff barriers and farm products. They are
inseparably interlocked and we must proceed together on all three. On
tariffs there have been proposals by various parties. We need an agreed
formula for tariff reduction. We need not agree here, but we should
move forward on this. Once agreed, this will simplify the technical
work which will follow and give impetus to the Tokyo Round. We
should set a target date of say August or September for us to agree on a
formula for tariff reduction.
On non-tariff barriers we must also make progress. These are of a
bilateral as well as a multilateral nature. We should quicken the pace of
the progress. This is an important goal not only in itself but in the con-
text of broader concerns to avoid protectionism. We must also give con-
sideration to the developing countries in the MTN.
Stammati: There are two reasons to be favorable to the expansion
of international trade. Italy has always been favorable to free trade and
has gone to considerable efforts to remove protectionist measures.
Even though we have deficits, we have made attempts to be integrated
in the international trading system. We must fight tendencies in the
government and among outside protectionists. There are also dangers
in certain sectors or geographical areas who want restrictions. And we
must look at the range of restrictions which hinder international trade,
certain privileges that are part of legislation in a number of countries,
and examine administrative measures that certain countries impose
which are frequently less harmful than conventional protectionist
measures. We should renew the OECD trade pledge at the end of June.
I agree with Prime Minister Fukuda on the need to intensify the
MTN and we hope for substantial progress in the course of the year. We
should have balanced results. We should also create liberalization and
the safeguards for the nations concerned.
We stressed the importance of trade relations between East and
West in the Puerto Rico Declaration.6 The preparatory group expressed
the wish for the development of sound financial and trade relations on
a mutually beneficial basis. President Carter wants the Eastern Euro-
peans to be in the IMF and this would be desirable. President Carter’s
view of this is important.
6 For the text of the Joint Declaration issued on June 28, 1976, at the end of the
Puerto Rico Summit, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Gerald R. Ford,
1976–77, Book II, pp. 1922–1926.
