696 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 6. Access to Port of Norfolk. Noting that he had already discussed the question with Nimetz and Assistant Secretary Vest,4 Andrei explained his interest in an arrangement which would permit Romanian ships to load coal at the Port of Norfolk. He said that the Romanian contract for purchases of coal from Island Creek, Virginia, called for long-term deliveries, perhaps extending as much as 50 years. The inability of Romanian ships to load the coal at Norfolk already added some $2 million per year to their costs. Andrei stressed that Romania was ready to accept whatever conditions or controls the US might want to place on its ships in order to gain access to Norfolk.5 7. Nimetz noted that we already had carefully examined this problem in response to earlier Romanian requests. As a result, he was more pessimistic about this problem than about US export licenses. The port security regulations extended to all Warsaw Pact countries and had been in effect for some twenty years. Secretary Vance said he could readily see how it would be more costly to ship the coal by rail from the mine to Baltimore rather than directly to Hampton Roads. He said that while he could make no promises that a way could be found, he would discuss the Romanian request with Defense Secretary Brown. Andrei expressed appreciation and added that it would be very difficult for Romania to have the coal shipped from Norfolk on non-Warsaw Pact ships, especially since Romania only recently had constructed special cargo ships for this and similar purposes. Christopher 4 The conversation among Assistant Secretary Vest, Counselor Nimetz, and Romanian Foreign Minister Andrei, which took place October 1 in Washington was reported on October 4 in telegram 260381 to Bucharest. Andrei stressed the Romanian desire to receive deliveries of the coal purchased in the United States at Hampton Roads (or the Norfolk Harbor) rather than Baltimore. They also discussed the CSCE process and developments in the Middle East. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, [no film number]) 5 On June 12, 1977, the Romanian Government signed a multi-year contract with Occidental Petroleum for coal from the Island Creek mine in Virginia. (Telegram 4383 from Bucharest, June 14, 1977; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770212–0906) Bucharest sought access to the Hampton Roads port in order to reduce the transportation costs associated with the delivery of coal to Romanian ships. In a conversation with Nimetz on May 7, 1979, Pacoste expressed the hope that the United States would reconsider its access ban of Warsaw Pact vessels to Hampton Roads for Romanian vessels, and that the Romanian Government “would be willing to comply with any restrictions if access can be granted.” (Telegram 2844 from Bucharest, May 10, 1979; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790219–0142)
