1222 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement locations, as agreed by competent scientists and as specified in the agreement. (See attached map, Annex A.) The inspectors to have the right to make prompt on-­the-­spot observations at any point indicated by their instruments as being a probable site of a nuclear test explo­ sion in violation of the agreement. (2) Subject to the satisfactory agreement on the inspection stations and on prompt installation of the inspection system, and further subject to the right to end the test suspension before expiration of the 24-­month period upon notice of a violation of the agreement upon any import­ ant particular; a 24-­month suspension of nuclear testing beginning on ­September 1, 1958, or as soon thereafter as the agreement is effective. This agreement would take effect as soon as ratified by the United States, the USSR, the UK, and any other state, such as Australia, whose territory might require inspection. This agreement would be open to adherence of additional states. b. Establishment of an initial inspection zone against surprise attack in Western USSR and Central Europe. (See attached map, Annex B.) This zone would be from approximately 3° East longitude to 28° East longitude and from 45° North latitude to the Arctic Circle zone described in c. c. Establishment of an inspection zone in Eastern Siberia, the Arc­ tic, Northwestern United States, and Western Canada. (See attached map, Annex C.) This zone would include all of Siberia east of 108° East longitude and the additional Soviet Arctic Circle territory including the Murmansk area. The West would submit to inspection the Arctic Circle area of Norway, Greenland, Canada, and Alaska, and in addition a suf­ ficient proportion of Northwestern United States and Western Canada so as to approximate the same number of square miles as the Soviet area and to include the same percentage of U.S. and USSR area. (NOTE: The zones referred to in paragraphs b and c would have aerial and limited ground inspection of the type proposed in the Four-­ Power proposal of August 29, 1957.) d. The establishment of a technical committee to study the inspec­ tion requirements of a system to assure that outer-­space objects would be used and maintained only for peaceful purposes. This committee would limit its study to the technical problems. e. The establishment of an Armaments Regulation Organization under the aegis of the Security Council of the United Nations to super­ vise any of the foregoing measures that are agreed, as well as to prepare for the supervision of future additional agreed measures. f. An undertaking by all signatory states to make an early and sustained effort, during the initial 24 months of the test suspension, to reach agreement upon, and begin to implement additional steps of, disarmament and arms control, including all of the other measures con­ tained in the August 29, 1957, Western proposals.
