1980  865
have a meeting with the JCS to hear their views, and an NSC meeting 
to address the broad national security issues.2 (U)
Soviet AWACS Testing: A recent DIA intelligence report3 describes 
unusual flight tests of what may well be a new Soviet CANDID (IL–
76) AWACS. Insufficient hard evidence makes a confident assess-
ment difficult, but—­given the obvious Soviet incentive to develop an 
AWACS—I believe that the flight tests indicate a Russian attempt to 
detect low-­flying aircraft and direct interceptors to those aircraft. Such 
a step on their part would be consistent with the evolution of Soviet 
strategic air defenses we anticipated when the B–1 program was can-
celled in 1977.
If this is in fact an AWACS test program, the Soviet Union could 
have a force of 20 CANDID aircraft operational by 1985. We also project 
at that time a deployment of 400 modified FOXBAT interceptors and 
the beginning of the new Sukhoi and Mikoyan fighter deployments; 
these three aircraft can be expected to have a look-­down/shoot-­down 
capability. This Soviet force of interceptors and AWACS would be quite 
effective against penetrating bombers of the B–1 type, but would have 
limited capability against our ALCMs.
Given the problems of attacking ALCMs, the Soviets are more 
likely to extend their defense coverage beyond their borders to attack 
the missile-­launching aircraft. Forward defenses, including extended 
range (1000 nautical mile) interceptors and a force of 50–75 CANDID 
aircraft, could be expected in the 1990s and would offer significant 
capability against the B–52 ALCM carrier.
Our most promising response to that Soviet approach is to extend 
the ALCM range, thereby allowing the carrier to stand off even from 
extended range interceptors. We have two relevant R&D programs; 
first, an improved engine that would give the first generation cruise 
missile 35 percent more range; and second, an improved cruise mis-
sile design that achieves greater range by operating at more efficient 
altitudes. Both improvements could be operational in time to meet this 
threat if it develops. I will keep you advised as more information on 
Soviet testing is received and analyzed. (TS)
Legislative Issues: The conference committee on the FY 81 Defense 
Authorization Bill is scheduled to convene next week. I have already 
had preliminary discussions with both John Stennis and Mel Price, 
and will meet with each next week. I will write the conference com-
mittee a letter strongly objecting to a number of the proposed add-­ons, 
and pointing out the imbalance created by those and by several of the 
2 Carter wrote in the left margin next to this paragraph: “ok, if satisfactory to 
McIntyre.”
3 Not found.
