430
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
work to keep the expectations low. Nonetheless, there would probably
be some press reports pointing out the contrast between such a Decla-
ration and more specific outcome that Callaghan, Lambsdorff, and
others had forecast. (If so, our answer should be that the test will be
post Summit performance, not Declaration language.)
In addition to whatever is said about the more controversial items
of trade, growth, and energy, the others will probably be ready to agree
on the draft Declaration language stressing the need for expanded re-
search, development, and investment in energy in the industrial coun-
tries, and the desirability of more aid to developing countries, in-
cluding aid for energy production. These last two issues are important:
—We need increased energy investment in the industrial world;
the pre-Summit energy working group that we set up developed some
useful ideas on follow-up.
—Bob McNamara would welcome the draft Declaration’s strong
support for IDA replenishment and the invitation for the World Bank
to examine proposals for improving aid for energy production in de-
veloping countries. A strong Summit stand on foreign aid should help
us with the US aid bill, which will be voted on after the Summit.
You may want to press for making these parts of the Declaration as
strong as possible, and for effective follow-up.
10. Bob Strauss spoke to me of the need to avoid placing you in the
position of being made to seem responsible for any lack of progress. I
don’t see why this should happen, if we play our cards sensibly—since
political considerations will probably constrain the other heads of gov-
ernments’ pledges as much as yours, and since all of them will be more
interested in taking credit for what they will portray as a success than
in blaming others for a failure that would damage them all.
11. Nonetheless, you will be the leading figure, because of domi-
nant US power. As in NATO, others will look to you to speak to the
common interest, to the need for according it priority over more paro-
chial concerns, and to the US willingness to play its full part in mutu-
ally reinforcing actions to this end. The other heads of government
know of your problems with the Congress; they don’t expect the
Summit to make them go away. But they want to be reassured about
your own constancy in pursuing the larger goals that you and they
share; they want to know that you will not be diverted, even if you are
delayed, by obstacles along the way.
For this you don’t need briefing papers—only to speak your mind,
as I have heard you do in meetings in the Executive Branch and with
members of the Congress. If you do, the most important prerequisite to
a successful Summit will be fulfilled.
What will it all add up to?
