316 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement reference. Mr. Gray thought that if General Trudeau’s statement were true, it was quite a serious matter. If it was not true, then it appeared not to be helpful inasmuch as it cut across efforts being made elsewhere in our Government to educate our people concerning Soviet scientific advances. The Acting Chairman, IIC, indicated that representatives of the FBI had talked with General Trudeau following the appearance of the story in the Washington newspapers. General Trudeau indicated to the FBI that he made a talk before the annual convention of the American Society for Industrial Security; that he had thought, in appearing before these officials of industry, it would be an excellent opportunity to needle them concerning their responsibility for safeguarding classified secu­ rity information and classified critical equipment in their possession. He said that in making his statements he did not have any specific cases in mind not already known to the FBI. He said he did have in mind past cases like the Abel espionage case, the cases which developed at Fort Monmouth, and the German espionage cases which were developed in World War II. He said his motivation in making his statement was simply to alert his listeners to the very real need for providing adequate industrial security. The Director, USIA, indicated that when General Trudeau raises the hackles of the industrial security people in this manner, it has adverse reverberations elsewhere. Mr. Allen mentioned that the Department of State was presently negotiating with the USSR on increased exchanges of people and that he, himself, has been endeavoring of late to negotiate exchanges of films with the Soviet Union. On the latter score, arrange­ ments had been made for the Soviet Ambassador to the United States to visit Hollywood to observe the making of a film, and the motion picture people involved were concerned from a security standpoint to the extent of requiring a letter from the Director, USIA, before they would permit Ambassador Menshikov to observe the making of a film. He thought that statements of the type attributed to General Trudeau would tend further to aggravate these and other exchange efforts which State and USIA had undertaken. The Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, Dr. Killian, stated that, without belittling the importance of adequate security, he thought that U.S. scientists would feel that statements of the type attributed to General Trudeau constituted a disservice to this country to the extent that such statements created the impression that the Soviet scientists did not have the scientific prowess which they do in fact possess. Mr. Gray indicated that he had raised the Trudeau matter for dis­ cussion, not with any intent of suggesting action be initiated against
