250
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
vened to review the outstanding questions on the Solomon Steel
Report.3
I. REFERENCE PRICE SYSTEM
1. Time Length—We had a discussion about the length of time
during which the reference price system would last since this was not
mentioned in the initial summary. There was a clear consensus that the
report should make clear that while there is no set deadline on the ref-
erence price system, that it was intended to be temporary and would be
reviewed periodically to determine its effectiveness and in light of
changing circumstances.4
2. Dropping Anti-Dumping Cases—The question here was whether
we should seek specific assurances from the major steel companies to
drop their pending anti-dumping cases and to forego filing ones that
are now in the process of being prepared. The Justice Department felt
strongly that no such assurances can be asked on legal grounds. Com-
panies could not be asked to forego their legal rights in return for this
system. However, presumably the course taken by the industry on
anti-dumping suits would be a factor in the Treasury’s determination
as to the length of time the price should be maintained. Tony Solomon
has implied to them, as strongly as he can within legal bounds, that the
Administration cannot be expected to simultaneously pursue this
“fast-track” reference price system and the more laborious investiga-
tion of anti-dumping actions.5
3. Legal Issues Regarding Reference Price—There are essentially two
legal issues involved, which the Department of Justice had not had the
opportunity previously to explore. First was the authority of the Secre-
tary of the Treasury to self-initiate a dumping investigation, which is a
key ingredient in this fast-track reference price proposal. While the Jus-
tice Department does not yet have a formal opinion, the Assistant At-
torney General for the Office of Legal Counsel indicated that he thinks
(as does the Treasury Department) that a strong case can be made that
3 No minutes of this meeting were found. On November 23, Blumenthal sent a sum-
mary of the Steel Task Force’s recommendations to Carter for his approval. Carter sent
Eizenstat Blumenthal’s cover memorandum on which he wrote: “Stu—You, Solomon &
others work out differences. Then submit to me,” adding as a postscript “Expedite.”
(Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Sub-
ject Files, Box 81, Steel (7)) A copy of Blumenthal’s November 23 memorandum to Carter,
without Carter’s comments but with the summary of the Task Force report attached, is in
the Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze
Subject Files, Box 81, [Steel] [6].
4 Carter wrote “I agree” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
5 Carter highlighted the final sentence of this paragraph and wrote “good” in the
adjacent margin.
