246 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Discussion The U.S. approach to verification of rail-­mobile ICBMs parallels the approach taken for road-­mobile ICBMs, except that there is no provision for a Deployment Area for constraining exercise dispersals. Thus, rail mobiles would be confined to rail garrisons no larger than a specified size (yet to be determined), and would be allowed to leave the garrison for training, maintenance and testing, as well as for dispersals. There are no geographic or other operational limitations on rail-­mobile ICBMs when they are taking part in exercise or operational dispersals. The U.S. approach to rail-­mobile verification is consistent with the rail-­mobile Peacekeeper, allowing Peacekeeper trains to have access to most of the U.S. rail network. The President’s ICBM modernization decision of April 22, 1989 is consistent with this approach. However, some are concerned that under the current U.S. proposal, which allows geographically unlimited dispersals from small garrisons, [2 lines not declassified] They also believe that our current approach may detract from stability because it would require dispersal of the force during a crisis for survivability. They believe that the need for such dispersal could be a factor toward inducing a Soviet first strike. Those who favor the current position note that all of these issues were considered in great detail by the Reagan Administration. They believe the current approach allows for the operational flexibility necessary to ensure survivability in the future while also providing a necessary degree of predictability and force transparency. The Peacekeeper concept requires that the missiles be able to deploy onto the full commercial rail network and blend into the larger commercial train population, forcing the Soviets to barrage the entire network or search the entire network in the hope of employing selective targeting. Option 1. Retain the existing position allowing rail-­mobile ICBMs to depart the rail garrison for training, maintenance, and testing purposes, and for exercise and operational dispersals with notifications, but without geographic limitations. (favored by JCS, OSD, Ambassador Rowny, and by the DCI as a fallback) Option 2. Alter the existing position to adopt a large Deployment Area with unrestricted movement within that Deployment Area. No dispersals permitted outside the Deployment Area. (favored by both ACDA and DCI as a fallback) — Option 2A. Provide for Deployment Areas using the civilian rail network limited only by geographic boundaries.
