156 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Nations. They also undertake to accept the compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice with respect to all disputes emanating from the application or the interpretation of their contractual arrangements. 3. In order to achieve peace between them, they have agreed to negotiate within three months from the signing of this “Framework” a peace treaty between them.4 In response to Egypt’s offer of full peace and normal relations, Israel has proposed the restoration of the exercise of full Egyptian sovereignty in the Sinai up to the internationally recognized border between Egypt and Israel. Security arrangements, the timing of withdrawal of all Israeli forces and settlements,5 and the elements of a normal, peaceful relationship have been discussed and will be defined in the peace treaty. 4. They will participate in negotiations on resolution of the Palestinian problem in all its aspects. The solution must recognize the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people and enable the Palestinians to participate in the determination of their own future. To this end, they agree that agreements relating to the West Bank and Gaza should be reached in three stages:6 (a) Egypt and Israel hereby agree that, in order to ensure a peaceful and orderly transfer of authority, there should be a transitional period not exceeding five years. They further agree that the Israeli military government will be abolished and withdrawn as soon as a government shall be freely elected by the inhabitants of these areas to replace the existing military government. This transitional arrangement should derive its authority from an agreement concluded among Israel, Jordan, and Egypt. To negotiate the details of a transitional arrangement, the Government of Jordan will be invited to join the negotiations on the basis of this agreement.7 Palestinian advisers selected by Jordan and Egypt may be members of their delegations. The establishment of the new regime should give due consideration both to the principle of selfgovernment by the inhabitants of these territories and to the legitimate security concerns of all the parties. (b) Egypt, Israel, and Jordan should meet to negotiate an agreement to end Israel’s military government in the West Bank and Gaza and to establish the elected interim government there.8 This agreement would define the authorities of the interim government. It would in- 4 In the left-hand margin adjacent to this sentence, Vance wrote “promptly.” 5 In the left-hand margin adjacent to this clause, Vance wrote “from Sinai.” 6 A blank half-page follows this phrase. At the bottom of the page, a typewritten notation reads “. . . more.” 7 In the left-hand margin adjacent to this sentence, Vance wrote “full autonomy.” 8 In the left-hand margin adjacent to this sentence, Vance wrote “X.”
