156
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Nations. They also undertake to accept the compulsory jurisdiction of
the International Court of Justice with respect to all disputes emanat-
ing from the application or the interpretation of their contractual
arrangements.
3. In order to achieve peace between them, they have agreed to ne-
gotiate within three months from the signing of this “Framework” a
peace treaty between them.4 In response to Egypt’s offer of full peace
and normal relations, Israel has proposed the restoration of the exercise
of full Egyptian sovereignty in the Sinai up to the internationally recog-
nized border between Egypt and Israel. Security arrangements, the
timing of withdrawal of all Israeli forces and settlements,5 and the ele-
ments of a normal, peaceful relationship have been discussed and will
be defined in the peace treaty.
4. They will participate in negotiations on resolution of the Pales-
tinian problem in all its aspects. The solution must recognize the legiti-
mate rights of the Palestinian people and enable the Palestinians to par-
ticipate in the determination of their own future. To this end, they agree
that agreements relating to the West Bank and Gaza should be reached
in three stages:6
(a) Egypt and Israel hereby agree that, in order to ensure a peaceful
and orderly transfer of authority, there should be a transitional period
not exceeding five years. They further agree that the Israeli military
government will be abolished and withdrawn as soon as a government
shall be freely elected by the inhabitants of these areas to replace the ex-
isting military government. This transitional arrangement should de-
rive its authority from an agreement concluded among Israel, Jordan,
and Egypt. To negotiate the details of a transitional arrangement, the
Government of Jordan will be invited to join the negotiations on the
basis of this agreement.7 Palestinian advisers selected by Jordan and
Egypt may be members of their delegations. The establishment of the
new regime should give due consideration both to the principle of self-
government by the inhabitants of these territories and to the legitimate
security concerns of all the parties.
(b) Egypt, Israel, and Jordan should meet to negotiate an agree-
ment to end Israel’s military government in the West Bank and Gaza
and to establish the elected interim government there.8 This agreement
would define the authorities of the interim government. It would in-
4 In the left-hand margin adjacent to this sentence, Vance wrote “promptly.”
5 In the left-hand margin adjacent to this clause, Vance wrote “from Sinai.”
6 A blank half-page follows this phrase. At the bottom of the page, a typewritten no-
tation reads “. . . more.”
7 In the left-hand margin adjacent to this sentence, Vance wrote “full autonomy.”
8 In the left-hand margin adjacent to this sentence, Vance wrote “X.”
