1020 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement largely wasted military manpower on constructive economic projects much on road building and maintenance. With modern equipment and better training a much smaller military establishment could in ordinary circumstances fulfill Paraguay’s internal security requirements. Paraguay is desperately in need of developmental capital for increasing its primary production and export trade; and the Ambassador suggested that action by the U.S. to assist the Paraguayan economy should be along the following broad lines: 1. Encourage the GOP to cooperate to the fullout extent with the DLF and continue with the monetary stabilization program. 2. Urge the GOP to work closely with the Inter-American Development Bank and other international agencies both for the purpose of obataing credits and for guidance into the fiscal and administration reforms needed to enhance Paraguay’s qualification for credits. The merits of self-­help should be particularly stressed in dealing with the Paraguayans. 3. Hold to a policy of not granting U.S. funds for direct budgetary assistance, but make available for economic development substantial amounts from the international lending agencies. The U.S. should consider early loans for the following purposes: a. To assist in the creation of a privately-­operated Paraguayan Development Bank to provide substantial medium and long-­term credit for the country’s leading cattle raisers and industrialists. b. To Support the National Development Institute ([illegible in the original] to National de Fernanto) which is being set up to replace the moribund Bank of Paraguay and to provide credit mainly for the smaller farmers and business men. U.S. aid to this organization should be conditioned, however, on the realization of the GOP’s announced policy of [illegible in the original] capital inverstment (approximately $1 million) each year in the institute. c. To provide additional help in the GOP’s road construction program—­preferably under a coordinated plan prepared by the IADB. d. To support the GOP in the construction of a hydroelectric project on the [illegible in the original] river system on the Brazilian border near Foz do Iguaszu. The total cost, including dam, power station and transmission lines to Asunción, could reach some $20 million. A project in Paraguay of this magnitude would have to be undertaken with the aid of several of the Washington lending agencies on a group basis. The present line of thinking is for the GOP to build and own the works but to lease it to private enterprise under a long-­term management contract. The IADB should be the prime mover for this undertaking. It could be tied in readily
