914
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
RECOMMENDATION:
That you sign the letter attached at Tab A.5
Jim Fallows and the State Department have cleared the text of the
letter.
Tab A
Letter From President Carter to Jamaican Prime Minister
Manley6
Washington, February 13, 1978
Dear Mr. Prime Minister:
Thank you very much for your thoughtful letter of December 22. I
was glad to learn of your views on economic relations among devel-
oped and developing countries.
The issues you highlighted—commodities, debt, energy, and the
transfer of resources—are all important. As you know, my Administra-
tion is eager to cooperate with other nations for global economic devel-
opment, and I greatly value our close working relationship in these en-
deavors. I understand that Under Secretary Cooper will invite Sir
Egerton Richardson, your Special Adviser, to Washington to discuss
these North-South issues as well as bilateral concerns. We know that
new efforts are needed to solve worldwide economic problems, and we
hope that the new United Nations General Assembly Ad Hoc Com-
mittee of the Whole will help us in that search.
Let me reaffirm the United States’ commitment to strengthening
the international system for commodity trading. We will continue to
search for sound, effective ways to deal with the problems of indi-
vidual commodities within the framework of the UNCTAD Integrated
Program. On the Common Fund, I regret that the negotiations have not
progressed as rapidly as we both have wished. At the November nego-
tiating conference, the industrialized countries proposed a formula for
an effective Common Fund, which we hope will provide a basis for
fruitful negotiations when they resume.
We believe that a Common Fund should support commodity ar-
rangements between producers and consumers that are designed to
stabilize prices around their long-term market trends. In our view, a
general expansion of world trade would do more than anything else to
5 Carter indicated his approval of the recommendation.
6 No classification marking.
