978 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III (1) Need to further liberalize conditions for IMF Compensatory Finance Facility (CFF) loans to offset declines in foreign exchange earnings caused by depressed world market commodity prices. (2) Inclusion in new Wheat Agreement provisions for financing of stocks to be held by LDCs.3 (3) Number of commodities for which price stabilization agreements may be feasible. (4) The weight to be given economic feasibility in judging desirability of negotiating new international commodity agreements. (5) Source of capital for a Common Fund; appropriate capital structure for a Fund; need to give such a Fund a role in financing non-stabilization measures (second window); and design of an acceptable decision-making structure for a Fund. IV. Debt March 1978 UNCTAD Ministerial meeting produced broad agreement on DC debt.4 At issue are: (1) In debt rescheduling, whether debt relief should be provided by creditors not only in situations of imminent default but also as aid device to enhance economic growth and help LDCs achieve development targets. (2) Extent to which debt relief should be conditioned upon debtor country undertaking comprehensive economic development and/or stabilization program. V. Monetary Issues US has fostered reforms which allow international monetary system to be more responsive to individual country needs. Yet LDC’s believe present monetary arrangements operate to their disadvantage and they therefore seek greater access to official BOP financing on favorable terms. At issue are: (1) Nature and extent of conditions on IMF loans. 3 Nations were negotiating a new agreement to replace the 1971 International Wheat Agreement. No agreement was reached in 1978 and the negotiations were suspended. 4 On March 11, the UNCTAD Trade and Development Board issued Resolution 165 (S. IX), which, among other things, reflected agreement that donor governments would endeavor to revise the terms of previous development assistance loans in keeping with the more lenient terms of contemporary loans. The resolution also called for international expert consideration of how the way in which previous debt issues were addressed might offer lessons for the future. See Yearbook of the United Nations, 1978, p. 429; see also “Developing Nations Agree to Reduce Debt Relief,” The New York Times, March 12, 1978, p. 10.
