610 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 A. That he be fully briefed on the political situation and the specific plan of which he is a part. B. That he be allowed to represent himself notionally to [cryptonym not declassified] as Major General instead of his actual rank of Brigadier General. He explained that this request was motivated by prestige reasons and explained that the Iranians, including [cryptonym not declassified], who are exceedingly rank conscious, would attach a disproportionate degree of importance to this point. C. That he be allowed to offer some explanation of his trip to Governor Driscoll of New Jersey and the Attorney General for the State of New Jersey for whom he presently works. At Mr. Waller’s request, he promised to say nothing at this time to either of the above officials but wanted to give them as much advance notice as possible before his departure. III. [1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified] A. It be arranged that the Pakistan Government invite him to Karachi for the purpose of giving advice on police and security matters. B. He visit the Sheikh of Kuwait as notional representative of a police equipment corporation and attempt to negotiate a substantial sale of police equipment to the Sheikh of Kuwait. IV. General Schwarzkopf was amenable to either of the above suggestions or a combination of both. He had no alternative suggestions to make at this time. Drafting Officer’s Note: Since General Schwarzkopf must make some explanation to Governor Driscoll and the Attorney General for New Jersey, suggestion (A) above would appear preferable because sales representative cover, which ostensibly represents private enterprise, would make it more difficult for General Schwarzkopf to justify an absence from work. V. General Schwarzkopf wanted KUBARK to know the following as it might have a bearing on his mission: A. Prior to General Schwarzkopf’s departure, then Chief of Staff Razmara, who was jealous of General Schwarzkopf’s command power over the Persian Gendarme´rie and who desired that the Gendarme´rie be largely absorbed by the Army, to some degree poisoned [cryptonym not declassified] mind against General Schwarzkopf. The result of this was that General Schwarzkopf’s relations with [cryptonym not declassified] were slightly strained at the time of former’s departure. Furthermore, while [cryptonym not declassified] was visiting the U.S. in 1949, General Schwarzkopf attempted to see him but was unsuccessful. This could be attributed to the tight schedule which [cryptonym not declas-
