26
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
recognizes that we must assume the Soviet Union could retain its ex-
isting capability even in the presence of a comprehensive ban. Elimina-
tion of these capabilities could not be reliably verified and confidence
in the system in the absence of testing could be quickly regained. This
system would be effective against such critical low altitude systems as
the current near-real-time imaging system. In such a situation it would
not be prudent to assume an ASAT agreement would be a suitable sub-
stitute for survivability measures. Furthermore, U.S. counteractions in
survivability and ASAT development could take several years. There-
fore, the OSD feels the U.S. should develop an ASAT capability. To-
ward these ends, OSD favors Approach Two.
In the JCS view, a ban on ASAT activities would concede existing
Soviet capabilities, since their elimination cannot be verified. Con-
versely, such a ban would deny the U.S. the capability to develop a
counter to military-related USSR space systems, particularly those
which may constitute a direct threat to U.S. forces. Arms Control agree-
ments cannot be used as a substitute for survivability of U.S. space
systems; to do so would be to invite denial of U.S. use of space systems
for a critically long period during a war given the likelihood of unilat-
eral treaty abrogation at the outset of conflict. An agreement to prevent
testing of an orbital ASAT has two drawbacks. First, Soviet confidence
in their current system would not be appreciably reduced. Second, the
U.S. would be unable to overcome the current Soviet advantage. There-
fore, the JCS believe the U.S. should develop an ASAT capability and
further that the U.S. should not enter into any agreement that would
ban ASAT research, development, testing, and deployment.
8.
Letter From the Special Advisor to the President for Science
and Technology (Press) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, September 8, 1977
Dear Harold:
Attached is a report prepared by the Office of Science and Tech-
nology Policy Space Advisory Group on the anti-satellite issue. Their
1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–80–0017, Box
56, 471.96 (Aug–10 Nov) 1977. Secret. A stamped notation at the top of the page reads:
“SEC DEF HAS SEEN.” In the upper right-hand corner, Brown wrote “9/10. AF should
also get a copy. HB.”
