806
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
4. We are prepared to support Iranian political elements toward
the achievement of the following objectives:
—To develop a coalition of moderate, nationalist elements inside
and outside Iran which can provide a credible alternative to mullah
rule, including religious elements who oppose Khomeini’s theocratic
aspirations.
—To organize active resistance to Soviet penetration of Iran at all
levels of Iranian society; and
—To counter the growth of communist and radical leftist forces in
Iranian politics.
5. The most important contribution which can be made by those
Iranians now living outside the country, who are deeply concerned
about the future of Iran, is to use their influence, talents and contacts
to build a coalition of forces within the country which offers the people
of Iran a viable alternative between the two extremes of clerical dictator-
ship and pro-Soviet Marxism.
6. The eventual political and economic structure of Iran is some-
thing for Iranians to work out for themselves. We have no desire to
impose specific solutions. However, we share an interest with the peo-
ple of Iran that their nation be free, independent, united, and not under
the domination of foreign powers or ideologies. We are prepared to
assist patriotic Iranians to work toward that goal.
294.
Message From the Department of State to the Swiss
Ambassador to Iran (Lang)1
Washington, undated
1. We would like to clarify as precisely as possible the thinking of
Bani-Sadr, Ghotbzadeh, Habibi (and other leaders you might appropri-
ately contact) regarding the possibility of hostage trials. We would also
like them to understand our strong objections to that procedure but
our recognition that Iran will try to find a means to end the crisis that
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,
Box 42, Subject File, Iran Papers 5/80–7/80. Secret. Sick thought the message, which
resulted from the June 3 SCC discussion (see Document 291), did an "excellent job of
subtly suggesting" acceptable arrangements, but he found it to be missing the "tough
warning which was initially the object of the exercise." (Memorandum from Sick to
Brzezinski, June 6; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East
File, Box 42, Subject File, Iran Papers 5/80–7/80)
