656
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
C. Food Supply—Uncertainty and Scarcity
The unpredictability inherent in each component of the balance of
world food supply and demand is compounded when one attempts to
project how the components will interact in the future. It is the assump-
tion of this study, however, that the world already has entered a period
of food uncertainty in which it is likely to remain for at least the next
decade. The world has, to be sure, always lived with some uncertainty
over food supplies. Because of its interconnection with other global
issues, however, the scope and international political impact of the cur-
rent situation are much greater.
A significant number of nations, to varying degrees, cannot now
take for granted their ability to produce or procure enough food to
meet—in the case of poorer countries—basic subsistence requirements,
or—in the case of more affluent food importers—desired nutritional
standards. There will of course be year-to-year variations in world food
supply during the period of food uncertainty. A coincidence of good
harvests will at times mean relative abundance and some stockpiling,
but there may also be crop failures and famines. The extent of malnutri-
tion and localized starvation will also fluctuate, but both are likely to be
ever present.
The period of food uncertainty could continue indefinitely, or it
could end in dramatically different fashions. Increased production and
advances in technology might combine with a slowing of world popu-
lation growth to usher in an era of assured sufficiency of supply.
Should population growth and other demand factors outstrip food pro-
duction and exhaust stockpiles, however, the world might move from
food uncertainty to a period of chronic and widespread food scarcity
that could have severe human consequences.3
Foreign dependence on US agricultural production is increasing.
As long as the period of food uncertainty persists, demand for US food
exports will probably fluctuate within relatively high parameters. In-
come from foreign food sales will contribute to US economic strength
and to foreign perception of its overall strength as a world power.
The possession of plenty amidst uncertainty will also give the US
an opportunity to derive political influence from the discretionary allo-
cation of its agricultural exports, i.e., the ability to decide to whom to
sell or give food. Assuming US willingness and ability to use food as an
instrument in international politics (discussed below), its effectiveness
as leverage will hinge on the interplay of a number of complex
considerations.
3 Except in the case of a dramatic shift in climate that adversely affected production,
there is only a small chance of chronic food scarcity for the next 20 years or so. [Footnote
in the original.]
