Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I forced to choose sides. If the opposition prevails in Nicaragua, the democratic middle in these other countries may conclude that it is time to throw their fate in with the guerrillas against the government. 5. Transnational Linkages. The extremes have obtained help, training, and encouragement from abroad. The military has obtained arms from the Israelis, Argentines, and the international black market. The left is getting increasing help from each other. A recent intelligence report suggests that the Cubans have also decided to encourage local—in this case, Honduran cadres—to assist in training and equipping their comrades, the TP faction of the Sandinistas. These conditions combine to present U.S. policy with two major problems, perhaps dilemmas: 1. How do we deal with the fact that the political middle is under attack from the two extremes? What can we do to effectively promote our human rights policy? 2. How do we reconcile our goal of wanting to discard a century of U.S. paternalism with a need and an instinct to try to manage events rather than let them manage us? Regardless of the outcome in Nicaragua, El Salvador, Honduras and Guatemala will continue to be plagued by polarization. The left will harass, and the right will repress, creating more support for the left. The political dynamic is almost inevitable. Moreover, whatever happens in Nicaragua will spill over to its neighbors, and indeed it already has. II. How to Tackle the Issues? A Conceptual Framework If I may borrow one of your analytic modes, I think the problem of Central America can be best understood by viewing it in three concentric circles: 1. The internal political upheavals in El Salvador, Honduras, Guatemala. 2. The relationship of those countries with each other and with Costa Rica and Panama. (Dealing not only with the problem of international terrorism, but also with the El Salvador-Honduras border dispute, Belize, and the Central American Common Market.) 3. The larger relationship of Central America to the U.S., Mexico, Venezuela, Colombia, and the Caribbean. A. Our goals are the following: 1. Internal Politics in Central America. (a) Strengthen the democratic center in each country and the links between these groups in different countries. (b) Provide an atmosphere conducive to the eventual evolution of democratically-elected governments.
