1312  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
request in full. The Defense Department, therefore, proposed that the 
two Governments modify the credit arrangement in order to provide 
the Venezuelan Government relief by permitting annual payments in 
lieu of semi-annual installments for all transactions not consummated 
in FY 1960, and by implementing the FY 1961 and 1962 Venezuelan 
credit program on the basis of ten percent down and payment of the 
balance at the end of the three year period.3
This modification was offered to the Venezuelan Government in 
the Department’s note of June 17, 1960.4 However, due to an increas-
ingly grave political and economic situation which has arisen since 
the Department’s proposal, the Venezuelan Government responded to 
the note by sending another special representative to Washington this 
month to plead on its behalf that the United States Government recon-
sider its request for longer credit terms, and, as a measure of immediate 
relief, to request the United States Government to grant a moratorium 
on payments now due and which will become due on most purchases. 
This request was confirmed by the Venezuelan Embassy note no. 1180 
dated November 14, 1960, a copy of which is enclosed for your infor-
mation and reference.5
Since the original request of the Venezuelan Government for mod-
ification of the credit terms was received, the economic situation of 
Venezuela has deteriorated rapidly. The Venezuelan Treasury is seri-
ously depleted and the Government faces a deficit of about 220 million 
dollars this fiscal year. The present Government has already pared its 
budget down about as far as is politically prudent. In fact, the politi-
cal disturbances that have taken place recently even in part from that 
Government’s rigid [illegible in the original] and such disturbances and 
riots are likely to recur, at least sporadically in the foreseeable future. 
[illegible in the original], the present Venezuelan Government feels that 
it is in no economic position to make payments on past purchases and 
will require an extension of repayment terms.
The Department of State considers it to be in the interests of United 
States Government to support on an urgent basis this request from 
the Venezuelan Government for relief upon its present overburdened 
budget.
The Department of State strongly recommends that both our 
Departments give immediate consideration to granting relief to the 
Venezuelan Government by providing a moratorium on payments 
3 Secretary Herter approved the new credit arrangements on June 11, 1960. 
(Memorandum from Rubottom to Herter, June 3, 1960; ARA/IAS Files, Lot 65 D 280. 
“Defense Affairs: Mansfield Amendment”)
4 Not printed;
5 Not found with source text; a copy is separately filed under
