408 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Communist leader Mora Valverde to speak over the radio, thus avoiding the Communist attempt to pose as martyrs who could not enjoy freedom of expression. It was pointed out by the Costa Ricans that the economy of Costa Rica is largely based on its foreign trade. The principal item of export is coffee which in 1957 produced 49% of the foreign exchange. It was further emphasized that the economic development and improvement in social welfare in Costa Rica were closely bound to the price of ­coffee. In Costa Rica a very large percentage of the population are directly connected with the production of coffee where small plantations are the rule rather than large landholdings as in other countries of Central America. Thus a rise or drop in the price of coffee directly affects a very large number of Costa Ricans. The President pointed out that the recent drop in the price of coffee had now begun to seriously affect the economic and social stability of Costa Rica. Unemployment had begun to appear precisely at a time when the Government’s revenue had dropped. The Government and people of Costa Rica hoped that the United States Government would do what it could to stabilize coffee prices as a further drop would seriously affect the living standards of the masses and might present a fruitful field for the development of extremist ideas with consequent danger to an Administration which firmly supports the development of private initiative. The President said that he had developed a plan, the implementation of which would require the conversion of the internal debt to an external debt, but that the possibility of doing this was directly related to reaching an agreement with the U.S. Treasury concerning the payment of taxes by the United Fruit Company. At the present time 50% of the taxes on UFCO profits were paid to the United States and 50% to Costa Rica. If an agreement could be reached whereby the Costa Rican share could be increased this would be a very useful form of assistance for them. They felt that Costa Rica was entitled to a greater share than it was presently receiving. At the present time the revenue from this source for Costa Rica amounts to some $3 million. Costa Rica had an internal debt of $30 million. If they were able to obtain this agreement they intended to devote the revenue from the banana tax to the servicing of a loan from foreign sources, government or private. 27,000 coffee plantation owners had been affected by the present drop in coffee prices. They had reduced their labor cost by laying off workers and the Government was currently not able to undertake projects giving work to these unemployed. If Costa Rica were able to obtain this $30 million loan they were prepared to assign the revenue from the UFCO tax to service this debt and furthermore the National Bank was prepared to guarantee it. The Costa Ricans felt that if this project could be carried out it would make a very great contribution
