1438 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 837. Letter 76 from Clough to Johnson1 Letter No. 76 Washington, November 8, 1957 Dear Alex: We have just emerged successful from a spirited encounter with the Chinese Communists supported by the rest of the Soviet bloc at the Red Cross Conference in New Delhi where the Communists endeav­ ored to exclude the Republic of China. Since Ed was present there is no need for me to describe the affair in detail. It is possible that Wang may attack us at the next meeting for our activities there and we will cover this point in your instructions. We sent an official delegation to the Conference only after considerable debate within the Department and with strong misgivings on the part of FE. We felt it would establish an unfortunate precedent for the U.S. Delegation to be present officially with the Chinese Communists. However we did go on the basis that this was to be a unique, humanitarian, non-political meeting at which all those having a reasonable claim to be present would be admitted. We of course could not assent to seeing the Republic of China excluded and the final result of our efforts was the admission of the GRC at which the Chinese Communists and the other Communist regimes walked out. Judge Goodman in the Powell-Schumann sedition case handed down an order on November 1 giving the U.S. 30 days in which to issue defense attorney Wirin a passport valid for travel to Communist China, failing which he would dismiss the case. I will enclose a copy of the order if we can secure a legible one. In the meeting today with L we decided that the overall interests of the U.S. Government would probably be best served by validating Wirin’s passport. Not to do so would place the responsibility on the State Department for dismissal of the case. Now that we have validated passports of American newsmen, we feel that validating Wirin’s passport would not appreciably decrease the pressure from others who desire to go to Communist China. He has reasons for going which are unique. I don’t believe that validating Wirin’s passport will necessarily lead to his admission to Communist China or the procurement of the evidence which he is seeking. The Chinese Communists in a letter dated October 30 rejected the court’s request for judicial assistance from Chinese Communist courts on the “ground that there is no agreement for judicial assistance between the U.S. and the Peoples Republic of China”. My guess is that Peiping will continue to play this case in such a way as to endeavor to force the 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Confidential; Official–­Informal. A copy was sent to Martin.
