purely domestic concern, representing as it does the exercise of a sovereign right and that the authority of Congress in immigration matters is exclusive. Accordingly, you should in any discussion on international aspects of immigration problems, be careful to note any tendency to call this doctrine into question and should, if necessary, be prepared to combat such a tendency by clear and unequivocal statements based on the historic position of the United States. For use in this respect, there are enclosed (Appendices 26, 27, 28)42 memoranda relating to the immigration policy and history of the United States, the Italian invitation to participate in the Conference on Immigration and Emigration in 1927, and a list of certain correspondence regarding immigration. It is possible that during the course of the Conference it may seem to you to be desirable to avoid all discussion of this Topic. This might be effected by pointing out that immigration and emigration matters are to constitute the sole subject matter of the March Conference in Habana. In this connection, and for your confidential information it may be stated that while the United States has not yet accepted the invitation to attend that Conference it will in all likelihood participate, in which case the Department’s instructions to the American Delegates will be based in essence upon the policy set forth above. Topic 4. Revision of the conventions signed at Buenos Aires in 1910 and at Santiago, Chile, in 1923, with a view to formulating changes which shall assure uniform and effective protection for trade-marks in the States members of the Pan American Union. [Detailed instructions on the proposed amendments to convention of 1923 are omitted.] Topic 5. Consideration of the results of the Conference on Uniformity of Communication Statistics, which met at Lima in December, 1924, in compliance with a resolution of the Fifth International Conference of American States. Topic 6. Consideration of the results of the Standardization Conference which met at Lima on December 23, 1924, in accordance with a resolution
