1042
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
recognition of the integrity and security of Israel and agreement to es-
tablish normal diplomatic relations, and (c) state its readiness to accept
“a Palestinian entity on the West Bank and Gaza provided it and any
negotiators on its behalf first agree to accept the existence, security, and
integrity of Israel within its 1967 boundaries and to undertake a perma-
nent non-aggression agreement with all of the existing states adjoining
it.” In connection with the last point, there is a statement that the
United States would prefer that such an entity be confederated with
Jordan or Egypt for a period of at least five years, but the U.S. would
abide by any reasonable solution acceptable to the states adjacent to
such an entity.
It is significant in the Bandar approach that there is no mention of
Jerusalem, although that may be subsumed in the commitment to the
1967 borders.
Analysis
[1 line not declassified]
—On the one hand, the idea of close Saudi-U.S. collaboration in
some sort of Middle East Marshall Plan has been in Saudi minds for
several years, and we have heard it on other occasions. Also, the fact
that the Saudis are asking for U.S. support for a Palestinian entity asso-
ciated with Jordan and Israel’s returns to lines approximating those of
1967 is not surprising.
—On the other hand, the idea that the Saudis would shift to open
support of the U.S.-Egyptian-Israeli approach to an Arab-Israeli settle-
ment and acceptance of Israel would be a major and important shift in
Saudi policy. Doubts are raised because none of Fahd’s recent commu-
nications to you, including one just a few days ago, indicates that the
Saudis are ready for such a shift. It is true that the Mecca Mosque take-
over4 is a new factor in their thinking, and only that would seem to ex-
plain such a sharp change in their position, if any, since Hermann Eilts
visited Saudi Arabia just a month ago.
[1 paragraph (4½ lines) not declassified]
Nevertheless, the approach is important enough to be investi-
gated. Hermann Eilts’ visit to Saudi Arabia in early January would pro-
vide an opportunity to probe [less than 1 line not declassified] (Hermann
will leave for Cairo the evening of December 27 to receive an honorary
degree at Cairo University and could be in Saudi Arabia at the end of
the first week in January.)
Before giving Hermann instructions to do more than probe [less
than 1 line not declassified] however, you will want to consider seriously
whether you really want to deal with such a Saudi proposal of these di-
mensions in the next few months.
—Saudi support for the peace process and recognition of Israel
would be a major endorsement of the success at Camp David and,
4 See footnote 7, Document 312.
