524  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
segment of the Dominican population into determined oppositionists. 
The turning-­point for this group, mostly middle-­class professionals, 
businessmen and intellectuals, was provided by the Castro-­supported 
invasions of June 1959. Although unsuccessful, the invasion attempt, by 
its example of active resistance and because of Trujillo’s brutal repres-
sion, rekindled a demand for basic liberties and sparked a determination 
to remove the Generalissimo.
What followed has been a most widespread and persistent 
anti-Trujillo movement, characterized by increasing contacts among 
dissidents, cautious attempts at organization, pamphleteering amongst 
the university students and sporadic acts of terrorism by extremists. 
This ferment first came to a head in January 1960 with the discovery 
and ruthless suppression of a plot to assassinate the Benefactor. At this 
juncture the Church intervened, calling for humane treatment of those 
arrested and for a broader measure of civil liberties. Trujillo stubbornly 
refused to retreat; combining minor concessions with intimidation 
he has, at least temporarily, suppressed the Church. Plotting and iso-
lated acts of resistance continued, however, heightened by the nation’s 
declining economy and the Generalissimo’s growing international dis-
repute. Dissident figures, exasperated by continued repressions and 
emboldened by OAS condemnation of the Trujillo regime, prepared 
another coup in August 1960, but this too was uncovered and quietly 
but vigorously suppressed.
The situation in the Dominican Republic now appears, superfi-
cially at least, favorable to Trujillo. OAS condemnation produced noth-
ing more than severance of diplomatic, but not consular relations. No 
meaningful economic sanctions have been levied. He has secured a large 
share of the “windfall “sugar market formerly allocated by the U.S. to 
Cuba.2 His international ­credit is still relatively secure and convert-
ibility of the peso has been maintained. The opposition is discouraged, 
and the Church has apparently retreated. The business community, now 
convinced that change is unlikely, is abandoning passive resistance. The 
military and the police are still loyal, and the Generalissimo still holds 
a monopoly of the means of power. However, the seeds of Trujillo’s 
downfall have been sown and are still growing. The economy contin-
ues in drastic decline. Large numbers of the urban and rural poorer 
classes have slipped below subsistence level. All imported goods are 
in short supply. The dissidents, in spite of so many costly failures, have 
now penetrated the armed forces. The Church, in spite of its seeming 
passivity, is still pressuring Trujillo. Although not yet sufficiently strong 
to end the era of Trujillo, these forces cannot be indefinitely contained, 
2 Documentation on this subject is in Department of State decimal files 411.396 and 
839.235.
