Chapter 5, May–June 1990  783
on the basis of the Ottawa Accords; and, issues pertaining to tanks, 
artillery and armor. We have had some convergence of views. (S)
We have prepared the agreement on the bilateral chemical weap-
ons which offers a serious breakthrough. We note our need to do some-
thing about the multilateral problem. There are testing protocols on 
TTBT and PNET and for those thorough—­very technical work—­was 
required. Now the issue is to decide the next phase and how to imple-
ment the agreement to a step by step process eventually leading to a 
cessation of nuclear testing. (S)
Now, I want to turn to the first document I mentioned. The U.S. 
draft of a unilateral declaration on non-­circumvention of the treaty 
contains an exception for Great Britain. We said that we can accept 
such an exception only if it is confined to present practices and the U.S. 
does not have in it an idea to confine further its commitment to non-­
circumvention. (S)
On the Soviet Backfire bomber, the U.S. side raised the possibility 
of a unilateral commitment by the Soviet Union concerning intercon-
tinental capability for this bomber. We have proposed a limitation of 
four-­hundred aircraft of the air forces. As to the problem of limiting 
naval aircraft—­we are prepared to negotiate these under future arms 
reductions which have a broader mandate. (S)
With limitations of weapons under START—­it is important that 
there be no basing on the territory of a third country. We have agreed 
with the U.S. on how to do this and to make it possible to verify that no 
strategic arms are outside the territory of the signatories. (S)
We also discussed the problem of warhead destruction. The Soviet 
side proposes the destruction physically of the warheads—­breaking the 
casings so that they cannot be used. The U.S. says that it cannot consent 
to this. (S)
President Gorbachev. What is your impression? Are the issues that 
remain such that we have to resolve them before there is agreement on 
the major elements and we sign a statement to that effect. (S)
Mr. Karpov: We have accomplished a lot. I believe as regards a 
statement—­there is also agreement on mobile ICBM limits at 1100 but 
this is an understanding—Ambassador Bartholemew and I have not 
finalized it. Now on the matter of future negotiations, the fundamental 
question is how much to try and predetermine. We believe that much 
should be addressed at Geneva. (S)
President Gorbachev: So in the opinion of the experts will we be able 
to conclude a treaty this year? Marshal Akhromeyev, do you have any-
thing to offer. (S)
Marshal Akhromeyev: No. I think Karpov has outlined everything 
accurately. I have nothing to add. (S)
