358 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II F–5 aircraft was made contingent on the actual freeing of some political prisoners whose release already was scheduled. The East Asian record will be somewhat better in 1979. Human rights considerations have contributed to adjustments in allocations, especially for military training, for Indonesia, the Philippines, and Thailand. This probably is known by the recipient governments (although they could rationalize their cuts as flowing from Congressional reduction of the overall budget). But the general public perception is likely to be of continued high levels of security assistance. Similarly, in the Middle East, our desire to move Arabs and Israelis toward a peace settlement and the importance of Mideast oil have kept arms sales high. Nor have the human rights considerations cut into arms transfers to black Africa, either because the amounts sold are minimal or because of an interest in supporting “moderate” governments (e.g., Morocco and Zaire). Finally, although we are working toward a policy of reviewing straight commercial sales to police forces of items not on the munitions list, no decision has yet been reached. II. Human Rights Accomplishments and Setbacks What Have We Accomplished? The human rights policy has helped us at least as much as it has produced changes abroad. Our post-Vietnam, post-Watergate image has been greatly improved. To a large degree we have taken the ideological initiative from the Soviets. This boosts our standing—and that of traditional friends—in Europe, and helps in our relations with a number of LDC’s. The policy is especially appealing—and encouraging—to many people living under repressive regimes. This underscores what many of us frequently forget—the US is a model for many countries; our influence transcends our political, economic, and military power and is strikingly important in ethical, cultural, and value areas; other governments find themselves unable entirely to ignore the impact of US policy and actions—particularly when we join action to rhetoric. Our championship of human rights is encouraging others to do likewise. Activity in the UN and OAS has picked up considerably, and the OAS and Red Cross human rights commissions are being allowed into countries which previously excluded them. The West Europeans are more active both in international fora and in diplomatic dialogue with problem countries. Once-lonely private activists now find themselves deluged with invitations to conferences. Some who long have been working to advance human rights have taken new hope from the
