1980 935 good for us. The public won’t support it.12 In a war, the American public would support a military buildup. But we should seek to push the Soviets into the realm of peaceful competition. (S) One more point the President added is that the Europeans might not even meet three percent increase for defense. He said he is not even confident that LRTNF will be deployed—­in Italy for example.13 (S) Warren Christopher observed that energy is overlooked in Brown’s paper. Unless we do develop energy independence, we will omit a fundamental building block in our overall strategy. Although this is a military strategy paper, Christopher admitted, the energy element needs to be included. (S) Turner noted that Governor Reagan does not seem to understand the energy issues, judging from briefings CIA has been giving him. He believes we just have to drill more wells in the United States. (S) The President added one more point about our military strategy that concerns him. That is our presence in the Caribbean. We have this ninety-­man JTF headquarters in Key West. We played around with moving the USS Forrestal into the Caribbean. Should we strengthen our forces there? We need to assess that, he added. (S) Brown said that the JTF was only a headquarters. We have, ­however, shifted some of our East Coast training further south toward the Caribbean in order to create a growing presence in that region. We should not, however, divert forces from Europe or Southwest Asia. The President added that we should not divert forces. Rather he is more interested in where our forces in the United States are located and the possibility of relocations in the direction of Key West. He said he would like to create quietly a significant military shift which would then be discovered by the New York Times and pointed to as of great significance. It would send a proper signal to Cuba and reassure our friends in the region. (S) Both Brown and McIntyre commented briefly on the possibility for base consolidation and other CONUS force shifts that might contribute to this effect. The President said he was interested in a symbolic14 signal, not a major force shift. Claytor pointed out that Roosevelt Roads in Puerto Rico is a key training area which might be used to contribute to such a signal. The President once again said that he would like the public to know that the United States has quietly moved some of its training to the Caribbean. (S) 12 Carter amended the sentence “The public won’t support it” to read “It will be difficult to sustain public support.” 13 Carter changed the period after “example” to a comma and added “or even Germany.” 14 Carter crossed out the word “symbolic” and replaced it with “clear.”
