Options Identified students function as personal guards of the hostages and as propagandists and ideologues trying to indoctrinate the hostages. The PLO function as observers, advisors, and propagandists. The Fatah trained militants supervise security, interrogation, and document exploitation. The Pasdaran, besides providing external security, maintain a presence within the compound, primarily providing sentries. Within the buildings, the students typically carry pistols or G–3 rifles. Those on duty outside typically are armed with G–3 rifles. Guards carrying rifles have not been observed carrying any spare magazines for their weapons. (B) (TS) The number of personnel present seems to vary according to the occasion and day of the week. Other factors being equal, the number of personnel in the compound drops on Thursday and Friday (the Islamic weekend, when some leave to visit families). The number rises again on Saturdays and Sundays when there are typically a lot of meetings held, according to a released hostage. There is another reduction when some members of the occupation force (students) leave the compound to attend classes. (C) (TS) Guard force distribution is estimated as follows with a day/night duty ratio of 60/40. Amb residence 10–14 DCM residence 8–12 Servant quarters 12–16 Consulate 8–12 Chancery 8–12 Staff cottages 18–20 Warehouse 8–12 Interior perimeter 10–12 (D) The general pattern of guard positions within a hostage location is 1–3 guards per room. The guards seem to favor positions in doorways vice protected corners. Outside hostage locations, single sentries walk beats which generally parallel building walls and extend the length of the building protected. (E) Within the compound several defensive construction measures have been noted. The athletic fields have been blocked to helicopter traffic with parked cars and 6–8 foot stakes which have been driven into the ground. Anti-helicopter stakes have also been placed on the roof of the warehouse building. The probability exists that mines or demolitions have been positioned around the athletic fields. One hostage mentioned trip-wires connected to bells or other noise makers in his debriefing statement, and other hostages have mentioned hearing buzzers before people entered their area, possibly as part of a warning system of some sort. The students have installed additional lighting and loudspeakers in several locations. They are reportedly using some
