Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX developed. He wanted to make clear that Hungary was an independent country with its own domestic and international policies although, of course, it was loyal to its alliances. He always read with amusement stories that said that while Hungary was a “satellite” on international affairs, it was freer domestically where its policies were more liberal than any other Eastern European country. Hungary had its own traditions, history and culture with its own national interests. These factors, plus the “size of our country, our location on the map and the nature of our economy” were the main criteria in the international and domestic policies that Hungary pursued. 5. He then spoke at great length about the Hungarian economy, stressing that it was by far the most important aspect of Hungarian life today. He is pleased with the progress that had been made and is determined that this progress continue. This depended, he pointed out, on expanding the country’s foreign trade. Forty-five percent of Hungary’s GNP derived from that trade and it had to be increased if the standard of living was to be raised. For every increase of one percent in GNP, Hungary required a one and a half percent increase in exports. At present, Hungary’s foreign trade was divided roughly sixty percent with the East and forty percent with the West and for the foreseeable future that was probably the right proportion. The main Western trading partners were the traditional ones: Germany, Italy and Austria. American trade, unfortunately, was “just a trickle” and he hoped that situation could be changed. 6. He talked at some length about the unfairness of the lack of MFN and the inhibiting effect it is having on our future relations, although he was pleased that several joint enterprises with American companies had been launched and others were in the planning stage. He saw no ideological obstacle to this kind of collaboration because Hungarian industrial enterprises were practically independent.” More than once he stressed that the most important political element to Hungarian life was the way in which it handled its economic development. 7. He then turned to a once-over-lightly review of Hungarian- American relations since World War I, ending up with the story of the Crown. He understood fully, he said that successful bilateral relations depended on mutual understanding of the differences in the domestic policies and attitudes of the two countries involved. Whereas for the Hungarians the issue of the Crown was simple—Hungarian people knew it belonged to them—he realized why it was more complicated for the Americans. He very much appreciated the President’s decision to return the Crown. He said that he was always confident that this issue would be resolved one day because we had succeeded in resolving the more complicated Mindszenty issue. He particularly understood
