International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 553 capital formation sufficiently to keep competition keen and provide for a continual renewal and restructuration of our industrial base. To maintain a healthy international position, we must invest at levels comparable to our major trading partners and those rapidly advancing among the ranks of nations. We are not doing so today. For example, the Japanese are currently making capital investments at a percentage rate of GNP approximately double that of the United States. Instead of improving our relative situation, this discrepancy can only contribute to a deterioration of our worldwide competitiveness. Moreover, the resulting competitive gap cannot be indefinitely bridged by currency devaluations and import constraints without leading us into a spiral of decline as an economy and ultimately loss of position as the key world power. The sentiments against capital investment incentives are evident, particularly among those who strive for greater income and wealth redistribution. But it can be argued that our country has acted to redistribute income far more than any society to date. Almost half of our federal budget is allocated to transfer payments, rather than to the provision of public services. This represents a massive redistribution of income. To support a reasonable redistribution effort, our economic base must flourish. To do this, as a capitalist society intending to remain one, we must keep attractive the desire to seek out and to take entrepreneurial risks for commensurate gains for those persons and entities with access to capital. Our capital investment pattern has been lagging in recent years, slowing our growth prospects, discouraging job formation possibilities, limiting productivity improvements and weakening our innovative thrust. The commercial risks today appear too frequently to outweigh the prospective gains, thus making conservation of capital a higher motive than placing that capital at entrepreneurial risk to search out new thresholds of opportunity. Investment incentives are particularly important to our heavy industries requiring continuing streams of high capital investments. Since more of these industries now feel threatened than in earlier years, they are in the forefront of those concerned currently with tariff reductions. Consequently, an investment incentive program, in addition to its fundamental long-term benefits, would be immediately helpful to swing a majority of the business community positively behind the overall effort, reducing to a strictly secondary position their concerns over trade liberalization measures. Such an incentive program would have to be tailored to be consistent with the new subsidies code obligations. B. A Sensitive and Effective Adjustment Assistance Program The United States does not have an effective adjustment assistance plan that aids in the restructuration of our industrial base. We need one
