International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
553
capital formation sufficiently to keep competition keen and provide for
a continual renewal and restructuration of our industrial base.
To maintain a healthy international position, we must invest at
levels comparable to our major trading partners and those rapidly ad-
vancing among the ranks of nations. We are not doing so today. For ex-
ample, the Japanese are currently making capital investments at a per-
centage rate of GNP approximately double that of the United States.
Instead of improving our relative situation, this discrepancy can only
contribute to a deterioration of our worldwide competitiveness. More-
over, the resulting competitive gap cannot be indefinitely bridged by
currency devaluations and import constraints without leading us into a
spiral of decline as an economy and ultimately loss of position as the
key world power.
The sentiments against capital investment incentives are evident,
particularly among those who strive for greater income and wealth re-
distribution. But it can be argued that our country has acted to redis-
tribute income far more than any society to date. Almost half of our fed-
eral budget is allocated to transfer payments, rather than to the
provision of public services. This represents a massive redistribution of
income. To support a reasonable redistribution effort, our economic
base must flourish. To do this, as a capitalist society intending to re-
main one, we must keep attractive the desire to seek out and to take en-
trepreneurial risks for commensurate gains for those persons and en-
tities with access to capital.
Our capital investment pattern has been lagging in recent years,
slowing our growth prospects, discouraging job formation possibil-
ities, limiting productivity improvements and weakening our innova-
tive thrust. The commercial risks today appear too frequently to out-
weigh the prospective gains, thus making conservation of capital a
higher motive than placing that capital at entrepreneurial risk to search
out new thresholds of opportunity.
Investment incentives are particularly important to our heavy in-
dustries requiring continuing streams of high capital investments.
Since more of these industries now feel threatened than in earlier years,
they are in the forefront of those concerned currently with tariff reduc-
tions. Consequently, an investment incentive program, in addition to
its fundamental long-term benefits, would be immediately helpful to
swing a majority of the business community positively behind the
overall effort, reducing to a strictly secondary position their concerns
over trade liberalization measures. Such an incentive program would
have to be tailored to be consistent with the new subsidies code
obligations.
B. A Sensitive and Effective Adjustment Assistance Program
The United States does not have an effective adjustment assistance
plan that aids in the restructuration of our industrial base. We need one
