Afghanistan
847
drawal is illusory, he said. It will simply not take place, except perhaps
in the very distant future. To base United States policy on the hope of
achieving a near term withdrawal was, to say the least, ill-advised.
Such a policy has the effect of freezing US-Soviet relations for the
indefinite future. Furthermore, the repeated insistence on a “transition”
period in various letters from Washington to Moscow on this subject
really raises hackles in the upper levels of the foreign ministry, includ-
ing Gromyko. By “transition” you obviously mean the replacement of
the Babrak Karmal government. But Babrak is stronger every day.
There is not the slightest chance of the Soviet Union abandoning him.
If you think otherwise, then the intelligence you are receiving is highly
suspect. (S)
Everything we receive, from whatever source—including various
statements made by the Kabul Regime itself—contradicts the assertion
that Babrak is growing stronger, I replied. Not only did he not seem
to be in control of the country, but his dominance of the Party was
very much in doubt. Our intelligence analysts believe that the Khalq
faction of the Party clearly outnumbered Babrak’s Parchamists. It was
therefore our assumption that if the Soviet Union withdrew its support,
Babrak would immediately be thrown out on his ear. In any case, it
seems apparent to us that Babrak entirely lacks a popular base, and
only has the support of a miniscule percentage of the population. (S)
People used to say the same thing about the Bolsheviks, Bessmert-
nykh rejoined. I am no expert in this area, but I can assure you that
the intelligence we receive is encouraging. We control a great deal
more of the countryside than your press would have you believe. It is
obvious to us that the United States will have to accept this sooner or
later. In order to achieve a resolution of the situation, you will have
to stop supporting rebel elements through some of your Muslim
friends. Once the rebels stop receiving outside assistance the problem
is resolved. During the Vietnam War the USSR adopted a wise policy
of initiating and continuing on with an era of detente no matter what
was taking place in Southeast Asia. (S)
The Soviet Union should recognize, I replied, that we are exercising
enormous restraint in Afghanistan. If the United States wished to
upgrade the equipment, the training, and the overall effectiveness of
the Muslim forces over what they are at present, it could do so easily.
As for the Vietnam War, it was the USSR which supplied the where-
withal for the Vietnamese to inflict enormous casualties, including
45,000 dead, on United States forces. It was therefore not the Soviet
Union which exercised restraint in carrying on with detente during
the Vietnam War, but rather the United States. (S)
In any case, in Afghanistan all we ask is that you accept reality
and not base policy on wishful thinking, said Bessmertnykh. There
