Experts and Advisers, representing 48 countries. As a result of personal
discussions, notable progress in clarification and standardization of the use
of technical terms was achieved. Through personal discussions it became
possible for the Delegates from different countries to weigh and value
points of view of other countries. Furthermore, through personal discussion
it became possible for Delegates to better differentiate between economic
and political phases of questions.
It might be fair to say that the indirect discussions of the Conference may
be of quite as lasting and general benefit as the resolutions passed. Many
divergencies of opinion existed between Delegations and with Delegations;
but in spite of these divergencies, there were evolved definite formulae for
the relief of economic difficulties that still militate against international
commerce.
At the opening of the Conference our Delegation was asked to give a
statement on the character and probable causes leading up to the relatively
prosperous position of the United States. Europe, which possesses rich and
varied natural resources, has an area approximately that of the United
States. The individual States of our country are geographically and
physically as heterogeneous as the different States in Europe; but in trade
and industry, we are a homogeneous whole, without barriers or currency
differences. Europe, on the other hand has a series of separate units, each
contending for national economic independence. Both employers and
workers have in the main adopted the policy of unrestricted output; and
generally workers have accepted substitution of machines for hand labor,
and employers in turn have compensated the workers with appropriate
increases in wages. The conditions obtaining in our country have been
important factors in the creation and maintenance of higher wage levels,
resulting in higher standards of living and, in turn, in greater power of
consumption and production. A comparison between the situation in the
United States and the European countries has led certain economists to
advocate an economic United States of Europe.
It developed in the Conference that “consumers’ goods” were being used,
even in Europe, at as high a rate per capita as prior to the war; but the
production and consumption of “capital goods” was considerably lower and
