Afghanistan
45
9. There has been a fundamental change in the South-Asia-Middle
East region, nevertheless, and whether the Soviets prompted the Kabul
coup or are merely the beneficiaries of it, the perception is that the
Soviet Union has scored an important gain in this part of the world.
That should be a matter of concern to us.
10. Our friends, in whose territorial integrity and independence
we have frequently expressed strong interest, and who rightly interpret
that interest, and our previous relationship with them based on our 1958
bilateral as testimony to our concern for their security can legitimately
expect a more visible sign of our concern than they have seen thus
far.5 As I see it, we are now very much in danger of letting our tactical
posture vis-à-vis the new Afghan regime be a substitute for policy
toward the region as a whole. Our friends will not be to blame if they
begin to draw the conclusion that our assurances of the past lack
practical effect.
11. It seems to me that we must find a way of acting in this region
which can serve to reassure our friends in Pakistan, Iran, and even
India, while not unduly disturbing the new relationship we are attempt-
ing to foster with India, or challenging the Soviets frontally to our
disadvantage perhaps, in other forums. And we must somehow per-
suade Iran, and India, and Pakistan that they now have more in com-
mon regarding the new situation in Afghanistan than they have interest
in their continuing mutual suspicions of each others’ motives and
activities.
12. The big hurdle for U.S. policy in this—at least the most obvious
one at the outset—is our nuclear non-proliferation face-down with the
GOP. I do not imply any diminution of the importance of this global
goal of reducing the spread of uncontrolled nuclear technology, any
more that I would suggest we abandon our human rights concerns
here or in Afghanistan or in Iran (or even in India) in the interests of
regional security. What I do suggest, however, is that we not hold our
entire bilateral policy relationship hostage to any single or multiple
strands of our global foreign policies, however important and worthy.
To continue to mortgage our entire relationship with Pakistan to the
non-proliferation question—despite what has happened and may hap-
pen in the wake of the Kabul coup—will be to promote the erosion of
our last remaining instruments of influence and prestige here in Paki-
stan while the GOP—this government or the next one or two or three—
decides it must trim its sails to the new wind blowing from Central Asia.
5 A reference to the bilateral Agreement of Cooperation signed on March 5, 1959,
pursuant to a declaration signed on July 28, 1958, by the Baghdad Pact nations. The
Baghdad Pact was the precursor of CENTO.
