Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 3. Arms Control and Non-Proliferation. In the last six months the US recognized the long-term importance of these two areas and acted accordingly, seeking the basic changes that are needed, rather than the quick fixes that make good news stories. —Instead of accepting a quick and relatively meaningless deal on arms control, the new Administration sought a major reduction in strategic force levels that would enhance nuclear stability, even if it took longer to achieve. —We are launching the long-term international study of how to meet peaceful nuclear energy needs without proliferation pledged at the Summit. If this study eventually suggests creation of a major new international institution to provide assurances of nuclear fuel to importing countries and to store spent fuel, it could be one of the most important new advances in global architecture since the 1940s. 4. Defense Policy. The last six months have seen major shifts in defense policy, which will make it more effective in supporting US foreign policy: —A shift from the previous Administration’s undue emphasis on strategic forces to greater stress on general purpose forces, the type of military power that counts most in an age of nuclear parity. —Within general purpose forces, increased emphasis on Europeoriented forces, which are badly in need of improvement. There’s a lot more work to be done in strengthening US conventional forces, particularly ground forces in Europe and air and naval forces in the Eastern Mediterranean. But our policy has begun to reflect the right priorities. 5. North-South Relations. The last Administration focused on cosmetic gestures to respond to LDC concerns in UN debates. In its first six months, this Administration focused on substance: (a) IBRD. You reversed the previous Administration’s position and committed the US to support a large general increase in the World Bank’s resources.7 7 In 1976 World Bank officials sought an increase in the bank’s capitalization. The Ford administration, however, approved a lower level than desired by McNamara. (Thomas E. Mullaney, “Carter and World Bank Goals: Leaning Toward More Cost Aid,”
