Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
247
3. Arms Control and Non-Proliferation. In the last six months the US
recognized the long-term importance of these two areas and acted ac-
cordingly, seeking the basic changes that are needed, rather than the
quick fixes that make good news stories.
—Instead of accepting a quick and relatively meaningless deal on
arms control, the new Administration sought a major reduction in stra-
tegic force levels that would enhance nuclear stability, even if it took
longer to achieve.
—We are launching the long-term international study of how to
meet peaceful nuclear energy needs without proliferation pledged at
the Summit. If this study eventually suggests creation of a major new
international institution to provide assurances of nuclear fuel to im-
porting countries and to store spent fuel, it could be one of the most im-
portant new advances in global architecture since the 1940s.
4. Defense Policy. The last six months have seen major shifts in de-
fense policy, which will make it more effective in supporting US for-
eign policy:
—A shift from the previous Administration’s undue emphasis on
strategic forces to greater stress on general purpose forces, the type of
military power that counts most in an age of nuclear parity.
—Within general purpose forces, increased emphasis on Europe-
oriented forces, which are badly in need of improvement.
There’s a lot more work to be done in strengthening US conven-
tional forces, particularly ground forces in Europe and air and naval
forces in the Eastern Mediterranean. But our policy has begun to reflect
the right priorities.
5. North-South Relations. The last Administration focused on cos-
metic gestures to respond to LDC concerns in UN debates. In its first six
months, this Administration focused on substance:
(a) IBRD. You reversed the previous Administration’s position and
committed the US to support a large general increase in the World
Bank’s resources.7
7 In 1976 World Bank officials sought an increase in the bank’s capitalization. The
Ford administration, however, approved a lower level than desired by McNamara.
(Thomas E. Mullaney, “Carter and World Bank Goals: Leaning Toward More Cost Aid,”
The New York Times, March 18, 1977, p. 83) In his message to Congress on foreign assist-
ance, released on March 18 (see footnote 9, Document 29), Carter indicated that the ad-
ministration would increase the amount of aid to the international financial institutions.
