1172  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
m. Action by the Army to establish the DA Forward Depot, Pacific, 
on Okinawa.
9. Actions being taken or that could be taken with regard to 
obtaining required transit and base rights in Southeast Asia, improv­
ing strategic and tactical communications in Southeast Asia, and the 
improvement of capabilities to conduct over-­the-­beach supply opera­
tions are as follows:
a. Transit and Base Rights in Southeast Asia.
(1) Requirements exist for the following facilities for dispersal, 
staging and recovery of aircraft and prepositioning and prestockage of 
materiels and supplies as required to support CINCPAC plans.
(a) Vietnam
Tan Son Nhut, Saigon
Tourane
Cap St. Jacques
Nha Trang
Bien Hoa
(b) Laos
Vietiane
Seno
(c) Thailand
Bangkok/Don Muang
Korat Nakhou Ratchasima
Takhl
Chiang Mai
Ubon
Udorn
(NOTE: Current interpretation of the restrictions imposed by the 
terms of the Geneva Convention have thus far prevented any use of 
facilities in Laos and Vietnam. Rights have been obtained for limited 
prestocking in Thailand.)
(2) Transit rights for overflight and for use of bases for peacetime 
training exercises are obtained on an individual basis.
(3) CINCPAC contingency planning for the area assumes that 
existing bases, facilities and services will be made available when and 
as required.
b. Strategic and Tactical Communications.
(1) Existing Strategic Communications. Communications to and from 
Vietiane, Saigon, and Bangkok are provided by the Army Strategic 
Communications (STARCOM) Station at Clark Air Force Base, 
Philippine Islands, which interconnects into the world-­wide commu­
nications system of the Department of Defense. There is, in addition, a 
communications circuit between Bangkok and Saigon. The Southeast 
Asian terminals of all these circuits have limited capacity and utilize 
air-­transportable equipment. A high capacity circuit links the British 
communication system at Singapore with the Naval Communication
