The Chairman of the subcommittee, M. Guerrero, opened the debate on
Article 1 of the Draft Convention (Document A.43.1928.IX)76 and
suggested a discussion of Remark No. 1 thereunder by the Belgian
delegation. It was instantly apparent that a situation had arisen which would
render it impossible to reach any definite agreement in this session and
might perhaps create a situation in which every article of the projected
convention might have to be debated over again. The Belgian delegate
stated that his Government considered it essential to examine the
arrangement of the categories and sub-headings under Article 1 in the light
of their unsatisfactory experience in analysing the administrative machinery
necessary to carry out the Traffic in Arms Treaty which they expected to
ratify at an early date. Sensing a decided opposition on the part of the other
members of the subcommittee, the Belgian delegate issued what was in
effect an ultimatum, stating that his Government could not sign any
convention which was not based on a previous and detailed analysis of the
categories of Article 1. At the request of the Chairman, the Belgian delegate
submitted his proposal in writing (Document C. F. A. 27).77 The French
delegate at once took the position that he could not pass upon the terms of
Article 5 until he knew exactly what Article 1 was to contain and this
statement naturally robbed the subsequent debate of actuality. It was agreed
that the delegates present were not prepared, either by instructions or by the
presence of technical advisers, to debate the Belgian proposal, and that it
would be essential to call a meeting of experts as soon as possible,
approximately March 1, 1929, for the purpose of giving consideration to the
proposal. Since the substance of the Belgian proposal was not debated, I did
not give the American point of view regarding further discussion of the
categories of Article 1.
Relative to Remark No. 2, the German delegate declared that he was
prepared to withdraw this remark and associate himself with that made by
the delegation of the United States.
Discussion then opened on Remark No. 3 which we had inserted relative to
aircraft and aircraft engines. As I telegraphed the Department,78 there was
immediate and vigorous opposition to the admission of our proposal,
mainly on the part of the military continental Powers and also on that of
Japan. It was evident that the alignment on this question was in general the
