Human Rights
357
Ethiopia, Benin, Argentina, the Philippines, Korea and the CAE) and
voted against seven (to Chile, Argentina and Guinea).12
We have not thus far formally opposed any loans when our oppo-
sition would have meant their defeat. We only have veto power over
the IDB’s Fund for Special Operations (FSO), and in several cases we
have indicated that we might oppose an FSO loan if it came to a vote; in
most, the applicant government has chosen to hold it back. Some
$143,252,000 worth of loans are currently being held up because of our
action—to Chile, Paraguay, Uruguay and Nicaragua.13
Few other participants in IFI deliberations have joined us in op-
posing loans on human rights grounds. West European opposition to
loans for the Pinochet regime began before ours. Venezuela recently
abstained on one loan to Chile. British and Swedish representatives in
the IDB recently put on record that they would have opposed a loan to
Argentina had they national votes; but the European regional group of
which they are a part cast its collective vote in favor.
Security Assistance and Sales
Human rights considerations have become perhaps the dominant
factor in arms transfers to Latin America. This has resulted from a com-
bination of factors: Congressional prohibitions (to Argentina and Uru-
guay); refusals of our security assistance by Brazil, El Salvador, and
Guatemala in response to our reporting to Congress on their human
rights situations; the low risk of Soviet inroads if our arms flows are re-
duced; and, possibly, the relatively small economic importance to us of
arms sales in the area. Most cases involving major lethal equipment to
serious violators have not been approved, at least absent progress on
human rights. However, some significant non-lethal items (e.g.,
C–130’s to Argentina) as well as some spare parts, still are approved
after careful review.
The great bulk of our arms transfers, however, are to East Asia and
the Middle East, and they have been only marginally affected by
human rights considerations. We have, for instance, opposed economic
loans in IFI’s to both South Korea and the Philippines and are including
Korea and Indonesia among the problem countries which must report
on their use of PL 480 Title I. But base negotiations in the Philippines
and troop withdrawal considerations in Korea have thus far led us to
continue very large security assistance programs to both. There has
been some impact on security relations with Indonesia, where sale of
12 An unknown hand placed a check mark in the margin to the right of the last sen-
tence of this paragraph.
13 An unknown hand placed a check mark in the margin to the right of the para-
graph next to the dollar figure.
