186
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—Retention of chemical munitions. We had believed that both
sides agreed that equipment to be used for protective training should
not be suitable for offensive purposes. The Soviets now would allow
the retention, in quantities to be determined by each state itself, of
chemical munitions for protective training.
—Declaration of facilities for production of the means of chemical
warfare. We had believed that both sides shared the view that present
and former facilities would be declared. The Soviets now would de-
clare only existing “capabilities,” (i.e., ability to produce), and reject
declaration of individual facilities.
5. The tone of both the plenary and drafting group meetings has
continued to be friendly and workmanlike.
Vanden Heuvel
83.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in
Geneva1
Washington, March 24, 1978, 2248Z
77166. Subject: US–USSR Chemical Weapons Negotiations, Sev-
enth Round: Supplementary Guidance. Ref: (A) State 43532 (B) Geneva
2410.3
State CW message—
1. This message provides general guidance for continuance of
round seven discussions following return of experts to Geneva. This
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780131–0619.
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Moscow, London, Bonn, and Paris. Drafted
by Robert Mikulak (ACDA/MA); cleared by Les Denend (NSC), Robert Weekley (DOD),
John Kokolas (CIA), and Margot Mazeau (ACDA); and approved by Thomas Davies
(ACDA/MA).
2 See Document 79.
3 This February 16 telegram from the Mission in Geneva summarized the major
issues the United States and Soviets would discuss during the seventh round of chemical
weapons negotiations. These included: whether or not to exclude irritants or riot control
agents from an agreement, verification provisions for “super-toxic” chemicals, which
types of chemical weapons could be retained by the two nations, whether or not either
nation could conduct “challenge inspections” should one believe the other had not com-
plied with an agreement, a declaration by both sides of their current stocks of weapons
and their production facilities, and international on-site verification, which the U.S. con-
sidered “the key unresolved issue.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D780071–0902)
