176  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
would deteriorate rapidly. This is just another phase of the same argu-
ment which we are making to secure needed capital for YPFB. I am 
concerned and depressed at the statesmanship being shown by the oil 
companies in this matter.
I am not familiar with the marketing problems for Bolivian oil. I 
know that Williams Brothers4 has been helping YPFB to sell gasoline to 
pay for the pipeline. I also understand that there might be a possibility 
of some sort of triangular trade whereby Bolivian sales of petroleum 
products to Chile would be paid for in terms of Argentine foodstuffs to 
Bolivia. I am looking into this matter and also other aspects of the situ-
ation and will let you know whatever I can find out. In addition to the 
outlet to the Pacific, there is, of course, a possibility of selling consid-
erable quantities of Bolivian oil to Argentina when the Yacuiba-Buenos 
Aires pipeline is completed in 1960 or 1961. In any case, I do not con-
sider that the no markets bogy should be considered a valid argument 
against a modest U.S. Government credit for YPFB.
As to the probable effect of a U.S. Government loan to YPFB on 
Henry Holland’s current negotiations with YPFB,5 I do not know how 
far the Department considers that there is a pertinent relationship. I 
note that the Holland proposition is for exploratory work in the mixed 
concession area, whereas the U.S. Government credit would presum-
ably be for equipment and supplies for use in YPFB’s proven areas, 
notably Camiri. The effect of both these propositions would be to 
increase YPFB’s total resources available for both exploration and cur-
rent production.
This whole situation is not going to stand still, and I hope that you 
can get some favorable action. A favorable decision would, in my judg-
ment, swing the situation here very definitely in our direction. It would 
also lay a basis for a gradual reduction in our grant aid to Bolivia, which 
is to me, and I assume also to the Department, a major objective.
Many thanks for your New Year’s wishes which I heartily 
reciprocate.6
Sincerely yours,
Philip W. Bonsal
4 Williams Brothers Sud Americana, Ltd., an oil company associated with John 
Williams, which had just completed a pipeline from Sicasica, Bolivia, to Arica, Chile.
5 Reference is to the activities of former Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs, Henry F. Holland, who was then representing the investment firm of 
Loeb-Rhoades, which were discussed in Bonsal’s letter of December 19, 1958.
6 Further documentation concerning the proposed loan is contained in ARA/WST 
Files, 62 D 16, “Economic-1958-Bolivia-YPFB.”
