870 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 of State is preparing a cable to nations throughout the world asking for an approach to the Tehran regime urging release of the hostages.2 Mr. Christopher noted that many of the countries will make their own judgment about the timing of any démarche, and they may insist on waiting until a new government has been formally installed. (S) Interest Sections The FBI has been investigating the killing of Ali Tabatabai.3 Some lines run to the Iranian Interests Section of the Algerian Embassy in Washington. The FBI wishes to interview Mr. Sajadi, the Iranian national (but American resident alien) who runs the section. It appears this will be worked out. There were some mixed signals initially, and the Iranians thought we wished to close down the Interests Section and eject Mr. Sajadi. They threatened to retaliate by closing the U.S. Interests Section in Tehran. The State Department pointed out that the Iranian Interests Section in Washington is of greater importance to us (because it handles the myriad cases of Iranians in this country) than is the U.S. Interests Section in Tehran, which is primarily a convenience and an investment in the future. All agreed that if the FBI investigation develops solid information leading to the conclusion that the Iranian Interests Section was involved in the Tabatabai murder, we should act promptly to close it or take other appropriate action. The Attorney General will keep the SCC informed as the investigation proceeds. (S) Iranian Students The Attorney General reported on the deportation proceedings against Iranian students. Since the review of students was initiated on November 14, 370 Iranian students have either been deported or have chosen voluntary departure. A total of 9,000 students were found out of status. Proceedings are underway against all of them, but it is a slow process. 2,000 of this group have requested asylum, and their cases are pending. (U) Of the approximately 160 Iranian students arrested over the weekend in connection with the proand anti-Khomeini demonstrations, 2 The appeal is in telegram 202298 to all diplomatic and consular posts, August 6. It expresses particular concern that the allied nations urge Iran not to put the hostages on trial. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800366–0240) Responses from various countries are listed by country and telegram response number in an August 5 memorandum from Tarnoff to Brzezinski. Tarnoff informed Brzezinski that the general tone of responses was “supportive and sympathetic, but there is little in the way of specific suggestions or plans for action so far.” (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Group Demarches) 3 See Document 313.
