VIII Preface sponse to famine in Kampuchea and East Africa. The international health, population growth, and international women’s issues compilation chronicles the administration’s efforts to initiate a global health program emphasizing food aid, nutrition, family planning, communitybased health care, and disease prevention and treatment. It documents the U.S. global population strategy, a strategy that advocated women’s rights, improved living conditions, and integration of family planning in community life. The compilation also illustrates the administration’s efforts to implement the recommendations generated as an outgrowth of the 1975 International Women’s Year conference and details the U.S. preparations for the 1980 United Nations World Conference for Women. Other issues documented in this compilation include U.S. support for the United Nations Water Decade and the preparation and release of the Global 2000 Report, which assessed current environmental and global trends and posited probable outcomes by the century’s end. Acknowledgments The editor wishes to acknowledge the assistance of Ceri McCarron, Albert Nason, Brittany Parris, and James Yancey of the Jimmy Carter Presidential Library; David Langbart, Don Mcllwain, and Herbert Rawlings-Milton of the National Archives and Records Administration; and Deborah Miller of the Minnesota Historical Society. The editor would also like to thank former Vice President Walter F. Mondale for granting permission to use documentation from his files at the Minnesota Historical Society. The Historical Staff of the Central Intelligence Agency helped to arrange access to CIA files. The editor conducted the research for this volume and selected and annotated the documentation under the supervision of Kathleen B. Rasmussen, Chief of the Global Issues and General Division, and the direction of Susan C. Weetman, the former General Editor of the Foreign Relations series. Dean G. Weatherhead coordinated the declassification review under the supervision of the Chief of the Declassification and Publishing Division Carl Ashley. Erin F. Cozens and Thomas I. Faith performed the copy and technical editing. Do Mi Stauber Inc. prepared the index. Kristin L. Ahlberg, Ph.D. Historian
