VIII
Preface
sponse to famine in Kampuchea and East Africa. The international
health, population growth, and international women’s issues compila-
tion chronicles the administration’s efforts to initiate a global health
program emphasizing food aid, nutrition, family planning, community-
based health care, and disease prevention and treatment. It documents
the U.S. global population strategy, a strategy that advocated women’s
rights, improved living conditions, and integration of family planning
in community life. The compilation also illustrates the administration’s
efforts to implement the recommendations generated as an outgrowth
of the 1975 International Women’s Year conference and details the U.S.
preparations for the 1980 United Nations World Conference for
Women. Other issues documented in this compilation include U.S. sup-
port for the United Nations Water Decade and the preparation and re-
lease of the Global 2000 Report, which assessed current environmental
and global trends and posited probable outcomes by the century’s end.
Acknowledgments
The
editor
wishes
to
acknowledge
the
assistance
of
Ceri
McCarron, Albert Nason, Brittany Parris, and James Yancey of the
Jimmy Carter Presidential Library; David Langbart, Don Mcllwain,
and Herbert Rawlings-Milton of the National Archives and Records
Administration; and Deborah Miller of the Minnesota Historical So-
ciety. The editor would also like to thank former Vice President Walter
F. Mondale for granting permission to use documentation from his files
at the Minnesota Historical Society. The Historical Staff of the Central
Intelligence Agency helped to arrange access to CIA files.
The editor conducted the research for this volume and selected
and annotated the documentation under the supervision of Kathleen B.
Rasmussen, Chief of the Global Issues and General Division, and the
direction of Susan C. Weetman, the former General Editor of the For-
eign Relations series. Dean G. Weatherhead coordinated the declassifi-
cation review under the supervision of the Chief of the Declassification
and Publishing Division Carl Ashley. Erin F. Cozens and Thomas I.
Faith performed the copy and technical editing. Do Mi Stauber Inc. pre-
pared the index.
Kristin L. Ahlberg, Ph.D.
Historian
