Afghanistan
873
our own efforts to publicize the Afghan resistance. In the matter of
arms, we decided to accept their offer of help, provided it was chan-
neled through our own pipeline. These weapons would appear to the
Pakistanis to come from us, and we would be adhering to their dictum
of not bringing any more parties into the program. In September 1980,
[less than 1 line not declassified] provided 400,000 rounds of .303 ammuni-
tion which was sent in through our supply channels. They are in the
process of contributing 3,000 Enfield .303 rifles—a weapon with which
the Afghan tribesmen are very familiar and which is very popular with
them. [less than 1 line not declassified] say they expect to provide at least
another 5,000 Enfields in the near future. (NOTE: The bulk of our
weapons supply has been of Soviet or Bloc manufacture.)
3. Also in recent months we have been discussing in general terms
with [1½ lines not declassified] our program of assistance to the Afghan
resistance. [less than 1 line not declassified] has shown a willingness to
help; but because of the Pakistani restrictions, we have limited our
response [less than 1 line not declassified]. We have told them we would
like them to explore means of supplying arms covertly to the Afghan
freedom fighters through Iran. In making this recommendation we had
two things in mind: a) Pakistani territory would not be used; and
b) eventually some of the heat would be taken off the Pakistanis, as
the Soviets would realize that arms were coming in not only through
Pakistan but also through Iran. [less than 1 line not declassified] promised
to help and said they would send an officer to survey possible clandes-
tine supply routes and assess the freedom fighters’ needs. We are
awaiting the results of this survey.
4. All this changed during the visit of President Zia to Washington,
when he told the President he would welcome assistance to the freedom
fighters from the West Europeans, and he told the President that he
would like U.S. help in arranging such assistance.2 While this takes
the wraps off the Pakistani restrictions under which we have been
operating to date, this Agency must continue to be concerned about
the overall security of the weapons supply program to the Afghan
insurgents. The Saudis are particularly sensitive about any potential
security breaches, and because they are instrumental in providing
financing and logistics support, we must continue our efforts to main-
tain the strict security of the program. Therefore, if there is to be an
approach at the policy level [less than 1 line not declassified] about assist-
ance to the Afghan freedom fighters, it would be useful to make a
parallel approach [less than 1 line not declassified] so the background to
this change during President Zia’s visit to Washington can be explained
2 See Document 326.
