National Security Policy 835 maintaining optimum readiness for the active forces. To achieve this objective, implementation of the military logistics base planning, in addition to providing for a continuing deterrent (including force and equipment modernization), should be sufficiently flexible to meet the requirements of the following: (1) Cold war including periods of heightened tension. (2) Opposition to local aggression, in accordance with paragraphs 12–­a and 16 above, by: (a) U.S. active forces, supplemented as necessary, without degrad­ ing the general war posture to a militarily unacceptable degree. (b) Allied forces, to the extent it is essential they be provided sup­ port for combat operations from U.S. resources. Planning for [illegible in the original] opposition to local aggression will include arrangements for the timely provision of personnel same as and combat essential materiel to insure the continued maintenance of an acceptable general war posture. (3) General War: (a) The active forces as of D-­Day. (b) The selected reserve forces having an initial general war mission. (c) Additional forces necessary for continued support and reconsti­ tution of forces required to achieve national objectives. Planning for general war will include appropriate consideration of nuclear damage. b. Civilian Readiness Base. The general objective of the civilian readiness base is to provide for the mobilization and management, for war and survival purposes, of all resources and productive capacity not under military control which can be made available to meet essen­ tial military and civilian requirements in any international emergency affecting U.S. national security interests. In developing this base, emphasis will be placed upon meeting the following goals: (1) Support of the military logistics base, as set forth in a above. (2) Implementation of the national policies set forth in paragraphs 58 (Civil Defense), 60 (Strategic Stockpiling) and 64–­g (Manpower). (3) Maximum feasible support from U.S. trade and other economic policies for both the cold war efforts of the United States and the war­ time readiness posture of U.S. industry and that of our allies. (4) Development and maintenance in a high state of readiness of (measures) essential (5) Develop plans essential to recovery in the event of general war. STATE-­OCDM-­COMMERCE BUDGET-­TREASURY to national survival and to retain a capacity for quick recovery in the event of general war. to survival as a nation, including minimum civilian needs and continuity of government.
