North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
1017
We would also step up our bilateral and regional approaches on
North-South issues. Our ASEAN activities provide a good model, and
we hope that the Colombo Plan meeting3 can also be helpful. Multi-
laterally and bilaterally, we would seek to clarify the major framework
of our North-South policy, endeavor to have a major influence on the
setting of the international agenda on North-South issues over the next
half decade, and announce several carefully designed new initiatives
which we believe would be politically appealing, economically sound
and domestically supportable, and respond to real LDC needs. This
memo summarizes the proposed approach, while the attached paper4
spells out a variety of possible initiatives in greater detail.
Many of the specific ideas are tentative and represent possibilities
which might be explored rather than recommendations for action.
Those which are particularly controversial (including between EB and
S/P) are marked with an asterisk.
A US FRAMEWORK FOR NORTH-SOUTH POLICY
The North-South dialogue ranges over a wide spectrum of specific
political and economic issues. US policies must be designed to deal
with each. These policies should be consistent with, and indeed sup-
portive of, four central US North-South objectives:
—the alleviation of the worst physical aspects of poverty;
—the promotion of self-sustaining growth with equity;
—the encouragement of societies which value individual civil and
economic rights;
—the integration of the developing countries into an open and eq-
uitable international economic system.
These objectives are both altruistic and in our self-interest. They
were developed jointly between this Administration and the Congress
and became law in the International Development Assistance Act of
1978.5 They make sense and should be acceptable to the LDCs. We
should refer to them more actively in outlining our basic North-South
policies.
These are essentially long-term goals. The LDCs have established a
North-South agenda in various international forums which is much
more short-term in scope. The focus is on three issues:
3 Apparently a reference to the Colombo Plan Consultative Committee meeting that
took place in Washington November 28–December 6.
4 Attached but not printed is a paper entitled “The North-South Dialogue: A US
Agenda for the Future.” The paper was drafted on November 9 by Johnson.
5 Carter signed the International Development and Food Assistance Act of 1978 into
law on October 6. For his statement on signing the bill, see Public Papers of the Presidents of
the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book II, p. 1721.
