National Security Policy  615
between the rising nations and the former imperial powers diminish. 
At the same time, Moscow will seek out new areas for the expansion 
of its political and economic influence, particularly in Latin America 
and Africa. In those countries where its efforts are most successful, the 
USSR may increasingly be tempted to resort to more direct means, that 
is, support of local Communists in attempts to seize power. But the 
Soviets would carefully weigh such gains against the harmful conse­
quences such a policy would inevitably evoke elsewhere.
234. Trade and aid. Soviet trade and aid programs are the economic 
adjunct to the strategy of penetration in underdeveloped areas. The 
underdeveloped countries, many of which are also politically uncom­
mitted, are generally receptive to Soviet offers of aid and offer the pros­
pect of high political gains in return for comparatively small economic 
investment. Rather than being widely dispersed, aid has been concen­
trated on countries which are especially susceptible to Soviet influence 
and also in most cases are of political or strategic interest to the West.
235. From January 1954 to June 1958 the USSR extended approx­
imately $1.2 billion in credits to underdeveloped countries in the free 
world, of which $300 million has already been used. Credits and grants 
by other Bloc countries bring the total to more than $2 billion, of which 
$1.3 billion has been obligated and $740 million has been expended. 
About three-­fifths of the total Bloc credits expended have been in 
the form of arms deliveries to Syria, Egypt, Yemen, Afghanistan, and 
Indonesia. These same countries plus Ceylon, India, Burma, and 
Cambodia have received the major part of the economic aid. During 
the first half of 1958 there were at one time or another an estimated 
3,700 Bloc technicians (including military specialists, totaling about 
one-­third of this number) in 17 underdeveloped countries, representing 
an increase of more than 50 percent over the preceding six months. In 
magnitude these programs are relatively small compared with Western 
efforts on a global basis, and the burden they impose on the Soviet 
economy is slight, annual expenditures thus far being only a few tenths 
of one percent of Soviet national product.
236. Attitude toward the UN. To the extent that the Soviets succeed 
in gaining influence over the policies of underdeveloped and neutralist 
countries, and as the number of Afro-Asian members increases, the UN 
will become a more attractive forum for them. They probably expect 
ultimately to find issues on which they can align majorities against the 
US and obtain endorsement of Soviet policies. They calculate that such 
a demonstrative isolation of the US would disturb US-­allied relations 
and curtail US influence in many areas. If the UN then became an issue 
in US domestic politics, the repercussions abroad would compound the 
Soviet advantage. We believe that the Soviets consider the chances for
