Comprehensive Test Ban 381 verification but make no linkage one way or another to a moratorium. If you would like Harold’s condition included in the letter, we will revise it. leave as is6 revise The other issues covered in Paul’s instructions enjoy a consensus in the SCC, at least at this stage. Political Aspects. The Soviets can be expected to take advantage of any opportunities to use the CTB to drive a wedge between us and the Chinese and, to a lesser degree, the French. This is what lies behind their suggestion of an agreement that would expire after 18 months if France and China do not join. In view of the difficulties such a guillotine approach could generate, particularly as we try to normalize relations with Peking, we recommend that Paul Warnke be instructed to probe Soviet views more vigorously on this issue in the trilateral talks.7 Moratorium. Soviet Delegation Chairman Morokhov did not have instructions on this issue when Warnke raised it with him last month, and Paul is instructed to pursue it without commitment and subject to your decision (above) on linking it to verification. Relationship to CCD and SALT. The Soviets were not very receptive to our approach of asking the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament (CCD) to negotiate the CTB treaty text as soon as trilateral agreement is reached on so-called “key elements.” However, since CCD involvement would be helpful in enhancing widespread adherence to the treaty, we recommend that we continue exploring this approach, but indicate that we would want full elaboration of all issues of national security importance prior to placing the negotiations before the CCD.8 We are also concerned about the linkage between CTB and SALT. The relationship of these two efforts will need to be considered in the context of possible expiration of the Interim SALT Agreement,9 but we recommend that Warnke keep the trilateral CTB discussions (and delegations) separate from the SALT and CCD discussions at this point. Soviets Statements on PNEs. The Soviet suggestion on PNE verification could substantially reduce the military risks in permitting 6 Carter checked the “leave as is” option and wrote “But emphasize verification.” An unknown hand wrote “Done” in the right margin. 7 At the end of this paragraph, Carter wrote “We need 3 years.” 8 At the end of this paragraph, Carter wrote “I’m not sure about this. Cy should get PRC opinion on worldwide approach—informally from Huang.” An unknown hand wrote “Done” in the right-hand margin. 9 The SALT I Interim Agreement, signed in Moscow on May 26, 1972, was scheduled to expire on October 3.
