Romania
681
conformist activities which could jeopardize their entire future. Further,
Romanian system can generally absorb and reward its high school and
university graduates—especially those trained in technical/scientific
skills, as most are—so that there are no more than isolated problems
of the unemployed, and therefore restless, intellectual.
Religious Groups
21. Leadership of all fourteen recognized denominations follow
rule of “rendering unto Caesar”, except that in Romania Caesar’s
share is significantly larger than elsewhere. In return, religious leaders
become, de facto, coopted into the ruling establishment and are
therefore unlikely to challenge it seriously. Moreover, Romanian
Orthodox Church, which is the overwhelmingly dominant denomina-
tion, has no tradition of militancy on temporal issues and an unbroken
record of accommodating itself to whatever government is in power.
Dissidents within established denominations, particularly Baptists
and other proselytizing neo-Protestants, do have some potential for
causing disruption and are more difficult to coerce or buy off, but
GOR, often acting through official denomination leaders, has been
successful so far in confining religious dissidence to limited and
generally harmless manifestations. While there are a few unrecognized
and therefore technically illegal denominations, they exert little influ-
ence and have not been so grossly persecuted as to engender a
revenge mentality. Largest group in this category is Greek Catholic
(Uniate) Church, which was officially abolished by GOR in 1948
and forceably merged into Orthodox Church; although scattered
pockets of sub rosa Uniates still exist, they are quiescent and show
no tendency to attempt to reclaim by force what was taken from
them. Finally, in spite of fact that legion of Archangel Michael/Iron
Guard, the principal grass roots organization Romania has produced
this century, combined religious mysticism with jingoistic nationalism
and fascist ideology, we view this organization as a product of
1930’s whose conditions are unlikely to be duplicated again; attempts
by “court poet” Adrian Paunescu to parlay similar elements into a
political mass movement nominally loyal to Ceausescu have met
with limited success at best (of 77 Bucharest A–81).5
Ethnic Minorities
22. Hungarians. Major unrest and insurrection among Romania’s
two million ethnic Hungarians is the single most important possible
source of domestic strife, as ethnic conflict between Serbs and Croats
could tear Yugoslavia apart. History of Romanian-Hungarian conflict,
5 Airgram 81 from Bucharest, July 25, 1977. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, P770121–0954)
