340 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 123. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State1 Moscow, December 31, 1979, 1826Z 28134. USSALTTWO. Subject: Afghanistan: Assessment of Soviet Motives. 1. (S—Entire text) 2. Begin summary. This report, which elaborates the initial thoughts on the Soviet move into Afghanistan which we reported in more restricted channels, attempts to analyze both the immediate objectives and the possible longer-range purposes behind the action.2 The obvious immediate aim was to replace Amin with a ruler who might stand a better chance of gaining popular support for the Marxist regime, thus bringing the insurgency to an end. But this objective would not, in our view, in and of itself have justified the Soviet move, given the seeming risk to other Soviet foreign policy interests. We assume, then, that other factors also heavily influenced the decision. Among these, in descending order of probability, would be: —fear that hatred of Amin and growing insurgency might eventually produce the collapse of the Marxist regime—a development to be prevented at whatever cost because of its potential impact on Eastern Europe; —similarly, a concern that defeat of the regime by forces of Islamic fundamentalism, which if combined with similar forces in Iran and Pakistan would have potentially dangerous implications for the Soviet Union’s own Moslem population; —a desire to construct a “cordon sanitaire” around China—based on Soviet control over Mongolia, Indochina, and Afghanistan and continuing good relations with India; and —at a later point in time, the beginning of a drive toward the Indian Ocean through Pakistan, or possibly toward the Persian Gulf through the Baluchi area of Iran. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800004–0424. Secret; Niact Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Immediate to London and USNATO. Also sent for information to Warsaw, Amman, Baghdad, Beijing, Belgrade, Berlin, Bonn, Bucharest, Cairo, Damascus, Islamabad, Jidda, Kabul, Leningrad, New Delhi, Paris, Prague, Rome, Sofia, Tel Aviv, Tokyo, Beirut, U.S. Mission Geneva, U.S. Mission Berlin, and USDel MBFR Vienna. 2 Likely reference is to telegram 28119 from Moscow, December 28, which is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 247. See also Document 101.
