1955 151 forth in “understanding” that “nothing in agreed announcement is intended raise any question of sovereignty, or jurisdiction over nation­ als of one country in territory of other and that it is assumed that mea­ sures referred to in numbered paragraph 1 of statement by Ambassador Wang contained in ‘agreed announcement’ and measures referred to in paragraph 1 of statement by Ambassador Johnson in ‘agreed announce­ ment’ are taken within the framework of the laws and legal procedures of their respective countries.” 3. It seems to me this is not inconsistent with first sentence para­ graph 3 Deptel 598. My thought is that such an “understanding” including language latter part paragraph 3 my telegram 564 would in substance simply be oral statements exchanged between Wang and myself in meeting, although we would, in accordance with our arrange­ ment at opening talks, give to other copy of any remarks we had made which we desired other side have exact words. 4. Believe my ability do this would materially strengthen my nego­ tiating position in attempting extract from him “understanding” on timing release Americans. Gowen 120. Telegram 602 to Geneva1 Washington, August 22, 1955, 3:52 p.m. 602. For Johnson. Your 571. 1. PAREN a PAREN Word QUOTE nationals UNQUOTE has pur­ posely been dropped minimize possible Chinese claim that we recog­ nize in public document jurisdiction of PRC over Chinese in USA. Not recognizing PRC as legal government China we are unable agree that Chinese in USA are its QUOTE nationals UNQUOTE. (b) No objection adding phrase QUOTE and the Government UK may also do so UNQUOTE. We purposely omitted phrase because we unable see that it would have any utility and we did not want to seem to think that it had. 2. Deptel 599. Delete word QUOTE residing UNQUOTE in first sentences in second and third paragraphs because QUOTE residence 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–2255. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Sebald, McConaughy, and Phleger; approved in draft by Dulles.
