Options Identified
259
—Fedayeen-al Khalq: These secular Marxists have broken with Kho-
meini. Their activities are illegal, their headquarters has been raided
and closed, and their leaders are underground. Individual members
may be associated with the Embassy occupation. They may have con-
nections with the Kurdish rebels.
—The Tudeh (Communist) Party: This party, now open and legal,
supports Khomeini and carries on various activities, such as organizing
meetings and publishing a newspaper. Its membership strength is
unknown, but it was quite small during the Shah’s period.
—Mujahiddin-al Khalq: These Islamic Marxists during the summer
became estranged from Khomeini. Like the fedayeen, they were
attacked and criticized. They have not gone underground, however,
and are trying once again to win Khomeini’s support.
Many observers have suggested that if the Khomeini regime col-
lapses, power will fall to the left. But the latter so far is not sufficiently
organized or strong to assume power. For the longer term, the left
breeds and grows on troubles and turmoil. If, however, there is real
political power in the left’s future, it is a distant future.
The Military. The Shah’s once-vaunted armed forces remain shat-
tered. Personnel is at about half-strength; equipment suffers from lack
of use; spare parts are in short supply. Competing armed groups, such
as the Revolutionary Guards, exist in many key locations. The officer
corps is well aware that the troops are more responsive to the religious
leaders than to military commanders. Thus, for the present, the armed
forces are not a potential source of anti-government activity.
They do, however, contain important resources for the future: a
tradition of backing strong leaders, an established institution in a coun-
try where there are few, and some remaining leaders of intelligence
and ambition. The military could eventually be a force of real political
significance, but first it must decide where it is politically. With the
loss of the Shah, the armed forces lost their raison d’etre, and a new
one has not reappeared.
The Moderates. Most of Iran’s moderate, secular leaders (including
those of the National Front) are in hiding or exile. They have been
almost eliminated as participants in the current political process leading
to the establishment of the Islamic republic. They will have little or no
representation in the new parliament. What remains of their strength
is among escapee groups, chiefly that of Shahpour Bakhtiar in Paris.
But Bakhtiar is only beginning to organize and seems to understand
that his problems far outnumber his realistic hopes.
Thus, none of the opposition groups is likely to wield much power
in the coming year or so. Their weakness is one of Khomeini’s main
strengths.
A nascent cooperation among some of these opposition groups
is, however, developing. It involves Bakhtiar, other moderate secular
