1956  1057
659.	 Letter from Osborn to Clough1
Geneva, June 14, 1956
Dear Ralph:
The failure of the Chicom statement to hit implementation may be 
a reflection of Peiping’s tactical dilemma. Wang’s line of counterattack 
on the prisoner release was planned on the assumption that the pris­
oner move is a US plot to repeat the Korea screening operation. Wang 
wouldn’t want to compromise this line by assuming a different position 
in public; yet he is aware of the many vulnerabilities of this line, and of 
how foolish he would look if our move on prisoners turns out not to be 
a plot. Accordingly Peiping may have felt it wiser to say nothing more 
on implementation until some initial results of the screening are in.
If no results are in by June 21, we ourselves have a choice to make. 
Should we really try to reassure Wang that the operation is “straight”, 
or should we let Wang continue to entangle himself in his ridiculous 
line of last meeting? So long as we don’t know what the prisoners’ 
choice is going to be, the last course would be safer as well as easier.
What Wang might do on implementation, if his dilemma is not 
resoved by June 21 by the appearance of the initial results of the screen­
ing, is to shift increasing emphasis to the “obstructed” students. We 
can of course counter this by our old standbys:—no representations 
from Indians, Chinese steadily returning Wang’s country (including 
Dr S.D. Liao, who was on Wang’s February 6 list, and who is now back 
in China). Might it not so be a good idea to start dropping a few low-­
keyed remarks about Chicom pressures on students’ families in China? 
We could do so without violating the confidence of Victor Chou et al, 
as we now have the Chinese news reports on the registration of student 
families. The Chicoms are vulnerable on this point and it might not hurt 
for them to know it.
On renunciation, I have no new thoughts—a lack which no doubt 
distresses you—but still feel that it would be in keeping with Wang’s tac­
tics if he were to submit a new draft soon. He likes to keep the initiative, 
both in the talks and publicly, and Peiping is probably fully aware, now 
that we have publicly confessed our deadlock, that both the initiative 
and the public advantage will now accrue to whichever side first makes 
a strong and apparently “reasonable” effort to break the deadlock.
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Confidential; Official–­
Informal. Osborn signed the original “Dave.”
