1979 637 In our PRC meetings, OSD compared the capabilities of the Trident II and the 192,000 lb MX missile the Air Force prefers. These comparisons show that if the Trident II can meet its accuracy goals, it would be nearly as capable as the large MX and thus not many more would be required to achieve the assumed design goals of the land based force. Thus a savings of perhaps $4 billion might ultimately be achieved by using the Trident II in the land based deployment—­though more money would be required up front to design a missile that is able to operate in both basing modes. (S) There are major problems involved in choosing the common missile approach however: —­many in Congress and elsewhere want “largest” missile allowed under SALT II; —Trident II is not well enough defined to begin now. The 6–12 month delay needed to define it will exacerbate concerns about Soviet strategic momentum; —­designing a missile for land and sea use will pose a significant management challenge—­some see possibility of another TFX; —­a common missile implies some increase in the probability of a simultaneous failure in both land and sea based missile forces; —­suspicions will be generated that we will cancel the land based deployment once SALT II ratification is behind us. Such suspicions will result in lower SALT support that would have been generated by the choice of the largest missile; —­the Air Force is strongly opposed for above reasons and more; —­the Navy is opposed because funding for Trident II will divert resources from other programs they strongly prefer (S) Taking everything into account, I don’t believe it would be prudent to choose the common missile for the land based deployment. I believe the partly common missile is even a poorer idea because it poses pretty much the same difficulties as the common missile, but promises significantly smaller ultimate saving even if everything works out. (S) M–X Decisions You should try to make as many of the above decisions as you can. At a minimum, you should make the broad choice between options A and B. If you choose B, it is extremely important that you announce it before the Summit in order to avoid any impression that it is the result of a deal with the Soviets. (TS) Assuming you choose A, you should also try to choose between MPS and the track-­mobile systems and, unless you choose MPS now, you should ask Harold to refine the track-­mobile concept by the end of June. (S)
