1955 571 F. Your authorities did not attempt deny fact that Dr. Bradshaw’s freedom of communication with Charge had been restricted but refused to accept protest on grounds that it went beyond the duties of UK Charge under agreed announcement. I thus assume that your authorities consider that this is only proper place for discussion of such matter. I do not agree that it cannot also be discussed by UK Charge in Peking, but am entirely willing discuss matter here. G. This is clear evidence that your government has, in violation of terms of the September 10 agreed announcement, obstructed free com­ munication of Americans with UK Charge. My government expects that any similar obstructions to free communication of other remaining Americans with UK Charge and other obstacles to full performance of his duties will be promptly removed. However, I was encouraged to note statement by your authori­ ties to UK Charge on December 6 that consideration was being given to request for early release of Dr. Bradshaw so that he could accom­ pany his wife, and wish again to express hope that this matter can be promptly handled. I. I will have further comments to make on your proposed draft at a subsequent meeting. I have nothing further to say today. 2. Wang replied that it was in interests of progress our discussions that his side presented new draft last meeting. Was regrettable I had not been able this meeting put forward concrete views U.S. side on that draft. Certainly hoped, as I had stated, would be able put forward latest views on draft at later meeting. 3. Turning to prepared statement Wang continued that in view of fact I had raised number questions regarding his draft at last meeting, he was willing make few amplifications on that draft. As I had specifically raised at last meeting question whether draft covered Taiwan area, he willing again amplify statement in explicit manner. It is specified in new draft that China and U.S. should settle disputes between them peacefully without resort to threat of use of force. 4. Wang said as heart of Sino-American dispute is precisely cen­ tered on Taiwan so it goes without saying that new draft covers this question. That I had said describing Taiwan as area where interests and policies China and U.S. clash seriously shows that tension Taiwan area is international matter and not simply domestic matter how to deal with ­Chiang clique. 5. Wang said in 1946 Chiang Kai-shek launched large-scale civil war and Chinese people forced to resort to war to overthrow Chiang and establish PRC. Notwithstanding fact some people been adopting hostile attitude towards victory Chinese people, nobody could deny fact liberation of mainland and large number coastal islands by PRC
