August 8–September 17, 1978 141 ment,5 however. It simply excludes certain aspects of Arab/Israeli and domestic affairs. El-Baz thought that the area of compulsory ICJ jurisdiction could be enlarged. It has the advantage, he pointed out, of de-politicizing the dispute and bringing it into a legal rather than a political framework. In this context, the resolution of disputes should be easier. It should lessen tensions and help to eliminate controversy. The Secretary asked whether this means that disputes flowing from a peace treaty for contractual arrangements between the parties should be covered. El-Baz responded that any agreement could be referred to the ICJ for decision. El-Araby pointed out that the USG has pressed Egypt to go to the ICJ on the petroleum issue. Hence, the Egyptians had believed that this concept could be beneficial to the conflict in general. The Secretary said he will have the Department’s Legal Counselor look into the matter. Boutros Ghali observed that this would be our contribution to the ICJ, which at the moment has little to do. The Secretary said that on other matters, he understood what had been said in the Egyptian paper. He noted the omission of Article 9. Also the general form of the Preamble and then the operational part are good approaches. He asked if the Egyptians have any question about our views. West Bank/Gaza-Sovereignty-Round-and-Round the Mulberry Bush: Kamel noted that the United States has taken certain public positions that are on record. The Egyptians hope that these public positions will be reflected in whatever language President Carter introduces. Specifically, he mentioned (a) withdrawal, (b) the illegality of settlements, and (c) the Palestinian problem. The previous day, he noted, the Egyptians has gained the impression that we are backing away from some of these previously enunciated positions. The Secretary said that this impression is wrong. President Carter has said that there is a good deal of merit in the self-government proposal of Prime Minister Begin.6 The Egyptians had assumed that the entire Begin proposal will be taken over. This is not the case. There is nothing inconsistent in this with our belief that there is a need to talk about self-government in the interim period. It is important to have a self-government in the transition period. 5 Named after Senator Thomas Connally (D-Texas), Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, the Connally Amendment refers to language included in the United States’ 1946 declaration of acceptance of the International Court of Justice’s compulsory jurisdiction. The amendment stated that the Court’s jurisdiction shall not apply to disputes with regard to matters which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of the United States of America “as determined by the United States of America.” (C.P. Trussel, “Senate Vote Near on World Court,” The New York Times, August 2, 1946, p. 5) 6 See footnote 4, Document 36.
