744  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
President Eisenhower said that President Duvalier’s appeal would 
be studied by the State Department and other appropriate agencies. 
The President said that he understood the Department of Justice is now 
investigating the facts of the recent plotting in the United States against 
the Haitian Government. Under Secretary Herter corroborated this.
The President said he was meanwhile preparing a greeting to 
President Duvalier in response to his letter to him.
On leaving, the Foreign Minister left a previously prepared sum-
mary of his intended remarks with the President, in addition to a letter 
from President Duvalier.3
3 The summary, not printed, is attached to the unofficial translation of Duvalier’s 
letter of August 2.
In a letter to President Duvalier of August 8, President Eisenhower affirmed that “the 
United States deplores the involvement of its citizens in the revolutionary attempt against 
your Government on July 29, 1958, and appropriate agencies of this Government are con-
ducting an inquiry to determine what violations of United States laws may have occurred.” 
In regard to Duvalier’s request for military assistance, President Eisenhower indicated that 
he had asked the Department of State and other U.S. government agencies to give urgent 
and careful study to the matter. (Presidential Correspondence, Lot 64 D 174)
HA–7.	
Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Middle 
American Affairs (Wieland) to the Deputy Assistant 
Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Snow)1

Washington, August 28, 1958.
SUBJECT 
Marine Corps Training Mission to Haiti
Problem:
The President of Haiti, Dr. Duvalier, has requested that a Marine 
Corps Training Mission be assigned to Haiti. The problem is to 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 738.5811/8–2858. Secret. Drafted by 
Norman Warner, Officer in Charge of Haitian Affairs, and cleared with George O. Spencer 
of the Office of Inter-American Regional Political Affairs.
The source text is an uninitialed carbon copy. Attached to the source text is a mem-
orandum from Wieland to Rubottom dated January 22, 1959, which describes several of 
the documents relating to the Marine Corps mission to Haiti. It indicates that the August 
28 memorandum constitutes a “position paper” on the subject.
