National Security Policy  329
99.	
Memorandum of Discussion at the 381st NSC Meeting1
Washington, October 2, 1958
SUBJECT
Discussion at the 381st Meeting of the National Security Council 
Thursday, ­October 2, 1958
Present at the 381st NSC Meeting were the President of the United 
States, Presiding; the Secretary of State; the Acting Secretary of Defense; 
and the Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization. Also present 
were the Acting Secretary of the Treasury; the Attorney General; the Acting 
Director, Bureau of the Budget; Brig. General Alfred D. Starbird for the 
Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission; the Director, U.S. Information 
Agency (participating in Item 3); the Chairmen, Interdepartmental 
Intelligence Conference and Interdepartmental Conference on Internal 
Security (attending for Item 1); the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the 
Director of Central Intelligence; the Deputy Assistant to the President; 
the Director, International Cooperation Administration; the Special 
Assistants to the President for National Security Affairs, and Security 
Operations Coordination; Assistant Secretary of State Gerard C. Smith; 
Assistant Secretary of Defense Mansfield D. Sprague; the Press Secretary 
to the President (attending for Item 3); the White House Staff Secretary; 
the NSC Representative on Internal Security; the Executive Secretary, 
NSC; and the Deputy Executive Secretary, NSC.
There follows a summary of the discussion and the main points 
taken.
1. SHIPMENTS ENTERING THE UNITED STATES UNDER 
­DIPLOMATIC IMMUNITY
(NSC 5802/1; NSC Actions Nos. 1868 and 1984; NSC 5527; Memos 
for NSC from the Executive Secretary, same subject, dated September 
22 and 23, 1958)
Mr. Gray briefed the Council on this item along the lines reflected 
in the briefing note, a copy of which is filed in the Minutes of this 
Meeting. Mr. Gray then called on the Secretary of State for comment.
The Secretary of State indicated that the Department of State con­
curred in the proposed modification of NSC Action No. 1868 and he rec­
ommended that the modified language be approved by the President.
1 Source: Agenda item 1: Shipments Entering the United States Under Diplomatic 
Immunity. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Extracts—4 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, 
NSC Records. Drafted on October 3.
