National Security Policy  1207
of operations which were approaching a condition of hostilities. Mr. 
Merchant said that the interim guidance on this subject approved by 
the President on August 25 contained the phrase “acting under the gen­
eral supervision of the Ambassador.” However, Mr. Merchant believed 
that the military operation should not be conducted under the gen­
eral supervision of the Ambassador but that the evacuation operation 
should be under the Ambassador’s supervision. The President believed 
one difficulty lay in deciding where supervision begins and ends. He 
had frequently insisted that the Chief of Mission must be the principal 
U.S. authority in a foreign country. The question was, at what point does 
our chief diplomatic official cease to have overall authority and respon­
sibility. Of one thing he was sure, namely, that we would need both a 
good Ambassador and a good military commander in the event evacu­
ation operations were necessary. General Lemnitzer said the JCS were 
not raising any question as to the overall authority of the Ambassador 
but they did question the extent to which he should become involved 
in military operations. The President, with an assist from Mr. Merchant, 
then proposed the language in Paragraph 5–c–(1) of NSC 6019 which 
appears in the action below.
The National Security Council:
a. Discussed the draft statement of policy on the subject contained 
in NSC 6019; in the light of the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff thereon, 
transmitted by the reference memorandum of December 15, 1960.
b. Adopted the statement of policy in NSC 6019, subject to the fol­
lowing amendments:
(1) Pages 5 and 6, subparagraph 5–­c–­(1): Add at the end of the first 
sentence the clause “who will respond to the extent which they con­
sider militarily feasible”; and revise the second sentence to read as fol­
lows: “Responsibility for the conduct of such evacuation operations 
by military forces rests wholly with the military commander, acting in 
coordination with, and under evacuation policies established by, the 
principal U.S. diplomatic or consular representative.”
(2) Page 6, paragraph 6: Revise the first line to read as follows: “6. In 
implementing this policy, the”.
NOTE: NSC 6019, as amended by the action in b above, subse­
quently approved by the President; circulated as NSC 6019/1 for 
implementation by all appropriate Executive departments and agen­
cies of the U.S. Government under the coordination of the Secretaries 
of State and Defense.
Marion W. Boggs
