600 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement announcement is being implemented. I would not take the time to repeat. However, basic test is whether or not there is obstruction to any Chinese departing U.S. for PRC or any other country. In spite of all discussion revolving about this question, there is still to be produced as single case of any kind of official obstruction by U.S. since my assur­ ances to Wang this regard on August 2. 54. I said on one hand he had raised question of 38 Chinese who had not returned, out of group of 103. On other hand he had made statement acknowledging some Chinese in U.S. may not desire return for time being. In regard to 103, he apparently still not clear what that group consisted of. I had never said that all of group desired return and prevented from doing so. I did not want to go again over issuance of restraining orders. I wanted to make clear, however, that issuance those orders not necessarily related to whether person desired return. Orders issued, as I had pointed out, in absence of exit permit system to prevent departure of persons we did not desire go PRC at that time. Some per­ sons that group may not at any time have in fact desired return. Others may have subsequently changed their mind. I had no way of knowing. 55. I said facts in individual cases not important. Important thing is whether persons now know that they free to go if they so desire and that if they feel obstructed they free communicate with Indian Embassy. Each person individually informed restraining order his case lifted. Each person aware of his right to get on boat and leave if he desired do so. Each person perfectly aware of ability and right to communicate with Indian Embassy if he feels obstructed. That applies to all Chinese in U.S. 56. I said Wang had again spoken of alleged fear of some Chinese in U.S. to apply for departure lest they be refused. I had stated over and over again that no Chinese desiring depart U.S. need apply to anyone for permission to do so. No exit permits of any kind required to depar­ ture. As I had pointed out this morning, if our nationals were to be placed on equal basis, PRC would have to repeal its exit permit require­ ments. However, I had not and did not intend to make such demand, since I did not want get bogged down in discussion of subject. 57. I said Wang had referred to cases Chinese in prison in U.S. I did not know of any such case. Certainly if there were a Chinese in prison who desired return, he free communicate with Indian Embassy and Indian Embassy free investigate his case. 58. I said Wang had also again raised question of INS requirement concerning entry permits to Taiwan. I would repeat again that there is no general requirement Chinese in U.S. obtain entry permits to Taiwan. What there is, is normal and regular requirement of any country that person entering country temporarily must show that at end of stay he able go somewhere else. This not applicable to Chinese alone but to all
