Romania
711
therefore not close the door entirely—especially since the succession
struggle in the Soviet Union may offer an opportunity for Bucharest
to increase its freedom of maneuver. At a minimum we could quietly
and discreetly discuss with the Romanians how our procurement sys-
tem works and apprise them of the major legislative requirements
without making any specific commitments. This might help to prevent
some of the problems that have arisen with the Yugoslavs (whom
we briefed too late in the game) while at the same time keeping the
door slightly ajar for sales at a later date should circumstances prove
propitious. (S)
We should be sure, however, that any moves with Romania do
not jeopardize our military relationship with the Yugoslavs, and before
proceeding too far, it would be wise to obtain Belgrade’s reaction to
our establishing a military supply relationship with Bucharest. While
the Yugoslavs would probably support efforts to aid Romania (with
whom they themselves are cooperating to build a joint fighter, Orao)
they might feel that such efforts on our part might expose them to
increased Soviet pressure and thus prefer we not sell arms to Bucharest.
At any rate, at some point we should discreetly seek their views. (S)
At the moment no agency or service has a firm view on how we
should proceed. PM/EUR is working on a memo to Vance setting out
the political, legal and legislative implications of the establishment of
any military supply relationship with Bucharest, which should be ready
in several weeks. Defense has prepared a memo (Tab B) outlining US
and COCOM restraints.3 I will keep you informed as work proceeds. (S)
After State has finished its memo to Vance, I think the issue should
be raised at a VBB and then a mini-SCC should be held.4 (C)
3 Attached at Tab B is a undated and unsigned Department of Defense memorandum
from the Office of International Security Affairs prepared for the Deputy Assistant
Secretary of Defense for European and NATO Affairs. The memorandum outlined the
DOD position regarding a military supply relationship with Romania suggesting that
sales of dual-use items on the Commodity Control List and the COCOM International
list could be sold to the Romanian military without congressional approval, but that
congressional notification was advisable. The memorandum further informed Siena that
the USG had asked COCOM partners to extend a more flexible treatment to Romania,
but that no consensus had been reached. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff
Material, Office, President’s Advisory Board, Box 84, Sensitive XX: 4/1–11/80)
4 Brzezinski underlined “VBB and then a mini-SCC” and wrote: “OK. ZB. (good
memo).”
