516 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Latin American leaders to talk seriously about Cuba only after agreeing that Trujillo is also a problem. Secretary Herter said that procedurally we could not get the case of Cuba before the OAS until the Trujillo situation had been considered because the Trujillo case was brought up first. With respect to sugar legislation, he asked whether the President thought it would be undesirable to prepare any new legislation for this session of Congress. The President said he had not meant to suggest that he was opposed to any new sugar legislation. He would prefer to have the authority of law for refusing to buy Dominican sugar. He said that the OAS would not consider the case of Cuba if we focused all our attention on Castro and forgot about Trujillo. The National Security Council: Discussed the subject on the basis of draft U.S. recommendations to the Organization of American States with respect to the Dominican Republic, as read at the meeting by the Secretary of State.4 4 This paragraph constitutes NSC Action 2273. DR–26. Editorial Note On August 3, 1960, Héctor Trujillo resigned as President of the Dominican Republic and was succeeded by Vice President Joaquín Balaguer. In telegram 140 from Ciudad Trujillo, August 4, 1960, Chargé Henry Dearborn stated in part, “Clear from Balaguer’s acceptance speech August 3 there has been no change of government and Rafael Trujillo still dominates . . . . Up to this moment no indication any responsible Trujillo opposition member will participate Balaguer administration. No indication anywhere that GODR plans to abolish arbitrary arrests, prison tortures, or reprisals against its political opposition.“(739.11/8–460) The Foreign Ministers of the American Republic met at San José, Costa Rica August 16–21, 1960 to consider Venezuelan charges of Dominican complicity in the assassination attempt against President Betancourt. On August 20, the foreign ministers approved a resolution condemning the Dominican Republic and called on all members of the OAS to break off diplomatic relation with that nation. The United States severed diplomatic relations with the Dominican Republic on August 26, 1960. For documentation on the Sixth Meeting of Consultation of Foreign Ministers of the American Republics at San José, see Volume V.
