Afghanistan
383
The President said that he hoped Warren Christopher was correct
and that the French and Japanese would not run in and take advantage
of our restraint. He said that we ought to make a maximum effort to
get our allies behind us. He suggested that a message be prepared
right after the NSC meeting giving the allies a rundown on what we
had decided to do.
The planned joint commercial meeting and business facilitation
talks were discussed and it was agreed that they should be postponed
indefinitely.
It was also agreed to postpone the Civil Aviation Talks. The Presi-
dent also agreed that for the time being Aeroflot would be strictly
restricted to two flights weekly as authorized by our existing
agreement.
Turning to the question of export controls and possible tightening,
the Secretary of State asked what we were talking about in specific
terms. The President said that he favored tightening our export controls
on a case-by-case basis.
The Vice President said that this gets into the problem that we will
have with the farmers if we have a grain embargo. They will feel that
the businessmen are left off the hook if we do not make a similar
tightening in trade in industrial goods.
The President noted under COCOM we would tighten our restric-
tions together with the allies. Harold Brown pointed out, however,
that this only dealt with sensitive exports and technology and did not
deal with lots of other trade.
The President suggested that we send someone to COCOM and
to talk with our allies about tightening up on trade with the Soviet
Union. He said he was in favor of tightening our trade even more than
the allies so long as it did not disadvantage the U.S. businessmen in
comparison with our allies. Dr. Brzezinski said that he would instruct
Commerce and DOD accordingly.
On the issue of limiting Soviet commercial expansion in the United
States, Secretary Vance said that he thought this subject needed addi-
tional study. The President agreed but said that on a case-by-case basis
he would favor limiting Soviet commercial expansion. However, he
agreed that we need a detailed proposal.
On the subject of Soviet fishing in U.S. zones, Secretary Vance was
opposed to suspending such fishing because we also benefitted from
the fishing agreement.
Dr. Brzezinski thought that if we do not do something in grain we
should do something on fishing. The Secretary of State said we could
handle this through the allocation and not cancel the agreement itself.
