1955  389
Chicoms are considering the renunciation of force matter we would be 
willing to hear their views about trade, particularly:
(1) Are they referring to the US total ban on Chicom trade?
(2) Are they referring to restrictions on strategic materials as 
administered by CHINCOM?
(3) Are they proposing modification of UN resolution adopted 
during Korean War?
Dulles
281.	 Telegram 855 from Geneva1
Geneva, October 13, 1955, 2 p.m.
855. From Johnson. Re Deptel 869.
1. I would think it desirable that whenever opportunity arises, 
such as in reply to Chang Han-­fu’s question on O’Neill’s interpreta­
tion of agreement, O’Neill should state UK interprets portion of agreed 
announcement reading “and will further adopt appropriate measures 
so they can expeditiously exercise their right to return” to mean exactly 
what it says. Appreciate that probably neither O’Neill nor UK would 
desire become deeply involved at this stage in our controversy with 
CHICOMS their implementation this point. However believe UK 
would desire avoid any implication it agrees with CHICOM interpreta­
tion and lay best possible basis for invoking this portion announcement 
in representations in individual cases.
2. In view continued CHICOM vagueness on delivery text anno­
uncement to imprisoned Americans suggest consideration be given 
have O’Neill invoke portion of announcement stating UK Charge may 
also give publicity to request facilities have copy personally handed 
by member his office to each imprisoned American in event refusal he 
could request delivery letter from him containing text announcement, 
and information on how to communicate with him, to each prisoner.
3. Department will desire consider this from standpoint any prece­
dent it may establish for Indian functions in US but it appears to me we 
could without harm agree to same interpretation by Indians if question 
were raised.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/10–1355. Confidential; Priority; 
Limited Distribution.
