undated MEMORANDUM 1. The Government of Japan have observed with great satisfaction that since the installation of Marshal Tuan Chi-jui as Provisional Chief Executive of China, various questions of national and international importance, and particularly those concerning the recent “Reconstruction Conference and the Gold Franc, have been finally settled. Should China further succeed in the work of the National Assembly and the Customs Conference, which are expected to be held in due course of time, her position in the family of nations will no doubt be greatly enhanced and strengthened. 2. It is a cause of regret that certain elements of the Chinese people have recently been active in inciting strikes in Japanese cotton mills at Tsingtao, Shanghai and elsewhere. Demands for better terms of employment soon developed into threats and violence against employers and police, and following the unfortunate incident at Shanghai, they have been succeeded by anti-foreign movements directed towards the cancellation of international arrangements. These agitations have spread rapidly to a great many localities and foreigners have everywhere been subjected to constant danger and molestation. 3. It is realized that the Chinese authorities in different places have been making efforts, although with varying degrees of success, to suppress disorder. At the same time, they have freely given their moral, if not material, support to the movements for the revision of treaty relations, regardless of the means employed or of the consequences involved in the support of such movements. The note addressed by the Chinese Foreign Minister to the Japanese Representative at Peking shows the disposition of the Chinese Government to take advantage of the Shanghai incident for urging consideration by the Powers concerned of many sweeping demands which are not directly connected with the incident itself. 4. The Government and people of Japan always look with sympathy on the legitimate national aspirations of the Chinese. The Japanese still retain bitter memories of the regime of extraterritoriality that existed in their own country years ago, and so their minds are naturally receptive to the Chinese appeal for the termination of that system. They are also mindful of the manifold difficulties with which China is now confronted in her domestic and foreign relations, and they trust that Marshal Tuan Chi-jui will appreciate the
