1957  1437
I was, of course, disappointed that the Department did not accept 
my suggestion from Prague for taking a little initiative in this field at 
today’s meeting. Although the meeting went off well without it, I do 
not think it safe to assume that this will always be the case or that they 
will not take another initiative in this field. Frankly, as you know, I am 
not happy with consistently being in the position of responding to his 
initiatives and never having an initiative of my own to which he is 
required to respond. I have felt that this correspondents issue gave an 
opportunity for somewhat turning the tables on him.
As far as the next meeting is concerned I think we simply have 
to wait and see what they do or do not do between now and that time. 
I fully expected him to turn down the suggestion for November 7 for 
the next meeting as that is the 40th Soviet anniversary and will be given 
a big play throughout the bloc. However, I wanted to leave it to him 
to suggest a later date. I should mention a point Ed Martin called to 
my attention with regard to the memo enclosed with your letter to me 
at Prague. Neither of us have a copy here as we do not like to carry 
classified communications but it is the recollection of both of us that in 
the last paragraph there was a phrase which in effect credited Chinese 
Communists with forcing us to change our policy on the travel of news­
men. While it is true that Peking’s issuance of invitations to American 
correspondents started the whole issue, it was not pressure from Peking 
that brought about a change in our policy but rather the pressure from 
our own press.
Incidentally, the amendment of Ekvall’s travel authorization men­
tioned in the last paragraph of my letter of September 12 has not yet 
been made and his new orders came out in the same form so he has not 
yet been able to collect for his previous travel.
Kindest regards to all.
Sincerely yours,
U. Alexis Johnson
P.S. For your information there has been a change in the courier 
arrival here so that your letters arrive here Wednesday afternoons. 
Thus, if there is anything of special importance in your letter it would 
be good to make some mention of it in our guidance so that if the cou­
rier is late for any reason we can ask you to telegraph the substance.
