552
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
159.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, December 16, 1978
SUBJECT
Relocating Israeli Airbases from the Sinai to the Negev
At Camp David you indicated that, subject to Congressional ap-
proval of the necessary funds, that the United States would help in the
relocation to the Negev of Israel’s two Sinai airbases at Eitam and Et-
zion. In pursuance of this agreement, on September 28, 1978, I sent a
letter to Israel’s defense minister2 proposing that our two governments
consult on the scope and costs of the two new airbases. In November
1978, I sent a survey team to Israel to begin these consultations. A sum-
mary of the team’s report is attached.3
Eitam and Etzion presently accommodate up to four aircraft
squadrons (120 planes). Israeli plans had called for expansion to five
squadrons in 1979 with subsequent further expansion to an eventual 8
squadrons. Israel is asking for U.S. assistance in building airbases to ac-
commodate 5 squadrons within three years. This would require con-
structing three bases, given the available land in the Negev. The cost
would be about $1.5 billion.
I recommend we confine any assistance on our part to no more
than the basing of the 4 squadrons now at Eitam and Etzion, and leave
to Israel the full expense of any expansion. This would entail construc-
tion at two sites in the Negev (Ovda and Matred) rather than three. The
cost for construction of the two bases, accommodating two squadrons
each, would be $988 million for operational facilities and $57 million for
necessary (family housing and recreational facilities for example) but
non-mission essential facilities, for a total of $1.045 billion. This does
not include costs for off-base infrastructure and related expenses such
as road construction and maintenance, utilities, port and terminal ex-
penses, and the like, which we have assumed Israel would bear. One
way we could reduce the U.S. contribution (alternative forms of which
are discussed later in this memo) below $1 billion would be by agreeing
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 35, Israel: 7–12/78. Secret.
2 See Document 57.
3 A notation in the right-hand margin next to this sentence reads: “(Available upon
request.)” A summary of the team’s report was not found attached, but a draft executive
summary is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 35, Israel: 7–12/78.
