380
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
126.
Briefing Memorandum From the Under Secretary of the
Treasury for Monetary Affairs (Solomon) to Secretary of the
Treasury Blumenthal1
Washington, April 12, 1978
SUBJECT
Supplemental Briefing for Fowler Committee Meeting April 13—Witteveen’s
Proposal for a “Substitution Account”
This proposal (described in Tabs D and F of your Fowler Com-
mittee briefing)2 may become a focus of both the Fowler Committee
and Interim Committee discussions. It has potentially wide implica-
tions, and we need to take a very careful approach.
In the C–20 reform negotiations,3 there were extended discussions
of proposals for substitution of SDRs for foreign official holdings of
dollars, in the framework of a resumed system of par values and con-
vertibility of currencies into “primary” reserve assets (SDR and gold).
The idea was to establish a new account in the IMF that would buy
dollars from official holders with newly created SDR, and hold the re-
sulting claims on the U.S. The par value reform approach was dropped,
and serious negotiations on terms of a substitution account never ma-
terialized. But it was widely assumed (hoped) by others that the U.S.
would bear exchange risk and pay market rates of interest on sub-
stituted dollars, and would undertake some form of amortization
obligation.
Witteveen’s proposal is supposedly much more modest, and is not
cast in terms of reform of the system. He has been trying to develop
support for an SDR allocation, but has run into strong German and other
European objections on grounds that additional international liquidity
is not needed. He has hit on this scheme as a way of getting his SDR al-
location and meeting European objections to increased liquidity: at the
same time there is an SDR allocation, countries would make irrevocable
1 Source: Carter Library, Anthony Solomon Collection, 1977–1980, Chronological
File, Box 4, 4/78. Confidential. Drafted by Leddy and reviewed by Cross.
2 The briefing was not found and no other record of the April 13 Fowler Committee
meeting was found.
3 In July 1972, the IMF Board of Governors established the Committee on Reform of
the International Monetary System, also known as the Committee of Twenty or C–20.
After 2 years of negotiations, the C–20 approved an Outline of Reform for the interna-
tional monetary system at a Ministerial meeting held in June 1974 in Washington. For
the text of the Outline, as well as the accompanying C–20 final report, see de Vries, The
International Monetary Fund, 1972–1978: Cooperation on Trial, vol. III: Documents, pp.
165–196.
