148
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
decision paper from the top down, rather than a consensual statement
filtered upwards through the bureaucracy.
This statement sets out ten central objectives for the next four years. It
does not prescribe specific tactics but it does propose steps for the at-
tainment of these ten central objectives, in addition to some others as
well.
I believe the four year objectives—though ambitious—are realistic.
In any event, they provide both stimulus and discipline for the devel-
opment of specific policy choices for your decision. I should note that
the second of these central objectives—that we cultivate the new “re-
gional influentials”—is likely to be both controversial and possibly
even occasionally in conflict with some of the other goals. Yet I believe
that American interests and global stability require that we nourish a
better relationship with these key states. Not to do so is to deprive our-
selves of potentially very constructive relationships. Given the impor-
tance and sensitivity of this proposal, I attach a special annex (Tab IV),3
pertaining to these states.
Basic Concept
These ten central objectives are derived from a basic concept of
what U.S. foreign policy should be at this historical stage. I want to stress
to you the importance of that concept. A foreign policy to be effective must
rest on a reasonably accurate assessment of the basic historical need.
The Soviets periodically undertake a very deliberate reappraisal of
their foreign policy based on the question: what is the nature of our his-
torical phase? Has that phase changed, and—if so—what are the impli-
cations for the Soviet foreign policy? We should be similarly alert to the
meaning of historical change. U.S. foreign policy in the past was rela-
tively successful because the notions of Atlanticism and containment
did correspond to the major needs of the late 40’s and early 50’s. Ac-
cordingly, this document is based on a unifying theme and you have to
decide whether the definition of that theme—in the section called
“Overall Concept”—is congenial to you.
Action
Accordingly, I would recommend: (1) that you review the docu-
ment, make whatever changes you deem necessary, and give me fur-
ther guidance; (2) that following further revisions in the light of your
directives, the document be used as the basis for discussion with your
principal advisers (such as the Secretary of State), and possibly even
with top Congressional leaders (though perhaps without actual distri-
bution); (3) that you give a comprehensive speech, maybe after the
3 Not printed.
