470 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 180. Telegram From the Embassy in Switzerland to the Department of State1 Bern, February 10, 1980, 1923Z 781. Eyes only for President, Secretaries Vance and Christopher, Dr. Brzezinski from Jordan and Saunders. Subject: Scenario for Resolving Hostage Crisis. 1. S–Entire text. 2. We met our contacts two hours Saturday midnight and all day Sunday.2 As a result, we believe we have an acceptable revised scenario (text below). The main lines are as you earlier approved3 with one addition—statements by Presidents Carter and Bani-Sadr. The changes primarily develop a more exact schedule of steps for establishing the Commission and a more precise description of events surrounding the end of the Commission’s work and the release of the hostages. Although the exact time it will take to play out this scenario cannot be determined now, we have stressed that the period must be short, and it looks to us as if the scenario should be completed in something less than three weeks from today. 3. One important proposal outside the scenario below is that Jordan (with Saunders) meet secretly with Ghotbzadeh in Paris next Sunday.4 He is taking a trip to Athens, Rome, and Paris on official Iranian business of various kinds. The purposes of the meeting would be (a) to demonstrate good faith on both sides; (b) to confirm or refine the last stages of the scenario, hopefully to get Ghotbzadeh’s agreement to direct release of the hostages rather than going through the intermediate stage of moving them to a hospital in Tehran; (c) to reach understanding on the contents of the two Presidential statements now added to the scenario; (d) to review any details on the remainder of the scenario. We recognize there are risks in such a meeting because it 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 31, Iran 2/80. Secret; Nodis; Cherokee; Flash. An unknown hand wrote “advance copy” in the upper right corner. Carter initialed “C” in the upper right corner. 2 February 9 and 10. Saunders, Precht, and Jordan met with Bourguet and Villalon at the Bellevue Hotel in Bern. (Crisis, p. 150) Sick later complained to Brzezinski that he had been cut out of the Bourguet and Villalon scenario and his inclusion needed to be clarified in order to maintain his credibility. (Memorandum from Sick to Brzezinski, February 11; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 32, Subject File, Iran [Retained] 2/80) 3 See Document 168. 4 February 17.
