152  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
individual bombers (this would respond to the Soviets’ stated concern 
that we could deploy wide-­bodied aircraft with dozens of ALCMs).
— Option 3—Do not change the U.S. position on counting rules; 
retain the existing ALCM attribution rule of ten per bomber.
— Option 4—Return to the earlier U.S. position that each heavy 
bomber equipped for ALCMs should count as six warheads, regardless 
of the number actually carried.
— Option 5—Eliminate all limits on ALCMs, retaining only an 
overall limit on heavy bombers.
ALCM Range and Nuclear-Conventional Distinguishability. Protecting 
future U.S. options for conventionally-­armed ALCMs from START lim-
its has been our overriding objective. At issue is whether this emphasis 
should continue to determine our approach. The JCS feel strongly that 
it should.
There are two complementary ways to protect conventional 
ALCMs from being captured in START: we can distinguish between 
nuclear and conventional ALCMs and limit only the nuclear missiles; 
or we can set the minimum range for limited ALCMs high enough to 
exclude all conventional ALCMs. The U.S. position does both.
We have agreed with the Soviets that all currently existing long- 
range ALCMs will be considered to be nuclear-­armed and subject to the 
treaty (all are in fact nuclear), and that future conventional ALCMs will 
either be distinguishable from nuclear-­armed cruise missiles by NTM 
or will be considered to be nuclear-­armed (distinguishability details 
have not been worked out). We have proposed a range threshold of 
1500 km; the Soviets have proposed 600 km, as was agreed in SALT II.
Two concerns underlie our 1500 km threshold proposal. First, we 
and the Soviets may not be able to agree on acceptable distinguish-
ability provisions and, in the end, all conventional as well as nuclear 
ALCMs over the range threshold would be limited, as are GLCMs 
in INF. A second concern is that possible improvements to Soviet air 
defenses which would require extended missile range (although there 
are no current U.S. programs for nuclear-­armed cruise missiles with 
ranges between 600 and 1500 km.)
In establishing the U.S. position, we recognized that the nuclear-­
conventional distinction could not be verified. Also, there is factor 
of two uncertainty in monitoring the range capability of an ALCM. 
Verification can be improved if START treats all ALCMs as though 
they are nuclear-­armed. Verification is also improved (i.e., the mili-
tary significance of cheating is reduced) as the range threshold is low-
ered. Both changes, however, limit future U.S. options. The primary 
consideration has been to protect U.S. programs, not to attempt to 
constrain Soviet ones.
