712 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI 288. Memorandum of Conversation1 Caracas, March 28, 1978, 3:30–4:40 p.m. SUBJECT International Political Issues: Panama Canal Treaties, Non-Proliferation, Middle East, Africa, Belize, Nicaragua, and Conventional Arms Restraint PARTICIPANTS President Jimmy Carter Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Terence A. Todman, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs W. Anthony Lake, Director, Policy Planning Staff Robert A. Pastor, NSC Staff Member Ambassador Viron P. Vaky Guy F. Erb, NSC Staff Member Venezuela Carlos Andres Perez, President Simon Bottaro Consalvi, Minister of Foreign Affairs Manuel Perez Guerrero, Minister of State for International Economic Affairs Valentin Acosta Hernandez, Minister of Energy and Mines Carmelo Lesseur Lauria, Minister, Secretariat of the Presidency Hector Hurtado, Minister of State, President of the Investment Fund Ambassador Ignacio Iribarren Dr. Reinaldo Figuerido, Director of Foreign Trade Institute After exchanging cordialities, President Perez asked about President Carter’s preference with regard to an agenda. President Carter said that he would like to discuss international political issues today and economic issues tomorrow. [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to conventional arms transfers.] Conventional Arms Restraint Perez raised the issue of the arms race in the Andes. He said that Venezuela had called a meeting based on the Ayacucho Declaration,2 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Office File, Country Chron File, Box 56, Venezuela, 1–4/78. Confidential. The meeting occurred at the Miraflores Palace. Carter was in Caracas on March 28 and 29. In a follow-up meeting with Perez on April 28, Assistant Secretary of State for Latin American Affairs Viron Vaky said the United States supported Perez’s call for “regional restraint, tying this to the larger US effort to encourage multilateral restraint.” (Telegram 4012 from Caracas, April 29; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780187–0874) 2 Declaration signed by Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Panama, Peru, and Venezuela on December 9, 1974 urging “the creation of a permanent order of international peace and cooperation and to create conditions that permit the effective limitation of armaments and put an end to their acquisition for offensive warlike ends, in order to dedicate all possible resources to the economic and social development of each of the countries of Latin America.” (Documents on Disarmament, 1974, pp. 819–822)
