524 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III 171. Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen) to President Carter1 Washington, October 18, 1978 SUBJECT Summit Follow Up and Preparations 1. Bonn Follow-Up. In one sense, the Bonn strategy seems to be working: The Germans and Japanese have both taken stimulus action;2 the US emphasis is shifting to fighting inflation; and Japan and the US are taking actions to promote exports and imports, respectively. If continued, as the IMF Managing Director’s annual report makes clear,3 these trends point the way to a gradual reduction of external imbalances and strengthening of the dollar. There are two flaws in this prospect, however: 1) The foreign exchange markets don’t believe that the US will accept the tight fiscal and monetary discipline that Germany, Japan, and others have found necessary to bring inflation under control. So long as this view prevails abroad, the dollar will continue to decline. 2) Japan, the UK, and France lag in fulfillment of their Bonn trade commitments. This blunts the effect of domestic policies in the main industrial countries in reducing the US external deficit and the Japanese external surplus. We can do something about both these problems: —The Europeans and Japanese can be convinced that the US is serious in tackling inflation if we make clear that the FY 1980 budget expenditure and deficit levels will be substantially below those now generally assumed. Hard budget target figures may persuade them (where 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 64, Summits: 1/78–8/79. Confidential. Sent for information. Carter and Brzezinski both initialed at the top of the page. An attached October 18 note from Owen to Brzezinski reads: “You asked me to postpone putting in this memo until after Camp David. I’ve brought it up to date. I’d like to get it in tonight, since part of it bears on the decisions he will be making tomorrow about his anti-inflation program.” Two previous memoranda from Owen to Carter on Summit follow-up and preparation, August 11 and August 16, are ibid. 2 The West German 12.25 billion mark economic stimulus package was announced on July 28. (John Vinocur, “Stimulus, Tax Cuts Announced in Bonn,” The New York Times, July 29, 1978, p. 25) The Japanese 2.5 trillion yen economic stimulus package was adopted on September 2; see Document 160. 3 Apparently a reference to the IMF Annual Report of the Executive Board, published immediately before the IMF annual meeting. A story on the 1978 report was published in the September 18 edition of The Wall Street Journal. (Richard J. Levine, “Dollar’s Weakness on Currency Markets Seen to Be Beyond Quick or Easy Remedy,” The Wall Street Journal, September 18, 1978, p. 5)
