1090 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III U.S. Government Reaction We are reacting cautiously to the report, emphasizing that the U.S. Government was not involved in its preparation, that we have just received it, and that review and analysis of its many recommendations will require some time.5 We will have to formulate a position for preliminary discussion of the Report at the Development Committee meeting in Hamburg in late April.6 I will convene an interagency discussion in the NAC on the monetary and financial issues. IDCA plans to coordinate an interagency study of all the recommendations and prepare a U.S. position on the development aspects of the Report. Background The Brandt Commission was established in 1977 at the request of IBRD President McNamara to provide a new assessment of the possibilities for progress on North/South issues. Brandt chose 16 commissioners with a wide diversity of backgrounds and nationalities to assist him, including Peter Peterson and Katherine Graham of the United States. Other notables on the Commission include Edward Heath, Olof Palme and Eduardo Frei.7 5 In his February 14 Evening Report to Carter, Vance noted that he had “had a useful meeting this morning with Willy Brandt. His report is interesting and has a number of stimulating and prodding proposals.” Vance explained to Brandt “the very real problems we face in raising our aid levels and told him 7 percent is simply not a realistic figure. Brandt probably will not press the point with you.” Carter initialed Vance’s memorandum. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 22, Evening Reports (State): 2/80) Carter met with Brandt on February 15 from 9:45 until 10:05 a.m. in the Oval Office. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No memorandum of conversation of this meeting was found. 6 The IMF/IBRD Development Committee met in Hamburg on April 24. 7 Edward Heath was the U.K. Prime Minister from 1970 until 1974, Olof Palme was the Swedish Prime Minister from 1969 until 1976, and Eduardo Frei was the President of Chile from 1964 until 1970.
