Covert and Overt Operations 885 give us a wide and immediate picture of what is possible in Tehran. We will assess the results of those probes as they come in to determine how to shape follow-on approaches. Those approaches under Steps 2 and 3—outlined below as illustrative of the kinds of moves we could make—would likely follow the actual formation of the government and our assessment, as the information from the first probes becomes available, of the best way to approach key individual leaders in the government and the new parliament. Step #1. As a first step, we would continue immediately to encourage a new series of approaches to key Iranian officials, i.e., the new Prime Minister, the Foreign Minister, Beheshti and other leaders of the religious party, and Bani-Sadr. Specifically, we would instruct the following approaches: —The telegram that you have already directed13 instructs approaches to EC–9 members to ask them, now that the formation of a new government may be near, to reconsider a statement of their own along the lines of their Middle East statement14 and sending an emissary or a message to Tehran. We laid the groundwork for this approach in June by asking the EC to study such an approach. They replied that they were prepared to consider such an approach but did not feel the time was ripe in early July. We agreed. The advantage of our June approach is that they have now done their homework and should be prepared to move quickly at the right moment. —Also via the telegram you directed, we would approach key governments represented in Tehran, important members of the Islamic Conference, and other Europeans and ask them either to make direct approaches in Tehran or to make public statements appealing to the authorities in Tehran. The substance of these approaches would be an appeal to the Iranian government to take advantage of the convergence of the formation of the new government, the end of Ramadan, the death of the Shah, humanitarian concerns generated by Richard Queen’s illness and release to bring an end to the hostage crisis. —Ask Kreisky and his Socialist International group to consider an approach of their own either by going back to Tehran to visit the new leadership or by sending a message to the new leadership. —Urge both Waldheim and the President of the UNGA (if we can manage this without offending Waldheim) to establish either direct or indirect contact with both the new Foreign Minister and Beheshti (Waldheim) and the leadership of the parliament (UNGA President). The substance of the approach would be much the same as that described above. The appeal might not have all that much effect, but it might have some freshness for officials who have not been previously 13 Presumably telegram 213548, August 12. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 33, Iran Update 8/80) 14 The EC–9 issued the “Venice Declaration” on June 13, establishing an independent European policy toward the Arab-Israeli dispute. The full text is in the New York Times, June 14, 1980, p. 4.
