Options Identified
277
to respond in effective ways as quickly as possible. She had been
asked about Chapter Seven sanctions against Iran this morning in a
TV interview and had, of course, said Britain would support the U.S.
in such action. It could never be otherwise. But it would be helpful if
she knew the President’s mind on timing for next steps to increase the
pressure on Iran. (S)
The President responded that he would be brief since Mrs. Thatcher
no doubt had been following the crisis in detail. Lately we had been
reasonably encouraged. Initially the Iranian authorities had said that
the hostages would be tried individually as spies. That theme had
gradually diminished which was a good sign. The U.S. was prepared
to use naval forces if the situation demanded it but certainly wanted
to avoid such action. The President said that if there were public trials,
the U.S. would interrupt commerce with Iran as had been made clear
to the UK, France, the FRG, Italy, and to Khomeini. If any of the
hostages were executed, we would reserve the right to take more
forceful action. The President said he prayed that that would not be
necessary and repeated that there were some hopeful signs. He said
it was his sense that Khomeini had decided that holding the hostages
was counterproductive. The President continued that Panama’s coura-
geous act in accepting the Shah had also helped after Lopez Portillo
had pulled the rug out from under us having given a firm commitment
to take the Shah as late as the morning that Mexico announced the
reverse. (S)
The President said that Khomeini seemed to be shifting toward a
multinational tribunal approach—not a trial but the equivalent of a
grand jury. This was quite a change from Iran’s original position but
it was hard to know how much control Khomeini had over the students.
In a showdown, the President said, Khomeini could probably prevail,
but Khomeini no doubt wished to avoid just such a showdown. The
President noted that three of our people in Tehran at the Foreign
Ministry, including Bruce Laingen, had been able to communicate with
us. Laingen had felt that the departure of the Shah would help in
defusing the crisis. Indicating that we must do everything possible to
prevent the Iranian crisis freezing into a status quo, the President said
that later today he would know more precisely the time schedule for
our next steps to increase the pressure on Iran. He would discuss this
privately tonight at dinner with the Prime Minister. Secretary Vance
added that both Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh and the Iranian Chargé
had said that the Shah’s departure would be an important first step in
beginning the process to free the hostages. (S)
The President then noted that Sadat had always been forthcoming
with respect to providing a home for the Shah, but we did not favor
this solution to the problem. It would produce difficulties for Sadat in
