3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
558
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
port or increase the cost perceived by the USSR, since we have no ready
way of countering Castro’s mind-set. That is the purpose of the pos-
sible actions listed above, all of which in turn have a cost to us in terms
of our relationships with the USSR. The point is that the Cuba-USSR
joint program which we now consider poses serious policy consider-
ations for the U.S., will not be moderated unless we find a way to exac-
erbate subtle ideological differences between the USSR and Cuba, or in-
crease the cost to the USSR compared to the benefit of using Cuba as its
surrogate, as has been so comprehensibly described in both DIA and
CIA studies (SNIE 85–792 and TCS 2315–79/1). Just as Cuban actions
can only be viewed in a Cuban/USSR context, U.S. counteraction must
also be viewed in a U.S./USSR context.
2 SNIE 85–79, entitled “The Cuban Foreign Policy,” is in the Central Intelligence
Agency, NIC Files, Job 79R01012A.
195.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 24, 1979
SUBJECT
Aftermath of the Prisoner Exchange—Treatment of the Families (S)
The US-Soviet agreement on the prisoner exchange specified that
members of the five prisoners’ immediate families would be allowed to
leave the Soviet Union “without obstacle or delay”. The definition of
“members of the immediate family” was not specified. (S)
While it seems likely that all members of the families who wish to
leave will be allowed to do so (with the possible exception of the Ginz-
burg’s “adopted” son) the Soviets have made every step of the process
as difficult and unpleasant as possible. Numerous obstacles have been
thrown in the path of the families’ orderly departure. (S)
Both Mrs. Ginzburg and Mrs. Vins have been subjected to heavy
surveillance in their homes, and whenever they venture out. Both have
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Country Chron File, Box 53, USSR: 5/79. Secret. Sent for information. Carter
initialed the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum.
