550
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Begin pointed out that the policy of non-recognition and rejection
of the PLO is motivated by the fact that the Palestinian national charter
calls for the destruction of Israel.
Israel apparently plans an overall settlement through the conclu-
sion of peace treaties. Begin did not mention the possibility of partial
solutions during his meetings with Ceausescu. The essential content
of these peace treaties, according to Begin, should be cessation of the
state of war. Begin said that territorial problems and settlements in the
occupied territories should not be obstacles to peace, everything being
negotiable. Begin said the Israeli position on the delimitation of frontiers
is dictated entirely by national security reasons and is not a pretext
for territorial aggrandizement. The final borders are to be jointly estab-
lished only through negotiations and reflected in the peace treaties.
The establishment of diplomatic and other relations must be an integral
part of the peace treaties—but this is a problem for the negotiations,
not a precondition.
Begin attached great importance to the contacts at Foreign Minister
level at the UN this fall. Israel would have preferred direct contacts,
but in any case some progress can be made toward a conference.
With regard to the problem in southern Lebanon, Begin said he
does not want any Lebanese territory and would do anything to avoid
the outbreak of another war, but Israel cannot be indifferent to the fate
of the Christian minority in the region.
3. Romanian Conclusions
The Romanian Government considers that Prime Minister Begin’s
visit was a good opportunity to set forth the Romanian position toward
establishment of peace in the Middle East. Efforts should be intensified
to convince Israel to revise its rigid position. During the talks, the
Romanian side got the impression that, despite Begin’s rigid statements,
the Israeli Government might be considering the possibility of revising
its positions. Begin did not reject the possibility of a peaceful solution
to the Palestinian question, but said that it would be hard to do this
as long as the PLO does not renounce the idea of destroying Israel.
Begin said that he would think over the comments and analysis made
by President Ceausescu.
If only for this reason, the Romanians consider the visit useful. It
was never expected that Begin would revise his positions in Bucharest
or find the solution to the Middle East problem while there. The opinion
of the Romanian Government is that Begin’s intransigent statements
do not represent the final word. The possibility of an understanding
is not closed, but it is necessary for all countries to help bring the
respective positions closer together so that the Geneva Conference can
reconvene and a solution be found for PLO participation.
