56
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Army, Deputy Secretary of Defense, Special Envoy on the Cyprus and
Korean situations, and negotiator at the Paris Peace Talks during the
Lyndon B. Johnson administration, to serve as one of his foreign policy
advisers. After Carter made his offer, Vance consulted with Richard
Gardner, Anthony Lake, and Richard Holbrooke to gain a better sense
of Carter’s views. As he explained in his memoir of his tenure as
Carter’s Secretary of State: “He had a set of values that I found attrac-
tive. His thinking reflected a principled approach to foreign affairs,
which I believed essential for the reestablishment of a broad base of do-
mestic support for a more comprehensive foreign policy. His views on
specific issues, although still largely unformed, were in the centrist
mainstream in which I felt comfortable. I concluded that this intense
and energetic man had a real chance to become the next president of the
United States.” (Hard Choices, page 29)
Upon further assessment and consultation, Vance agreed to join
Carter’s foreign policy team. In the early fall of 1976, Vance wrote that
Carter had requested him to prepare a “memorandum setting out spe-
cific goals and priorities for a Carter foreign policy, should he be
elected.” (Ibid., pages 29–30) Under cover of an October 24, 1976, mem-
orandum to head of the Carter–Mondale Policy Planning Group Jack
Watson, Vance sent two copies of a 25-page “Overview of Foreign
Policy Issues and Priorities” memorandum. On the first page of the
overview, Vance noted that it “rapidly surveys, if not all the trees in the
foreign affairs forest, at least the clumps of trees.” He continued with a
broad statement of themes, which he felt should constitute the primary
elements of the Carter administration’s foreign policy:
“(1) In its dealings with the Soviet Union, the United States will
keep itself strong, and will stand resolutely firm to protect key United
States interests. At the same time, the new Administration will con-
tinue to direct its efforts toward the objective of a further reduction of
tensions between the two countries.
“—Although of central importance, US/Soviet issues will not be
permitted to so dominate our foreign policy that we neglect other im-
portant relationships and problems.
“(2) The new Administration will bring a new sensitivity,
awareness and priority to the vast complex of issues clustering around
the relationships between the industrialized and the unindustrialized
world, and the new set of global issues that are emerging, such as en-
ergy, population, environment, and nuclear proliferation.
“(3) The United States will continue in international forums its un-
wavering stand in favor of the rights of free men and, without unrealis-
tically inserting itself into the internal operations of other governments,
to give important weight to those considerations in selecting foreign
policy positions in the interests of the United States.
