1955  183
Communists were interested. The Chinese Communists have not 
spelled this out specifically, and naturally they would like to enlarge 
the representation formula if they could. But we would stand firm on 
the principle that no Chinese in this country could be approached on 
behalf of the Chinese Communists unless he first expressed a desire to 
return to the mainland. Those who might express a wish to return pre­
sumably would be in the student category.
Note: Separate Memoranda of Conversation have been prepared on 
the following subjects which were discussed at the same conversation: 
Revision of the U.N. Charter and Detention of the Soviet Tanker “Tuapse”.
145.	 Letter 9 from McConaughy to Johnson1
Letter No. 9
Washington, August 26, 1955
Dear Alex:
The communications people have very helpfully arranged a sec­
ond pouch each week, closing here on Friday morning and reaching 
Geneva via Frankfort Sunday evening. The spacing (Mondays and Fri­
days) is not the best, but it is much better than once-a-week service.
Herman Phleger returned to duty on Monday the 22nd, and from 
that date has played a large role in the direction of the Washington end 
of this project. You must have recognized his talented and distinctive 
imprint immediately. The Secretary asked him on Monday to coordi­
nate and take the immediate responsibility for all instructions to you. 
So Bill Sebald and I are working directly with him on all your messages. 
The Secretary has been away in New York since Wednesday.
I believe it is important for you to know the Secretary’s general 
thinking at present on the matter of Indian representation. Last Sunday 
afternoon he remarked that he thought it was important for it to be 
clear that the granting of a limited role to the Indian Embassy would 
be a matter of our own volition. He felt it should be made manifest to 
all that this was something which we decided to do of our own free 
will and accord, and not something that we were driven into by the 
Chinese Communists against our own inclination, as a quid pro quo in 
a deal for getting citizens out. It was even debated briefly whether we 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Printed from an unsigned copy.
