Sources
Sources for the Foreign Relations Series
The 1991 Foreign Relations statute requires that the published
record in the Foreign Relations series include all records needed to pro-
vide comprehensive documentation on major U.S. foreign policy deci-
sions and significant U.S. diplomatic activity. It also requires that gov-
ernment agencies, departments, and other entities of the U.S.
Government engaged in foreign policy formulation, execution, or sup-
port, cooperate with the Department of State Historian by providing
full and complete access to records pertinent to foreign policy decisions
and actions and by providing copies of selected records. U.S. foreign
policy agencies and Departments—the Department of State, National
Security Council, Department of Defense, Central Intelligence Agency,
and the Jimmy Carter Presidential Library—have complied fully with
this law and provided complete access to their relevant records.
Research for Foreign Relations volumes is undertaken through spe-
cial access to restricted documents at the Jimmy Carter Presidential Li-
brary, and other agencies. While all the material printed in this volume
has been declassified, some of it is extracted from still-classified docu-
ments. The staff of the Jimmy Carter Library is processing and declassi-
fying many of the documents used in this volume, but they may not be
available in their entirety at the time of publication.
Sources for Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
The files at the Jimmy Carter Presidential Library, in Atlanta,
Georgia, are the single most important source of documentation for
those interested in U.S. foreign policy toward Eastern Europe during
the Carter administration. Foreign policy research in the Carter Library
centers around two collections: National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Material, and National Security Affairs, Staff Material. Additionally,
the Country files in the Brzezinski Donated Material provided impor-
tant documentation.
The most important collections at the Carter Library were the Bre-
ment Subject File in the Europe, USSR, and East-West Collection of the
National Security Affairs, Staff Material holdings, as well as the Brze-
zinski Office File, and the National Security Council Institutional Files.
The administration’s policy toward the Radios (RFE/RL and VOA)
was detailed extensively in Paul Henze’s files (the Horn/Special Col-
lection), as were numerous intelligence related matters regarding the
covert action program directed at Eastern Europe. These files were sup-
XV
