1978 441 any one force component. This argument is based on two ideas—­first, that failure of any one force component in a strategic force divided into three essentially equal components leaves you with 2⁄3 of your original force, whereas with a strategic force divided into 2 essentially equal components you would only have ½ your original force left. Second, since there is no reasonable way to establish the relative probabilities of unforeseen catastrophic failures in each strategic force component, we should adopt a conservative approach and construct our strategic force so as to make the loss of our most capable force component at least marginally acceptable. While these ideas are not unreasonable, a deeper look yields some interesting insights. To begin our analysis, we might first examine the significance of the 17% difference between having 2⁄3 rather than ½ the total strategic force remain effective, given a catastrophic failure? At Tab A I have constructed illustrative 1990 strategic force postures for a full Triad, and a slightly augmented Dyad in which our ICBM forces are not modernized. For these national forces, you have [less than 1 line not declassified] remaining after the strongest leg of the Triad fails, versus [less than 1 line not declassified] after the stronger leg of the Dyad fails. The significance of such a difference is clearly a judgment call. While moving to sharply lower strategic force levels than say [less than 1 line not declassified] will make a 15–20% difference more significant, I don’t see this difference much of a motivation for modernizing the ICBM force in the foreseeable future. We should also ask how likely the total failure of one leg really is? The only failure that our strategic forces have had that approaches the level one might call catastrophic occurred in the late 1960’s. [4 lines not declassified] While this was a very serious problem and took a number of years to fix, even if we had discovered it in the course of a nuclear exchange, there is good reason to believe that we could have strung out our missile launches and realized at least 1⁄3 of the original expected effectiveness in each missile leg (I grant you the failure was in 2 legs, but I’ll get to that point below). However, if we assume that hedging against a 2⁄3 loss of effectiveness in any one leg of our posture is sufficient, a Dyad of forces should be acceptable. The reasoning behind this is that there seems to be a reasonable consensus that a Triad of forces provides sufficient hedging against a complete catastrophic failure of any one leg. However, a Dyad hedges as well against 2⁄3 type losses as a Triad does against complete losses (½ your force plus 1⁄3 of the other ½ is equal to 2⁄3). Another question we might ask is—­exactly how does modernizing the ICBM force to maintain a second missile force allow any greater degree of hedging than is possible by increasing the sizes of each leg of the underlying Dyad? Given the [10 lines not declassified]
