Chapter 1, 1988  3
This is a short description of possible provisions. There are far 
more detailed limitations and rules in the draft text.
There is another lesson here which we believe is important: we 
can not accept an approach that says monitoring problems are too diffi-
cult. With good minds and intense study and research solutions can be 
found. We’re not yet convinced that the approaches above will solve all 
our START monitoring concerns, nor are we convinced they will give us 
high confidence. But the effort is necessary if we are to be serious about 
arms control as a contributing element of our national security. As you 
know, many think the problems in monitoring a chemical weapons ban 
are too difficult to overcome. The US experience in START may show us 
that monitoring difficulties can be tackled and solved.
The draft GRIP compartment papers are attached if you want more 
technical details.
Attachment
Letter From the Chairman of the President’s Intelligence 
Advisory Board (Armstrong) to President Reagan3
Washington, February 5, 1988
Dear Mr. President:
In recent weeks your Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board has 
focused its attention on the intelligence issues related to the INF treaty 
and START negotiations. Although we have some concern about the 
Intelligence Community’s ability to monitor Soviet compliance with 
the INF treaty, the Board believes the total ban on the intermediate and 
shorter range missiles and the prohibition on testing such weapons 
make Soviet cheating more difficult and less likely over time.
In the case of a possible START treaty, however, the Board has seri-
ous misgivings. Our concerns center on the Government’s ability to 
monitor the agreement as well as its effort to assess the strategic impact 
of such an accord. We believe that the negotiating process may be ahead 
of our resolving key intelligence uncertainties. If these uncertainties are 
not lessened markedly, they could permit the Soviets to attain strategi-
cally decisive advantages in a post-START world.
There appear to be greater incentives for the Soviets to cheat under 
a possible START agreement and many more opportunities for them 
to do so. We are struck, for example, by the problem of accounting for 
3 Top Secret.
