International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues Advantages —Enable U.S. to play constructive, highly visible role while focusing on the specific subject matter of the agenda. —Would ensure significant substantive role for U.S. in helping to solve LDC water problems. —Would undercut any criticism that U.S. is not interested in solving practical LDC problems. Disadvantages —Initiatives would have future funding implications and will require an immediate intensified interagency effort to identify and develop them. —Could raise expectations that the U.S. will step forward with new commitments every time a UN conference is called. 3. Low Profile—Continue the strategy developed under the last Administration, limiting U.S. role to exchanging experiences, views and ideas on global water problems. Several modest initiatives may well emerge from the ongoing preparatory efforts and lend additional support to our role. The Secretary of the Interior might still head the Delegation; however, in the absence of an ability to present anything new at the Conference, an Assistant Secretary of Interior could serve as head, backed by a combined team of experts on water and those skilled in international diplomacy. Advantages —It is consistent with original strategy. —It will at least match the expected posture of other developed nations (since our preparations, though modest by previous U.S. conference standards, have been significantly ahead of other nations). —Demonstrates U.S. intentions to be selective, rather than automatically responding with new funds and programs every time the UN calls a conference. Disadvantages —Administration might be subject to criticism at home and abroad for “not caring.” —Conference could be politicized by LDCs in absence of any serious developed country proposal. —Gives initial impression of negative Administration approach to North-South problems. Bureau Views IO and S/P recommend that Option 2 be followed given the facts that: the Water Conference will be the new Administration’s first exposure in an international forum on a subject with North-South over-
