International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
931
Advantages
—Enable U.S. to play constructive, highly visible role while fo-
cusing on the specific subject matter of the agenda.
—Would ensure significant substantive role for U.S. in helping to
solve LDC water problems.
—Would undercut any criticism that U.S. is not interested in
solving practical LDC problems.
Disadvantages
—Initiatives would have future funding implications and will re-
quire an immediate intensified interagency effort to identify and de-
velop them.
—Could raise expectations that the U.S. will step forward with
new commitments every time a UN conference is called.
3. Low Profile—Continue the strategy developed under the last Ad-
ministration, limiting U.S. role to exchanging experiences, views and
ideas on global water problems. Several modest initiatives may well
emerge from the ongoing preparatory efforts and lend additional sup-
port to our role. The Secretary of the Interior might still head the Dele-
gation; however, in the absence of an ability to present anything new at
the Conference, an Assistant Secretary of Interior could serve as head,
backed by a combined team of experts on water and those skilled in in-
ternational diplomacy.
Advantages
—It is consistent with original strategy.
—It will at least match the expected posture of other developed na-
tions (since our preparations, though modest by previous U.S. confer-
ence standards, have been significantly ahead of other nations).
—Demonstrates U.S. intentions to be selective, rather than auto-
matically responding with new funds and programs every time the UN
calls a conference.
Disadvantages
—Administration might be subject to criticism at home and abroad
for “not caring.”
—Conference could be politicized by LDCs in absence of any se-
rious developed country proposal.
—Gives initial impression of negative Administration approach to
North-South problems.
Bureau Views
IO and S/P recommend that Option 2 be followed given the facts
that: the Water Conference will be the new Administration’s first expo-
sure in an international forum on a subject with North-South over-
