Human Rights Failure to make clear this vital link between human rights and US security interests could gravely undermine our whole human rights approach. II. Policy Issues and Priorities The priority goal of US human rights policies over the next five years should be to convince foreign governments, and US public and Congressional opinion, that respect for human rights is a requirement of long-term stability and therefore serves US security interests. Three areas of endeavor will be central to this effort: development of strategies for key individual countries; strengthening regional organizations in their understanding of, and responsibility for, related regional stability/human rights problems; and demonstrating to nervous governments that the aim of our human rights policies is not their “destabilization.” We also should use the next five years to ensure the domestic foundations of our human rights policy. Priority attention should be given to an aggressive and sustained effort to explain the connection between human rights and security interests. We also should ratify UN and OAS Charters and Covenants, and complete a body of legislation that will help ensure attention to human rights concerns by future American Administrations while allowing enough flexibility for pragmatic implementation of a policy that can maintain domestic support. A. Country Strategies Five-Year Goal: Especially for human rights problem countries where there are important US security interests, we need country strategies that focus not on human rights as such, or on immediate security needs, but rather on the longer-run requirements of stability and the prospects, and limits, for American influence in that particular situation. There is no abstract formula—or choice among strategies—for convincing governments which feel threatened by pressures for change to share our view of the requirements of stability. Strategies will have to be shaped with regard to individual countries, bearing in mind the sources of internal instability, the state of its political development, and the nature (if any) of genuine external security threat, as well as the particular human rights problem. These strategies should include not only questions of USG pressures and/or assistance, but also of opportunities to work with (or complementary to) other democracies or democratic forces. Southern European Socialists, for instance, are eager to establish links with the non-Communist left in Latin America (especially in the troubled Central America and Caribbean region). And even some European gov-
