1978  393
90.	
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Mid-Term Review of Defense Programs
You are scheduled to meet Friday, September 29th, with me, Har-
old Brown, Jim McIntyre and a few others for a mid-­term review of 
those particular programs in the FY 80 Defense budget that seem likely 
to have the greatest implications for our overall national security policy.
In arranging this meeting, we planned for Harold to take the lead 
in framing the issues for discussion. The agenda Harold has proposed 
(Tab A) is too broad to allow discussion in-­depth of any of the issues if 
we try to discuss them all. Harold will therefore focus on the strategic 
issues and in particular Minuteman (MM) vulnerability which is by far 
the most important issue you will face this year.
You should begin the meeting by calling on Harold Brown to out-
line the strategic forces issues as he sees them. He will then call on 
Under Secretary of Defense Bill Perry to present more detailed remarks 
and a “straw man” strategic force structure through the 1980’s, along 
with development and procurement plans. This presentation and the 
ensuing discussion will probably consume most of the time of the meet-
ing. Harold will then want to raise some issues on General Purpose 
Forces which Assistant Secretary of Defense Murray will present in 
more detail. Finally, if there is time, Harold may call on Dr. Perry to 
address the question of research and development strategy.
At the end of the general meeting, Harold would like to take 15 
minutes to discuss the separate highly classified paper for which not 
all participants are cleared. When you so indicate, Harold will arrange 
for those not cleared to leave, or you may want to adjourn to the Oval 
Office with a much smaller group for that part of the discussion.
As background for the meeting Harold has sent you three short 
papers (Tabs B–D). In addition, Frank Press has prepared an analysis 
of the MM vulnerability issue and what we should do about it which is 
included at Tab E with a forwarding memo and an Executive Summary. 
The remainder of this memo summarizes and comments on Harold’s 
1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Material, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, Depart-
ment of Defense—Subject File, Box 39, Department of Defense—General—I [1]. Secret. 
Sent for information. Printed from an uninitialed copy of the memorandum. Tabs A–E 
are attached but not printed.
