550  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
capability. He noted that some Soviet writers and strategists seem to 
recognize a difference in potential nuclear war outcomes. He said that 
we must take such things into account when we consider how to deter 
the Soviets. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski noted that what we deter them from doing is a cen-
tral issue. (U)
Secretary Brown responded by noting that one of the things we are 
trying to deter them from is attempting political intimidation of the US 
or its Allies. (C)
Secretary Brown continued his summary by noting that the study 
does not say that the Soviets are right in believing that nuclear war can 
be won in any meaningful sense, and it doesn’t say that we should shift 
from targeting the Soviet urban industrial base to targeting Soviet mili-
tary forces. He noted that most of our SIOP weapons have always been 
targeted on Soviet military forces. (TS)
Secretary Vance questioned Harold’s statement that the study was 
not proposing to shift from economic to military targets. (S)
Secretary Brown and General Jones noted that the changes proposed 
by the study probably won’t change the target list much at all. (S)
Mr Keeny disputed this by saying that shifting our emphasis from 
urban industrial to military targets is a central theme in the study. He 
argued that the study notes that we don’t understand how to prolong 
Soviet recovery from a nuclear attack, and thus that we should place 
more emphasis on military targets. (TS)
[Spurgeon is wrong on this point—­he is mixed up on two issues: 
The study says that we don’t understand how to prolong Soviet recov-
ery and thus should drop prolonging recovery as an objective of our 
targeting and shift our industrial targeting back toward two broad sets 
of targets—­war supporting industry, and, as the ultimate deterrent, the 
broad urban industrial base that would support the post-­war power of 
the Soviet Union. Within military targeting, the study proposes a more 
flexible building block approach to the SIOP, plus the development of 
a capability to target Soviet conventional forces even after they have 
begun moving away from their peacetime locations. While implemen-
tation of the study’s recommendations may lead to some shifts in the 
fraction of our weapons going to military as opposed to non-­military 
targets, it does not appear that this shift will be significant.] (TS)
Secretary Brown responded by saying that Mr. Keeny was making 
too big an issue of how the study’s recommendations might change 
the percentage of our weapons allocated to military as opposed to 
non-­military targets. Secretary Brown noted that the study recom-
mends placing more emphasis on being able to hit moving targets, C3 
and leadership. He noted that while the ability to do these things was
