1979 675 MINUTES OF MEETING Brown: You’ve been briefed on the basing option involving horizontal shelters with a dash capability.2 We want to review the considerations involved in deciding whether this is acceptable, namely, survivability, verifiability, and public acceptance. Soviet reaction is a factor in the case of survivability and verifiability. Then we want to consider how to move to a decision, possibly to an NSC meeting where we make a final recommendation to the President. Bill Perry will address the survivability issue. Perry: I’ll present three illustrative threats and options for our responding, with the help of these charts (draw-­down curves).3 In the first case the Soviets fill out their ICBM force under SALT II limits to a level of 6300 RVs by 1982–83. Clearly our MINUTEMEN are eliminated in a Soviet attack. The attacker can then devote the rest of his ICBM RVs to attacking our base-­line M–X shelter system of 4600 aim points. He basically exhausts his ICBM force, leaving us with zero or very few survivors. The force balance is then constituted of SLBM and bomber weapons. Turner: He can get this capability by 1982–83, whereas we don’t get those 4600 aim points until much later. Perry: In the next case, the Soviets go to 10 RVs on most of the 820 ICBMs, extensively deploying their new ICBM for this purpose. They get a force of some 8600 ICBM RVs by 1987–88. Turner: They could do it by 1986 under the High SALT Force of the NIE. Perry: If we see this threat coming, our response is both to expand the number of shelters and to expand the number of deployed missiles such that, at a minimum, we could enforce the exhaustion of his ICBM force and retain a few survivors because of his unreliable missiles. The main thing is that we must see this threat coming about 1983, and we probably would see it for him to have such a capability by 1987–88. This threat level will also drive M–X procurement costs in the expensive years, 1984–86. Keeny: [1 line not declassified] Turner: [2 lines not declassified] Perry: Basically, such inputs don’t matter. If they put an RV on a shelter, they can destroy it. The outcome is defined by the numbers of weapons and shelters plus missiles in shelters. In the third case, the Soviets go for very high fractionation levels and force expansion after 1985, essentially doubling the number of RVs we now expect on their 2 See footnote 2, Document 146. 3 Not found attached.
