100 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII that “all is designed” to “secure the life of the Ambassador and the terrorists.” 33. At about 1245 it was clear to EmbOffs in the corridor outside room 117 that the police had received their orders. Top police officials and other armed men joined the crowd outside the room. One specially armed and armored policeman lay prone on the floor before the door, pointing his weapon at the door, while others stood behind him and to his side also pointing their weapons at the door. The Soviet advisors then stepped forward into operation roles. One Soviet advisor helped to arm an Afghan policeman with what appeared to be special weaponry. Two other Soviet police advisors and Bakhturin went out to the balcony. The tall, senior Soviet advisor then made hand signals from the balcony, presumably positioning the snipers across the street. 34. Before 1250, the police had all non-participants take positions of safety. At exactly 1250 very heavy gunfire broke out in the corridor, in the room, and from across the street. Both single-shot and automatic weapons were heard (several American officers were nearby). The main bursts of firing continued for approximately 40 seconds. The police snipers across the street continued to fire until two Soviet advisors gave hand signals to cut it off. Following that, there were at least three more bursts from inside the room, and then silence. 35. The police then asked the Americans to come immediately with the stretcher. The entryway into the hotel room was a seven foot long hall whose air was filled with dense cordite smoke. When the American party entered the room, they found the Ambassador seated to the right side of the entryway next to a wardrobe. His head was slumped to the right side and he had sustained several bullet wounds, one of which appeared to be a single small calibre shot above the right eye. A heavy calibre round had struck him in the heart area. A third round had hit him in the left wrist. The American party placed the Ambassador on the stretcher. The Embassy doctor’s initial diagnosis in the room was that the Ambassador was dead. 36. At 1253 the party rushed the Ambassador down to a waiting American ambulance which took the Ambassador’s body to the American dispensary. Mr. Flatin remained behind as the two terrorists were removed. The first terrorist was dragged out into the hallway through cascades of water (the radiator pipes in the room had been shot out). The police slapped his head around with a gun butt, but he appeared as probably dead. The second man was still, and possibly dead. The third terrorist, who had been held back in the immediate area of shooting was then badly roughed up by the police. A hood was put back on his head and he was dragged down to the lobby. By about 1258 all three terrorists had been removed from the hotel. The one who had been first captured was definitely alive at that time and on his feet. A
