January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1085 playing the old formal alliances of Europe. Rather we intend to create a framework of enhanced security. We envision six levels for directions of U.S. activity in the region. First on the Arab-Israel front, we recognize the pernicious effects of this problem in radicalizing the region. We are straining our resources. We are risking the President’s political capital to try to resolve this issue. Ambassador Linowitz has just been here3 so you should have some idea of our strategy. We believe that autonomy for the West Bank and Gaza will lead to a new situation. We recognize that the Palestinians are a people and they must find a way to express this in a way which is acceptable to the Israelis. This process is underway and is moving fast enough for Egypt and that is something. However, we must also focus on Jerusalem. Once Ambassadors are exchanged4 we should be able to move with greater energy. We hope we can use the special religious character of Jerusalem as an opening wedge. We would like at a minimum to reduce the polemics between Saudi Arabia and Egypt and develop some tacit understanding on security issues recognizing that open relations are probably going to be very difficult. Sadat is very emotional (Prince Saud interjected so are we but we do not talk as much). We would hope that at least some tacit cooperation between Egypt and Saudi Arabia would be possible dealing with the questions of Sudan and Yemen as these become more acute. Three, we will try to obtain military facilities—not bases but air and naval facilities which will permit us to project power into the area effectively, quickly, and decisively. We are also considering landings by marines or an airborne brigade. We need to work out the details with the host country. It might be Egypt, it might be Oman. If it is convenient for Saudi Arabia, that would be another possibility. Four, we want to cooperate with Saudi Arabia to reinforce Somalia and Oman. Both of us have a stake in the security of these two countries. We must talk to you more concretely about facilities and their security needs. This is especially important if we need to seal off Yemen. Cooperation is very important. We must also move forward on the Yemen issue. We hope you will tell us more about the emissary from North Yemen. Five, we intend to reinforce Pakistan. Something which six months ago would have been incredible has transpired. We will talk to the Pakistanis about their defense needs, send a military team to strengthen the northwest frontier, and take other steps to make it difficult for the Soviets to use Afghanistan as a military base. Six, we would like to work 3 See footnote 1, Document 334. 4 On February 26, Egypt and Israel formally exchanged Ambassadors in parallel ceremonies. Saad Murtada represented Egypt as its first Ambassador to Israel; Eliahu Ben-Elissar was installed as Israel’s first Ambassador to Egypt. (William Claiborne, “Cairo, Jerusalem Ceremonies Accredit First Ambassadors,” The Washington Post, February 27, 1980, p. A14)
