foundation for worldwide naval expansion. It is all right to lay
emphasis on fact that a favorable outcome of Conference would
enhance good feeling among the three countries parties to it and
would create favorable impression throughout world, but I do not
think that this was fundamental purpose back of calling
Conference, which was, rather, to obtain a reasonable limitation
on naval construction and to prevent competition. If the only
powers which have considerable navies are willing to make
reasonable limitations, the United States is not able to understand
why the British Government finds it necessary to create so large a
sea force when the United States and Japan are the only countries
against which there is any necessity for building large navies.
Neither British safety, nor British trade routes, nor British foreign
possessions could possibly be endangered by navy of any other
power, and should any other power start a building program of
proportions to constitute a danger, the treaty would contain clause
protecting not only Great Britain but any other signatory power.
I suggest also that you consider wisdom of including in your statement
mention that the British accepted Secretary Hughes’ proposition at
Washington Conference in 1921 for limitation of 450,000 tons on both
cruisers and destroyers (Proceedings of Washington Conference on
Limitation of Armament, pp. 86 and 100). The Department is utterly unable
to understand why, five years later, there is any justification for a cruiser
tonnage which alone exceeds this combined figure. If result of Conference
cannot be fairly interpreted by world opinion as self-denying ordinance
entered into freely by the great naval powers, it then possesses no value
whatever and will do endless harm. If the three great naval powers are
unwilling to make concessions in order to stop competitive construction in
sea forces, what can be expected of the other countries? The example to the
lesser powers would certainly be very unfortunate.
Great stress is being laid by British press on view that Great Britain has
proposed great economies through reduction of size and extension of life of
battleships; but no mention is made of fact that no economy can result from
any agreement on that score before 1931. I offer suggestion that it might be
well to state that the United States had been willing to discuss with the
