conventional tariff was welcomed not alone by the Powers but also by China as a
diplomatic solution of what had proved to be a very vexatious question.
Since the conclusion, in 1902 and 1903, of the commercial treaties referred to in Article
II of the Treaty relating to the Chinese Customs Tariff, signed on February 6, 1922, my
Government has given particular attention to every evidence of effort on the part of the
Chinese Government in the direction of fiscal reforms which could be taken as an
assurance that the old causes of international friction need no longer be feared and that
the conventional tariff could be abandoned.
It was at the time of the negotiation of those treaties that the Chinese Government
expressed a desire to reform its judiciary system and to bring it into accord with that of
Western nations. The Powers party to those Treaties agreed to give every assistance to
such reform and stated that they would be prepared to relinquish extraterritorial rights
when satisfied that the state of the Chinese laws, the arrangements for their
administration and other considerations warranted them in so doing. The Powers have
since then observed attentively each measure that the Chinese Government, during the
twenty-two years which have passed, has taken for the establishment of an independent
judiciary and the enactment of laws for the administration of justice. The establishment
of courts and the enactment of laws, however, do not in themselves meet all the
requirements of the situation. Courts cannot function and develop properly or
consistently without the aid of a stable Government capable and willing to maintain
them and enforce their findings and decisions. It is regretted that the inability of the
Chinese Government during the past few years fully to enforce the mandate of its
authority has made it difficult for the courts and judiciary already established to
function in a normal manner.
The questions of the conventional tariffs and of the extraterritorial rights under which
nationals of the treaty Powers reside in China are two of the important questions raised
by the Chinese Government’s note. Both received consideration at the Washington
Conference, and it is the belief of the Government of the United States that the most
feasible method for dealing with them is by a constant and scrupulous observance of
the obligations undertaken at that Conference. To that end the Government of the
United States is ready to appoint its delegates to the Special Conference on Chinese
Tariff matters provided for in the Treaty of February 6, 1922, and is furthermore willing
either at that Conference or at a subsequent time to consider and discuss any reasonable
proposal that may be made by the Chinese Government for a revision of the Treaties on
the subject of the tariff.
Before it can form any opinion as to what, if any, steps can be taken to meet the desire
of the Chinese Government in regard to the question of extraterritoriality and those
special safeguards of the treaties under which its nationals live and conduct their
enterprises in China, my Government desires to have before it more complete
