482
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the fulfillment of President Sadat’s dream when he went to Jerusalem.
It would [be] a tragedy if his effort were not to result in peace. It will
help us for you to present the Egyptian position clearly.
Your negotiating team in Washington has done a superb job. They
are competent, tough negotiators. It is hard for the delegations from
Egypt or Israel to negotiate when the leaders of their countries are not
present. At Camp David, Begin or Sadat could make final decisions.
This resulted in hundreds of compromises. This is more difficult for the
negotiators to do since they are uncertain of what the reactions will be
back home. General Ali and Minister Ghali have done a great job and
they deserve credit and appreciation for that. I am concerned about the
future of the negotiations. Our most serious problem is that public
statements are made in Egypt and Israel which can become a source of
diplomatic incidents. This did not take place at Camp David. Now all
the proposals that are made are in the international news and this
causes serious problems.
We have tried to find common ground between the parties, and
later Egypt or Israel rejects the agreements that have been reached by
the negotiators. This has been frustrating for us but we will continue as
a negotiating partner. Both Secretary Vance and I have many other re-
sponsibilities which we have been neglecting to some extent. We
thought that the treaty negotiations could [be] done in a few days. We
have other problems, such as with the Soviet Union, in Africa, Cyprus,
NATO, and Nicaragua. We need a commitment now to succeed, and
this requires understanding of the other side’s political problems, and
there is a need for flexibility on both sides. No ultimatum can help. That
would aggravate the already difficult problems.
Your presence here will be constructive and we know that you
speak for President Sadat. There have been some recent statements that
have added a new dimension and I am sure that you will want to
discuss them. We believe that to separate Gaza from the West Bank is a
new development, if the news reports are accurate, and I am eager to
hear directly from you on the Egyptian position. I hope your position
will open the door quickly to a peace treaty.
Vice President Mubarak: Thank you for your warm welcome. I met
with Secretary Vance last night2 and bring you greetings from Presi-
dent Sadat. We want to thank you for the effort you made at Camp
David. Ninety percent of the problems were solved there. The Egyptian
people are aware of your efforts and appreciate them.
2 No memorandum of conversation of this meeting has been found.
