1312 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement Incidentally, I told the New York Times man here yesterday that, without any direct quotation, he could indicate I was very unhappy that some correspondents had traveled to Communist China in spite of the U.S. Government’s position as it obviously had greatly weakened my position vis a vis Wang here. I hope this will be of help to the Department. I also had USIS expand out their story from here on today’s meeting to review the facts on the release of Americans and the fact no Chinese have been obstructed in leaving the U.S. I suggest you take a look at it. I thought it would be useful for the field to be reminded of some facts to counteract the line Chou has been putting out on his journeys. The talks now seem in a complete cul de sac and look as if they could well continue indefinitely in that state. It now seems to me that while they would probably quickly fall into any move on our part which would place the onus for a break on us, they are not going to take the onus for break­ ing and only some major outside development or a move by one side or the other in the talks can resolve the impasse. It seems clear we cannot at the present stage expect the release of any Americans other than possibly slightly expedited releases of those whose terms will shortly expire. I am, of course, entirely willing to go on as we are if it is still felt it is serving a useful purpose but I hope that that decision will be fully exam­ ined at a high level. I am not arguing that the exercise is not useful, I think it may well be, but I just want to be sure that the Secretary also still thinks so. Sincerely, U. Alexis Johnson American Ambassador 780. Telegram 260 to Prague1 Washington, January 23, 1957, 1 p.m. 260. Your 705 from Geneva. Though effectiveness US ban on travel Communist China as pressure on Chinese Communists release imprisoned Americans may possibly have been somewhat weakened by fact three correspondents defied ban, we do not believe US Government can or should alter opposition to travel Americans in area where no repeat no protection 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/1–2357. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated for information to Geneva for Osborn as telegram 769. Drafted by Clough and Sebald; cleared in draft by Phleger and in FE/P and SCA.
