1955  425
29. He concluded by stating that the question in what manner 
China will liberate Taiwan is solely a domestic affair and not for dis­
cussion here and that Chinese people resolutely oppose any state that 
tries to interfere in their domestic affairs. He reserved comments on 
remaining parts of my statement for the next meeting.
30. I replied that if one government were entirely to concede to the 
views of another government, many situations would be resolved, but 
only in a one-­sided manner. What governments can do is to say that dif­
ferences must not lead them to war and that they will discuss problems 
in peaceful atmosphere free from threat of force from either side. I said 
that I was proposing no more at the moment. I was not asking him to 
concede to our point of view, but simply asking that we agree we will 
not fight over our points of view. Then we would be able to discuss 
other matters with a better hope of finding solutions.
31. Wang replied that of course we were trying to find better solu­
tions in our talks and that it was certainly correct when I said that differ­
ent points of view should not lead to war. He said that as he has stated on 
many occasions and as Premier Chou En-­lai has also stated, Chinese peo­
ple are friendly to the American people and do not wish to fight Amer­
icans. However the present situation can be described as dagger thrust 
into the body of China. Those who suffer are Chinese people.
32. Wang said that I had stated that no government can resolve 
a dispute with another government entirely in accord with its own 
views. He said he recognized that each party to a dispute has its own 
reasons, but one cannot say all reasons are correct. That is why it is nec­
essary to have international law and standards of conduct such as UN 
Charter. That means each state must respect territorial integrity and 
sovereignty of other governments. If any government could interfere in 
internal affairs of other states in disregard of international law, outlook 
of world would indeed not be optimistic.
33. I replied that if his government was determined that the situ­
ation should not lead to war and if, as I had told him, my government 
is so determined, why should it not be possible for us simply to say so.
34. Wang replied that if declaration of renunciation of use of force 
is to be made then why cannot US specifically withdraw its armed 
forces from this area. He cited a Chinese proverb: only a person’s deeds 
can verify a person’s words. Only deeds give effect to words.
35. I replied that Wang was asking the US to abandon solemnly 
pledged words and agreements with others and to change its policies 
in area. I said I was not excluding discussion of other subjects but I was 
simply saying that we cannot discuss such subjects unless we have said 
we will not let differences lead us to war. That is fundamental to any 
fruitful discussion of differences. If his government shared my govern­
ment’s determination that differences should not lead to war, I saw no
