addition to [for?] failure to pay. Prior to incorporation of this provision in the bill, the big American business interests had expected to avoid hardships of the law by insuring in New York with New York companies and the foreign insurance doing business in Chile had hoped this possibility of the insurance business being thus diverted from Chile to foreign countries would convince the framers of the bill of the inexpediency of the proposed legislation. All are greatly perturbed by new provision and wish assistance of our Government. I have had three opportunities to discuss matter directly with Minister of Hacienda who earnestly advocates this legislation. I got him to withdraw the request for urgent action by Congress but matter has been referred to a joint committee of House and Senate and it is possible that measure will be rushed through notwithstanding he assured me his purpose in withdrawing urgency request was to permit me to communicate with you and obtain instruction. There have been intimations that article 59 would be stricken out if we would not oppose rest of legislation. Best-informed agent for American companies believes this will be the maximum which we can accomplish and that if this section is eliminated it will result in either abandonment of the bill or eventual repeal. I know of no treaty obligations preventing Chile from limiting insurance business to its own citizens. I request Department’s instructions as to any principles of international Jaw that may be invoked. I have made representations to Ministry of Foreign Affairs that proposed law is injurious to mutual commercial interests, inconsistent with fundamental idea of insurance to spread loss and that it is particularly hazardous to Chile to seek to insure itself, considering possibility of catastrophe by earthquake with enormous incidental loss. I have told Minister of Hacienda that in my opinion section 59 infringes upon sovereignty foreign countries and trespasses upon right of foreigners to make legitimate contracts in foreign countries with other foreigners. I believe he is impressed by this reasoning and that it is for this reason there
