516
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
We are directed to avoid identification with repressive regimes by
statute. A supply relationship with the local secret police or military
forces which run the repression conflicts with the policy structure. It
also conflicts with PD–30, paragraph 6.
Positive Promotion of Human Rights
We concur with S/P’s view that more should be done to promote
political freedom through positive legislation revising the foreign
assistance program, a separate fund which would be identified as a
“Special Development Fund” which would be restricted to countries
which consistently respect human rights, including fundamental
freedoms, or those which have taken far-reaching strides recently to in-
stitutionalize the protection of the full range of human rights. Some
portion would be discretionary to permit the Administrator to respond
during the year to significant developments.
159.
Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts1
Washington, August 12, 1978, 1914Z
204786. Subject: World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination, Geneva, August 14–25, 1978.
1. ASAP after receipt of this telegram, Ambassador or Charge
should, at his discretion, deliver aide memoire along following lines to
the Foreign Minister or most appropriate senior Foreign Ministry
official:
“The World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimina-
tion, convened by the United Nations General Assembly, will meet in
Geneva August 14–25. The United States will not participate in this
Conference. Our decision not to participate was reluctantly taken, but
we had no choice in view of our total and firm opposition to the action
taken by the United Nations General Assembly on November 10, 1975,
determining that ‘Zionism is a form of racism and racial discrimina-
tion.’2 The Assembly adopted this resolution notwithstanding the fact
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780330–0994.
Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Hewitt; cleared by Maynes and Dailey and for infor-
mation by Harris, Cheshes, Goot, Lister, and Veliotes; approved by Newsom.
2 See footnote 5, Document 149.
