have been registered previously for that purpose. Public employees and members of the army or of the police that may be in service in the provinces mentioned may not vote.” The Huneeus-Valera exchanges of November 10, 1912, provided as follows: “Persons born in Tacna and Arica, and Chileans and Peruvians that may have resided for 3 years in the territory will be entitled to vote.” The Chilean Case in referring to the provisions of the Huneeus-Valera exchanges according a vote to “persons born in Tacna and Arica” without a residential requirement, points out that the Huneeus-Valera plebiscite was only to take place in 1933, but expresses the view that “the right to vote because of birth in the territory is an unimportant matter.” It thus appears that on three occasions in the course of negotiations the representatives of Peru have conceded the right to vote to Chileans having prescribed residence in the territory, and that the insistence on the right to vote of persons born in the territory, irrespective of present residence is not strongly opposed. The latter provision will give opportunity to such native Peruvians of the territory as may have been expelled, without attempting the difficult task of determining all the questions of fact as to particular cases. The only remaining question as respects nationality is whether the right to vote should be extended to residents of Tacna and Arica who are neither Peruvians nor Chileans. It must be remembered that a whole generation has grown up in the territory, since the treaty, among them a number of foreigners who are neither Chileans nor Peruvians, who do not know whether the land in which they live will ultimately be Chilean or Peruvian, and who may well have been restrained by this uncertainty from acquiring either Chilean or Peruvian nationality, although Peru permits naturalization after two years’ residence and Chile after only one year’s residence. In these circumstances, it would be no more than fair, while the number of such voters apparently would not be large, to permit foreigners, i. e., persons neither Chileans nor Peruvians, who have had a bona-fide actual residence in the territory for a sufficient length of time to become naturalized in either Chile or Peru, and who are willing to make affidavit of their intention to seek naturalization in whichever country is successful at the plebiscite, to have a vote. Aside from persons born in the territory, there remains to consider what period of bona fide residence in Tacna and Arica ought to qualify any person as a voter at the plebiscite irrespective of the place of his birth. The Arbitrator is of the opinion that the date upon which the qualifications of every voter in the plebiscite should be fixed, to the extent at least that he cannot acquire rights by the lapse of time thereafter, should be the date of the protocol of arbitration and supplementary act, namely, July 20, 1922. Also, that any person of Peruvian or Chilean nationality who has resided continuously in Tacna and Arica for two years prior to July 20, 1922, and who has continued to maintain his residence therein until the date of registration should be entitled to vote. Further, that any person of any other nationality
