1955 49 depart. May be cases of people who express desire but may change mind for one reason or another. All these practical difficulties prevent departure. Wang went on to say that all this serves explain why even though I had repeatedly stated Chinese free to leave any time they still faced many difficulties. Therefore he hoped way could be found bene­ ficial to both sides such as formula of 3rd country. Regarding case Mrs. Huizer Chinese Government not in position determine whether she is Dutch or American. He only knew she mar­ ried to Dutchman and held Dutch passport. If US and Dutch could agree on status Chinese Government would not oppose. Wang con­ cluded he was only trying clarify few points and did not desire debate. I told Wang that there was nothing we could agree with Dutch about concerning Mrs. Huizer since according to laws of both countries she was both (repeat both) Dutch and American. Wang interjected in humor­ ous vein that if husband cooperated with wife problem could be settled. Then talking from prepared statement I referred to Wang’s first proposal made August second and said as previously stated I felt this goes beyond agreed scope present discussion and I had also at that time mentioned practical difficulties. I now added it is not policy US Government make such information available any other government. Therefore it not possible agree Wang’s proposal. With regard Wang’s fourth proposal I stated I believed it went some­ what beyond first agreed item of agenda. However I told Wang US Gov­ ernment considering arrangement which would be within agreed scope present discussions and fully meet objectives with respect to civilians both countries envisaged by two governments in July 25 statement. Told Wang seemed to me all that is required carry out this purpose is for each of our governments take whatever steps necessary permit return of civilians who desire do so. As I had explained to him my gov­ ernment has already taken all necessary steps. If Wang’s government would do same entire problem would be quickly resolved. Nevertheless my government was giving consideration to follow­ ing arrangement: Indian Embassy Washington could receive requests from any ­Chinese civilian in US who felt he being prevented from leaving. Indian Emb could investigate case sending officer to interview per­ son if it desired and if Embassy concluded complaint justified could report facts to Dept with request for whatever action Emb considered appropriate. Emb could also act as channel for transmission travel funds and otherwise extend to individuals appropriate assistance. Both my government and Indian Embassy would give full publicity. British Embassy in China would perform same services for American nation­ als there, Chinese Government agreeing to give and permit publicity in same manner as arranged in US.
