6
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
distribution of literature and socio-political commentary in the Russian
language, and in some political activity in the USSR. (FY 77 $200,000)
6. A Czech-language quarterly magazine aimed at Czechoslovak
intellectual dissidents. (FY 77 $125,000)
7. A literary institute in France which publishes a monthly Polish
language magazine and selected books directed at Polish intellectuals
and youth. (FY 77 $115,000)
8. A Ukrainian emigre group which in addition to promoting the
cause of Ukrainian national identity, seeks to encourage the many
national minority groups to unite with the Russian dissidents in their
struggle for national and cultural identity. (FY 77 $245,000)
POLICY:
This program is consistent with U.S. policy toward the Soviet Union
and Eastern Europe in recent years.
GAINS:
—The dissident movement in the USSR, whose prospects were
viewed with considerable pessimism by many observers as recently
as a year ago, has shown remarkable tenacity and vitality. The activity
of dissidents fighting for greater civil liberties in Poland and Czechoslo-
vakia, has greatly increased in the past year. Testimony is available
from internal dissidents and from recent emigres interviewed in the
West that the operations which publish and distribute literature and
periodicals are effective in terms of reaching their targets and sustaining
the existence and growth of democratic movements in the countries
involved.
—Prominent dissidents such as Leonid Plyushch, Andrey Amalrik
and Vladimir Bukovskiy who have been expelled or allowed to emi-
grate in the past year have been active and effective in dramatizing
the situation of their fellow dissidents in the USSR, and in generating
publicity and mobilizing public support in the West for the cause of
human rights in the USSR and Eastern Europe. This activity, especially
when done by professed Marxists such as Plyushch or the Czech emigre
Jiri Pelikan has been a factor contributing to the strong stance taken
by the French and Italian communist parties for the cause of human
rights in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.
RISKS:
—The growth of dissidence in Eastern Europe, especially in Poland, could
reach crisis proportions insoluble by the regime and intolerable to the USSR.
It has been argued that this could lead to Soviet intervention and repression.
If such a crisis occurs, we believe it will be primarily owing to grave economic
and other factors little affected by our covert action program to support
human rights.
—Many of these operations are “covert” action in name only. U.S. Gov-
ernment, and indeed CIA, support for the instruments involved is widely
