Peru 1119 cabinet minister did resign. In Ecuador an unpredictable man has just been elected President (Velasco Ibarra). The Prime Minister said that the communists complained about Berlin, but Cuba is much worse from the standpoint of the free world. The President stated that the combination of government assistance and private investment in Latin America from the United States had been substantial, yet that message seems not to get across. The Prime Minister reflected for a moment, and said that perhaps we had concentrated too much on major capital investments and that we should now devote our assistance to projects going directly to the people so as to capture public opinion. The Prime Minister recalled the great western immigration in the United States. The Latin American people must now move to their unused land for the new opportunity they seek. The President said that the communists seem to concentrate their efforts in the cities. He said that it was not an easy matter to settle new residents on land and that careful training was required. The Prime Minister referred to the great opportunity for Peru east of the Andes, a region which could offer a new life to their illiterate indigenous population. The Prime Minister said that he understood from the press that the Bolivian President (Siles) had said, following the Khrushchev press conference in Paris, that Bolivia would be glad to have Khrushchev visit that country. He had been shocked by this. The President stressed the need to get the best possible representatives assigned to the Council of the OAS, to give them additional work and opportunity, and to try to mold opinion throughout Latin America. He compared the OAS unfavorably with NATO, saying that perhaps we don’t take the OAS as seriously as we should. Our effort is designed to save a continent. We are not Latins, perhaps we don’t understand Latins as well as we should, but we are trying and we are willing to do more. Still there must be a joint determination to be free and to remain free. The Prime Minister recalled his visit to Puerto Rico in 1958 at the time of Dr. Milton Eisenhower’s visit there9 and the sharp contrast which he noted as compared to the earlier visits he had made to Puerto Rico. The improvement was due largely to Mufioz Marfn’s having helped the lowest social levels. The Prime Minister returned to his line that “A showdown has to come with Cuba”.
