3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
28
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
part. You affirmed in this letter, just as you had done earlier, in your
inaugural address5 and other statements, the devotion of the new U.S.
administration to the principles of defense of human rights through-
out the world. Of particular significance is your striving to facilitate the
release of prisoners of conscience.
I wrote, in my congratulatory telegram on the occasion of your
election, of the deep respect which your position evokes in us. I have
frequently written and said that the defense of fundamental human
rights is not interference in the internal affairs of other countries, but is
one of the most central elements in international affairs, inseparable
from the basic problems of peace and progress. Today, having received
your letter, the exceptional nature of which I clearly understand, I can
only once again repeat this.
I would like to take this occasion to refer to concrete cases, in par-
ticular the fate of those prisoners of conscience about which I wrote you
in January.6 One of them, Sergey Kovalev, has a dangerous tumor. I ask
you to intervene on behalf of his immediate transfer to the prison hos-
pital in Leningrad. I once again underscore the arbitrary nature of sin-
gling out names of prisoners of conscience. I feel I do not have the right
to make such a selection. The fate of many, many political prisoners re-
quires the same kind of close attention.
Four members of the group to facilitate fulfillment of the Helsinki
Agreement were arrested in February—Aleksandr Ginzburg, Mikola
Rudenko, Oleksa Tikhiy, and the group’s leader, Yuriy Orlov. Their ar-
rest is a challenge to all governments that participated in the Helsinki
Meeting. I ask that you intercede for the release on bail or under guar-
antee of Ginsburg and Rudenko, both of whom are ill. The active efforts
of the heads of state of all Helsinki-signatory countries are required so
that all members of the group can be freed, so as to enable it to continue
its important work.
From foreign radio broadcasts I learned that you have expressed a
wish to meet with me, if I travel to the U.S.A. I appreciate very much
this invitation. I have no doubt that such a trip and such personal con-
tacts could have extraordinary significance. Unfortunately, however, at
the present time I see no possibility for a trip of this sort.
5 See footnote 2, Document 3.
6 See Document 2.
