736
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
people throughout the world. That is what makes it so difficult to com-
prehend when you are involved in the minutiae, as well as other things
relating to a situation like this.
It is interesting to recall now how Jody and others handled the
press treatment of this entire project. From the beginning it was repre-
sented, properly, as a mission which had no assurance of success and,
to the contrary, had significant likelihood of not succeeding. It is ob-
vious that many cynics felt that President Carter already “had it
wrapped up” before he embarked upon the venture, but that is now
quite obviously false.
The expectations of success for this trip were correct for two
reasons:
1. In fact it was a high risk venture with no assurance whatsoever
of success and with every possibility of failure.
2. By keeping the expectations low, should it prove to be successful
(as it has) then the accomplishment would of course, seem even greater.
President Carter throughout this entire Middle East situation has
demonstrated some amazing characteristics, and even though I have
had almost unlimited faith in him for many years, even I did not com-
prehend his capacity to handle this situation in the manner he has.
Among these characteristics are:
1. The ability to study and understand this tremendously complex
situation involving so much history, emotions, geopolitical consider-
ations, etc.
2. The ability to establish personal relationships with people who
are attractive and people who are unattractive, but all of whom were
necessary to give any hope of succeeding in these negotiations.
3. The willingness to devote the amount of time which he has de-
voted to this entire matter, much more than he has devoted to any other
matter since he became President. (I personally believe that he really
has taken this on as a “mission” not only because he is President, but
because of his personal feelings and concern about this entire
situation.)
4. His patience and tenacity in pursuing this basic objective of
peace in the Middle East, which he has expressed over the last three or
four years, and which he has demonstrated over the last two years. This
obviously is in the face of tremendous opposition, frustration, and
discouragement.
5. His ability to handle the numerous legal problems involved in
negotiation of a treaty, injecting not only the necessary technical abil-
ities, but also the psychological and other factors which have proved to
be so necessary in order to reach some type of resolution.
