884  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
such a loan. Such a gesture on the part of the United States would have 
great psychological impact throughout the area.
Agriculture—The Panamanians expressed a desire for a $7 ­million 
loan to make available additional loan capital to the Institute for 
Agricultural Development. Because of the shortage of such capital, the 
Institute had had to curtail its credit.
Sewage and Water—Panamanians expressed a hope that a loan 
could be obtained to improve the water system and extend sewage con-
struction. The Smathers loan3 had been helpful and they would like to 
handle this on the same basis.
Electric Power—In this field, it was stated that Panama was stag-
nating. Power available was greatly below that required. A hydro-
electric project to supply Panama and Colon was badly needed. The 
Panamanians made it quite plain they would be perfectly happy either 
to do this themselves or to have American and Foreign Power do it, or 
a combination of both. This willingness was cited by the President as 
an indication that the Panamanians were receptive to private enterprise 
and capital investment.
Roads—Panama was expending a great deal of money to complete 
the Inter-American highway but a great many feeder roads were nec-
essary and further credit facilities would be required. In the meantime, 
they were anxious to obtain training of engineering units and opera-
tors of road building equipment. They had requested such assistance 
through the International Cooperation Administration and hoped that 
this matter could be expedited.
Housing—The Panamanians indicated that this was a very seri-
ous problem considering the fact that, on the average, in Panama City, 
5 people live in a 9 x 9 room. It was the intention of the government 
to create a housing institute and initiate a low-­cost housing program. 
Initially this would be done with government funds but as the pro-
gram gathers momentum, the government will welcome credit from 
any source to go ahead with this program.
Development of the Bay of Panama—It was pointed out that there 
were no pier facilities except through the Canal Zone and the number 
of shrimp and fishing boats as well as pleasure craft was increasing 
constantly. The construction of the new bridge will further emphasize 
this problem. Land reclamation will make available land which could 
3 The amendment to the Mutual Security Act of 1956, which was named after its 
sponsor, Sen. George A. Smathers (D-Fla.), provided for the use of a portion of the defense 
support funds authorized in the Act for health, education, and sanitation projects, and for 
land resettlement programs in Latin America. For the text of the Mutual Security Act of 
1956 (Public Law 84–726), enacted on July 18, 1956, see 70 Stat. 555.
