Afghanistan
509
that resolves the contradiction between their interest in a government
with broader support and their intention of dominating Afghanistan.
Militarily, the Soviets could continue on their present course, under
which their military forces maintain control of Kabul and other essential
points and conduct counterinsurgency operations necessary to prevent
major setbacks. But this seems unlikely since it would allow the insur-
gents a free hand in most of the country, allow them to prey on extended
Soviet supply lines, and present the Soviet leadership with the prospect
of continued casualties and a steady drain on resources.
The Soviets now have the forces in Afghanistan to conduct a some-
what expanded counterinsurgency effort. It is unlikely, however, that
the forces now there could end the insurgency. If the Soviets seek to
end the insurgency—and, as seems likely, cannot rely on effective
support from the Afghan Army—they will have to commit more forces.
180.
Memorandum From Marshall Brement of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 26, 1980
SUBJECT
Getting Our Act Together on Afghanistan (U)
As I noted in my memo of January 7 (Tab A),2 the Soviet invasion
of Afghanistan offers this Administration a priceless opportunity to
begin to speak with one voice on how we deal with and what we say
about the Soviets. This is very important from a political (viz., George
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
I–047, Afghanistan: 11 Sep 1979–22 Jul 1980. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information. Copies
were sent to Ermarth, Griffith, Henze, Odom, Thornton, and Schecter. In the upper right
corner, Brzezinski wrote: “agree→first rate.”
2 Attached but not printed. Brement wrote to Brzezinski, January 7, to emphasize
“the country wants the President to exercise firm, vigorous leadership in foreign affairs.
The crisis in Afghanistan will enhance this desire.” Brement argued that Afghanistan
gave the Carter administration an opportunity to reverse a “commonly-held perception”
among domestic critics and the Soviets, that U.S. policy toward the Soviet Union lacked
focus and resolve. Brement’s memorandum is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980,
vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 255.
