180
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
President Carter has given thorough consideration to the question
of replacing the four 10 KW transmitters at Holzkirchen with four new
250 KW transmitters, as he had promised Chancellor Schmidt he would
do during their talks in Washington July 13–14, 1977. The President
has concluded that replacement of the transmitters is necessary to our
overall broadcasting effort to Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.
This conclusion is based on the results of a recent detailed study of the
U.S. international broadcasting effort, which revealed that the current
overall capacity of 400KW would be eleven percent below5 the mini-
mum level required for effective broadcasting into Eastern Europe and
the USSR, even if all governments in the area were to cease jamming,
which some have shown little indication of doing.6
We have further concluded that Radio Free Europe and Radio
Liberty play a very important role in the exchange of information and
the support of Western and democratic values. The audiences for these
stations in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe have come to depend
in varying degrees on their broadcasts for a balanced and comprehen-
sive view of international developments.
Our request to upgrade the Holzkirchen facility is a continuation
of a process to modernize Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty facilities
in Europe. As far as Germany is concerned it goes back to the late
nineteen-sixties when authorization was granted by the Federal Repub-
lic to replace four older and lower-powered transmitters at Lamper-
theim with four 250 KW transmitters. Budgetary restrictions prevented
our replacing the transmitters at that time. A formal request to upgrade
the Holzkirchen plant was made on February 24, 1976 and on June 9,
1976 FRG authorization was given to build six 100 KW transmitters
in Holzkirchen. This authorization was subsequently reduced to the
replacement of four existing 10 KW transmitters by four 100 KW trans-
mitters. However, on the basis of a Presidential study7 of Voice of
America and Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty technical deficiencies
requested by Congress in the summer of 1976, completed in December
5 In telegram 203257 to Bonn, August 25, the Department revised the text of the
aide mémoire, changing “current overall capacity of 400 KW would be eleven percent
below” to “the current overall capacity of Voice of America, Radio Free Europe, and
Radio Liberty would be eleven percent below.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D770308–0934)
6 In accordance with instructions in telegram 203257 to Bonn (see footnote 5 above),
the text here was changed from “which some have shown little indication of doing” to
“which some have shown no indication of doing.”
7 In accordance with instructions in telegram 203257 to Bonn (see footnote 5 above),
the text here was changed from “however, on the basis of a Presidential study” to “on
the basis of the aforementioned study.”
