382  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
on unit of account and telemetry. Interestingly, he hinted in one conver-
sation that he is fighting a rearguard action against some of the military 
hardliners on his delegation.
5. Under the circumstances, our best course of action is to demon-
strate that we are serious by fleshing out our position. If we do this, I 
think we will find that the Soviets are prepared to buy on to much of it.
Summary of the Round to Date
6. The following are the highlights of the round.
— Unit of account: we recently presented our approach for imple-
menting the Wyoming unit of account agreement. Although it was 
well received in the treaty text working group, it is clear that some on 
the Soviet delegation are resisting conforming the treaty documents 
to reflect the agreement, especially in the mobiles and MOU working 
groups.
— ALCMs: there has been little exchange on ALCMs, except for 
distinguishability, and the Soviets have not yet agreed to record their 
proposal to exclude former heavy bombers from the 1600 limit.
— SLCMs: there has also been little development on SLCMs. 
Nazarkin followed through on proposing a separate agreement, empha-
sizing binding limitations and discussions on verification. He told me 
that these two issues must be resolved before they will take the SLCM 
language out of the treaty text.
— Mobile ICBMs: the work on mobile ICBMs is proceeding well. 
While noticeably disappointed about not merging the mobile text (JWP) 
into the JDT, the Soviets tabled a complete restructuring of the JWP at 
the beginning of the round. This was a constructive step and we have 
tabled a version of our own based on the Soviet text.
— Noncircumvention: Nazarkin has probed our commitment to 
the British trident program. I responded that for the U.S. to reduce its 
commitment is inconceivable. Asking whether U.S. commitment was 
limited to D–5 or extended beyond, Nazarkin said that this issue is not 
“insurmountable.”
— NDMs: Nazarkin outlined “new ideas” on non-­deployed mis-
siles, saying they would eliminate numerical constraints on NDM 
outside missile bases, but retain them within missile bases. The Soviet 
approach looks interesting and we will be probing to learn more.
— Throw-­weight: the Soviets are pressing us hard on details of 
our approaches both on range capability, and on how we will deter-
mine throw-­weight of existing U.S. missiles and evaluate values for 
Soviet missiles. They have resurrected the SALT II approach for exist-
ing missiles and have hinted they are working on a new approach for 
future types.
