825.00/365: Telegram
[Document 407]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
WASHINGTON, January 27, 1925—1 p.m.
4. Supplementing the Department’s telegram No. 3 of January 26, 4 p.m. the following
is the Department’s position with regard to asylum: The Government of the United
States respects the principle that a sovereign state enjoys the exclusive right to control
and administer justice within its territory, and hence that it should not be resisted or
thwarted by an American diplomatic officer when its authorities demand the surrender
for purposes of prosecution of any person charged with crime who is not, by reason of
some connection with the mission, to be deemed exempt from the local jurisdiction.
Because the granting of shelter is oftentimes, if not commonly, accorded with a view to
withholding an individual from that jurisdiction such action cannot be regarded with
favor, save under very exceptional circumstances. As Secretary Root declared in a note
to the American Minister to Haiti on April 11, 1908, “instructions have made it clear
that this Government does not recognize a [the] so-called right of asylum” (Foreign
Relations , 1908, 435). The Department of State does not countenance “any attempt
knowingly to harbor offenders against the laws from the pursuit of the legitimate agents
of justice.”
While the Department has at times approved of the yielding by an American diplomatic
officer of temporary shelter to an individual when the safety of his life was threatened
as by mob violence in a country where conditions of great disorder prevailed, the
significance of such an exceptional situation should not be misconstrued. It is based on
the theory that disorderly conditions productive of mob violence, for example, have so
impaired the power or disposition of local authorities to administer justice as to render
inapplicable for the time being the principle above set forth. An American diplomatic
officer must therefore exercise utmost discretion in determining whether such
extraordinary conditions exist and continue to exist throughout the period of which
shelter is sought or granted; or whether on the contrary any shelter which he is asked to
accord is designed rather to thwart the common exercise of jurisdiction by the
territorial sovereign. That a refugee should be sought by his political enemies for an
essentially political offense would not necessarily bring the case within the exception
noted, at least if such an offense were one made punishable by the local law, and if
there was no reason to believe that the rights accorded an accused person for purposes
of defense would not be respected.
