Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II Memorandum From the President’s Counsel (Lipshutz) to President Carter1 Washington, April 17, 1977 SUBJECT International Financial Institutions Authorization Bill Reference is made to the April 15 memorandum from Cyrus Vance to you regarding this matter.2 I recommend strongly that you withhold action on his two proposals until you have reviewed observations which both Frank Moore and I wish to make. Further, I suggest that you meet with representatives from Treasury, State and NSC, along with Frank, myself, (perhaps) Senator Humphrey, and such others as you deem advisable; at such a meeting all points of view can be fully aired and debated. I personally wish to present a perspective in this matter which, in several ways, is different from that presented heretofore. I believe that Frank Moore will emphasize other factors of importance. 1. Should we oppose the substance of the “Harkin Amendment,” (i.e., mandatory action on our part based upon carefully described conditions and according to properly established procedures) we well might undermine much of our credibility in our espousal of Human Rights as a fundamental cornerstone of our foreign policy. As I understand the situation, we have only a few means of implementing this policy: speaking out consistently (which we certainly are doing); diplomatic actions (which I understand we also are doing); overt physical actions (which we properly have discarded); and financial leverage (which is the subject of this pending legislation). I was concerned to note in staff memos prepared for Zbigniew and forwarded to you,3 a statement that “. . . we do not like any of the amendments . . .” (Harkin, Badillo, Humphrey, Reuss). The perception which I received from this was that we should give only lip service and diplomatic efforts to the goal of Human Rights. 2. We can support the substance of the Harkin Amendment—mandatory action—and still retain: 1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Counsel’s Office, Robert J. Lipshutz Files,
