106
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
36.
Memorandum From the President’s Counsel (Lipshutz) to
President Carter1
Washington, April 17, 1977
SUBJECT
International Financial Institutions Authorization Bill
Reference is made to the April 15 memorandum from Cyrus Vance
to you regarding this matter.2 I recommend strongly that you withhold
action on his two proposals until you have reviewed observations
which both Frank Moore and I wish to make. Further, I suggest that
you meet with representatives from Treasury, State and NSC, along
with Frank, myself, (perhaps) Senator Humphrey, and such others as
you deem advisable; at such a meeting all points of view can be fully
aired and debated.
I personally wish to present a perspective in this matter which, in
several ways, is different from that presented heretofore. I believe that
Frank Moore will emphasize other factors of importance.
1. Should we oppose the substance of the “Harkin Amendment,”
(i.e., mandatory action on our part based upon carefully described con-
ditions and according to properly established procedures) we well
might undermine much of our credibility in our espousal of Human
Rights as a fundamental cornerstone of our foreign policy.
As I understand the situation, we have only a few means of imple-
menting this policy: speaking out consistently (which we certainly are
doing); diplomatic actions (which I understand we also are doing);
overt physical actions (which we properly have discarded); and finan-
cial leverage (which is the subject of this pending legislation).
I was concerned to note in staff memos prepared for Zbigniew and
forwarded to you,3 a statement that “. . . we do not like any of the
amendments . . .” (Harkin, Badillo, Humphrey, Reuss). The perception
which I received from this was that we should give only lip service and
diplomatic efforts to the goal of Human Rights.
2. We can support the substance of the Harkin Amendment—man-
datory action—and still retain:
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Counsel’s Office, Robert J. Lipshutz Files,
1977–1979, Box 19, Human Rights (Re International Financial Institution Legislation),
4–8/77. No classification marking. All brackets are in the original.
2 See Document 35.
3 Presumable reference to Brzezinski’s April 13 memorandum to the President,
printed as Document 33.
