National Security Policy 315 94. Memorandum of Discussion at the 379th NSC Meeting1 September 18, 1958 SUBJECT Discussion at the 379th Meeting of the National Security Council Thursday, ­September 18, 1958 Present at the 379th NSC Meeting were the Acting Secretary of State, presiding; the Acting Secretary of Defense; and the Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization. Also present were the Acting Secretary of the Treasury, the Attorney General (participating in Items 1 and 2); the Acting Director, Bureau of the Budget; the Acting Chairmen, Interdepartmental Intelligence Conference and the Interdepartmental Committee on Internal Security (Attending for Items 1 and 2); the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Acting Director of Central Intelligence; the Assistant to the President; the Deputy Assistant to the President; the Director, U.S. Information Agency; the Director, International Cooperation Administration; the Special Assistants to the President for Foreign Economic Policy, for National Security Affairs, for Science and Technology, and Security Operations Coordination; the White House Staff Secretary; the NSC Representative on Internal Security; the Assist­ant Secretary of State; the Executive Secretary NSC, and the Deputy Executive Secretary NSC. There follows a summary of the discussion and the main points taken: [Omitted here is agenda item 1.] 2. STATUS OF NATIONAL SECURITY PROGRAMS ON JUNE 30, 1958: THE INTERNAL SECURITY PROGRAM (NSC 5819) Mr. Gray indicated that before getting into the details of this item he wished to raise a related point occasioned by the publication on September 17, 1958, in one of the Washington newspapers, of an arti­ cle which attributed to Lt. General Arthur Trudeau, USA, a statement allegedly made on the previous day to the effect that the advanced state of Soviet technology was due more to Soviet success in espionage and subversion than it was to their scientific apparatus. Mr. Gray thought it timely to raise the Trudeau statement at this time inasmuch as the Status Report on Internal Security, which was before the Council for consideration, covered areas to which General Trudeau had made 1 Source: Agenda item 2: Status of National Security Programs on June 30, 1958: The Internal Security Program (NSC 5819). Top Secret; Eyes Only. Extracts—6 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
