3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 386 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI except that unfortunately people’s freedom was involved. He wanted to ask the Secretary how one could explain the veritable explosion of anti-Soviet propaganda, of statements hostile to the Soviet Union, that was now in process here in the United States. Until now the Soviet side had believed that the U.S. Administration was not taking an active part in this respect. While this had not been quite clear, the Soviets had tended to emphasize the constructive aspects of statements by the President and by the Secretary and by other political leaders. Lately, however, they could not but note that the Administration, beginning with the President, had indulged in vehement statements aimed at returning to the atmosphere of the cold war or something similar. Indeed, Mr. Brzezinski had surpassed himself in this respect. How could this be explained? While still in Washington, Gromyko had reached the conclusion on the basis of his discussion of African matters with President Carter4 that a role of prime importance in determining the nature of the President’s statement was the fact that he had been given imprecise, incorrect and distorted information about the situation in Africa and about the role played by the Soviets and the Cubans there. After that meeting Gromyko had made a public statement using the words “inaccurate and incorrect” to characterize the information the President had been given. If he were talking to correspondents today, he would use much stronger words. Someone in the United States, certain circles, were deliberately creating myths and subsequently referred to them as proof, placing them on the President’s desk and perhaps on the Secretary’s desk. Someone appeared to be doing this quite deliberately. Gromyko’s question was—what was the true policy of the United States? Was it aimed at furthering the relations between us, at searching for agreements that might possibly be concluded between our two countries on the basis of mutual respect for each other’s sovereignty and non-interference in each other’s affairs? Or was it a policy aimed at whipping up tensions and exacerbating relations between our two countries? Both of them were surely well aware of the consequences of such worsening of relations for the entire world. It was for this reason that Gromyko was asking this question today, and he would report the answer the Secretary might give him to his colleagues on the Politburo and the Central Committee, and to L.I. Brezhnev himself. In this same context he would point out just in passing that the more than 50 listening devices he had referred to earlier had been installed during the Carter Administration, not earlier. That was his question, and he would ask the Secretary to answer it if he could. Of course, he would proceed from the premise that the Secretary would inform President Carter of this conversation. 4 See Document 115.
