3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
386
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
except that unfortunately people’s freedom was involved. He wanted
to ask the Secretary how one could explain the veritable explosion of
anti-Soviet propaganda, of statements hostile to the Soviet Union, that
was now in process here in the United States. Until now the Soviet side
had believed that the U.S. Administration was not taking an active part
in this respect. While this had not been quite clear, the Soviets had
tended to emphasize the constructive aspects of statements by the Pres-
ident and by the Secretary and by other political leaders. Lately, how-
ever, they could not but note that the Administration, beginning with
the President, had indulged in vehement statements aimed at returning
to the atmosphere of the cold war or something similar. Indeed, Mr.
Brzezinski had surpassed himself in this respect. How could this be ex-
plained? While still in Washington, Gromyko had reached the conclu-
sion on the basis of his discussion of African matters with President
Carter4 that a role of prime importance in determining the nature of the
President’s statement was the fact that he had been given imprecise, in-
correct and distorted information about the situation in Africa and
about the role played by the Soviets and the Cubans there. After that
meeting Gromyko had made a public statement using the words “inac-
curate and incorrect” to characterize the information the President had
been given. If he were talking to correspondents today, he would use
much stronger words. Someone in the United States, certain circles,
were deliberately creating myths and subsequently referred to them as
proof, placing them on the President’s desk and perhaps on the Secre-
tary’s desk. Someone appeared to be doing this quite deliberately. Gro-
myko’s question was—what was the true policy of the United States?
Was it aimed at furthering the relations between us, at searching for
agreements that might possibly be concluded between our two coun-
tries on the basis of mutual respect for each other’s sovereignty and
non-interference in each other’s affairs? Or was it a policy aimed at
whipping up tensions and exacerbating relations between our two
countries? Both of them were surely well aware of the consequences of
such worsening of relations for the entire world. It was for this reason
that Gromyko was asking this question today, and he would report the
answer the Secretary might give him to his colleagues on the Politburo
and the Central Committee, and to L.I. Brezhnev himself. In this same
context he would point out just in passing that the more than 50 lis-
tening devices he had referred to earlier had been installed during the
Carter Administration, not earlier. That was his question, and he would
ask the Secretary to answer it if he could. Of course, he would proceed
from the premise that the Secretary would inform President Carter of
this conversation.
4 See Document 115.
