914 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 283. Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of State and the White House1 Tel Aviv, August 17, 1979, 1718Z 17880. Special encryption for the President from Bob Strauss. Cairo for Strauss. Subject: Strauss’ Initial Meeting With Prime Minister Begin. 1. Secret-entire text. 2. The two hour initial meeting with Begin August 17 took place in warm low key atmosphere with uncommon scarcity of PriMin’s emotional rhetoric. Result, however, was stalemate. 3. With only Ambassadors Evron and Lewis present, I gave Begin a friendly but unvarnished assessment of your concerns, including your resentment over unwarranted personal attacks by Dayan and others. Stressed unwavering nature of your commitment to Israel and its security, and urged Begin to help produce positive achievements which could breathe some credibility (with the Arabs) into Camp David process. 4. Begin made lengthy, reasoned argument for strict adherence to SC 242, 338, and Camp David Agreement (CDA) plus joint letter, as authoritative guidance for autonomy negotiations. He cited examples from recent Alexandria working group meeting of alleged U.S. support for Egyptian ideas which contradicted CDA, (e.g. “legislative council”). I told him both you and I agreed thoroughly that CDA was our mandate to be closely followed. 5. I then described problem we face re Palestinian resolution in UNSC, and probed persistently for any hint that Begin might acquiesce in a U.S.-sponsored resolution—with total lack of success.2 Begin said repeatedly and absolutely categorically that Israeli Cabinet stood unanimously behind its recent decision, i.e., if any repeat any new UNSC resolution dealing with the Arab-Israeli conflict were adopted anytime before full implementation of CDA is completed, it would con- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 22, Israel: 3–12/79. Secret; Cherokee; Immediate; Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to Cairo. Printed from a copy that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room. In the right-hand margin of the telegram, Carter wrote: “The United States will not approve any UN resolution which would change or modify UN 242 at all. We will pursue the goals of security for Israel w[ith]in secure & recognized borders and the right of the Pales. to participate in the determination of their own future. In all cases, agreements already reached by Israel, Eg. & US at Camp David and in ME Peace Treaty will prevail. J.” 2 In the right-hand margin next to this sentence, Carter drew a vertical line with an arrow pointing to it. Carter also underlined “probed persistently,” “Begin might acquiesce,” and “with total lack of success.”
