August 8–September 17, 1978
173
E. Kamel next observed that there is no reference in the paper to
settlements. The Secretary pointed out that this had been deliberately
omitted. He then explained our position on settlements, stressing that
we have clear and strong views on the subject. In the case of the Sinai,
the settlements should be withdrawn. In the case of the West Bank and
Gaza, as he had indicated to Kamel the other day, there should be a
freeze on all settlement activity. Kamel asked why there had been no
reference to our previously expressed position of the illegality of settle-
ments. The Secretary said President Carter will make a speech which
will include a reference to our longstanding view that settlements are
illegal. The Secretary then explained why we had left out in our present
draft any reference to the settlements. This had been done in the hope
that, without such a reference, it might be possible to work out with the
Israelis the other aspects of the problem. The Israelis have been made
aware, however, that our position on settlements is a strong one and
that it will be included in any final document. He could assure Kamel
that when we leave Camp David, appropriate language on the settle-
ments will be included in our paper and that this will be made public.
Kamel reverted to the overall paper, indicating that the Egyptian
side is not at all happy with the paper. The Secretary responded that the
Israelis are also unhappy with it. Kamel wanted to know what the Is-
raelis could find in the paper that would make them unhappy. The Sec-
retary went through his copy6 of the paper and noted the following
points: (a) The inclusion of language on the inadmissibility of the acqui-
sition of territory through war. Ghorbal noted this is only in the pre-
amble, which we and the Israelis have always claimed does not have
the same weight as operative language. (b) The concept of restoring
Egyptian sovereignty in the Sinai. The Israelis want to cast this solely in
terms of the Begin Peace Plan.7 (c) The language on Suez and Tiran,
which we had refused to include. (d) The Israelis do not like the inclu-
sion of the Aswan language. (e) The Israelis do not like the transition
arrangements as we have worked them out. They want to base these on
the Begin self-rule plan. (f) The Israelis do not like the Vienna lan-
guage.8 Here Kamel interjected that the Egyptians also do not like the
Vienna language. (g) The Israelis also object to the Palestinian refugee
language. (h) They dislike the Jerusalem language. They argue that in
the case of Jerusalem there is nothing to be resolved. It has been de-
clared to be the capital of Israel. We have not accepted this.
6 Not further identified.
7 See footnote 2, Document 5.
8 Article 31 of the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties posits a “general
rule that a treaty is to be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of the
treaty’s purpose.” (Yearbook of the United Nations, 1969, p. 736)
