1956  829
in U.S. that they had asked me inquire and look into his case. If state­
ment given by me were true that any aliens in U.S. including Chinese 
were free to leave or enter the U.S. without application INS or any other 
U.S. authority; if it true INS does not set up any procedures controlling 
exit of foreign nationals, if this true then action taken by INS against 
Chinese in U.S. defy reason and that is something they request me to 
investigate and correct this state of affairs. I have to tell INS to stop all 
such illegal acts because such illegal and wild acts taken by INS are in 
violation of agreement between us on return of civilians.
64. I said first let me say I did not say that U.S. INS does not exer­
cise control over entry of aliens to U.S. I have continued to refer only to 
departure of aliens from U.S.
65. Wang said case of Tan not one of entry U.S. but one of departure 
U.S.
66. I said that was right and I was discussing it in those terms. 
In case of Tan and these other cases he had continued to make vague 
statements regarding their being prevented from departure. It utterly 
incredible me, if there were any factual basis any these cases that at 
least one person would not have called attention his case to Indian 
Embassy in accordance procedures we established for handling this. 
I simply could not give credence to these charges in view lack any fac­
tual evidence. I satisfied there was no factual basis.
67. I said facts show that not single case been called to attention 
my government in accordance agreed announcement but that ­Chinese 
have steadily and regularly been traveling from my country to his 
country. According best information available to me, at least 114 
Chinese had arrived in his country since beginning talks. 67 arrived 
between September 10, date our announcement and December 20. 
Since December 20, a period during which not single American had 
been released from his country, my information was that at least 35 
Chinese had arrived his country. I had no way knowing how many 
others might have arrived.
68. I said as for situation regarding Americans his country, I could 
only conclude we were going backwards. Subsequent to September 10 
his authorities on October 27 announced release of two American pris­
oners. Three weeks later on November 17 his authorities announced 
release of three Americans. About one month later on December 20 
his authorities announced release of one American. This was aver­
age of about one every two weeks. More than ten weeks have passed 
since December 20 and in that time no American been released. I had 
extremely difficult time reconciling this with agreement September 10 
which specifically covered these Americans and reconciling this with a 
desire to bring about improvement in our relations or with a desire to 
obtain genuinely constructive achievements in these talks. It certainly
