Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
397
An additional issue that deserves further study is the US-Soviet-
Chinese triangle. I believe that this is a factor of which we must be con-
tinually aware as we shape our relations with each. Clearly Chinese at-
titudes toward us are heavily influenced by our policies towards the
Soviets. Zbig’s trip was useful in indicating to the Chinese our
firmness.6 It is less clear to me that “playing the China card” has much
effect on Moscow’s actions.
B. Competition and Cooperation in Third Areas
Increasingly, we are faced with two differing views of the US-
Soviet relationship; although so far we have managed to combine the
two in our public statements, it is becoming more difficult to do. We
have always recognized that the relationship between the US and the
Soviet Union has been a combination of cooperation and competition,
with the competition not preventing either side from seeking agree-
ments in our mutual benefit in such areas as SALT. Now, however, we
are coming to the point where there is growing pressure on the part of
some people to have us portray the competitive aspects of the relation-
ship as taking clear precedence over the search for areas for coopera-
tion. This fundamental issue has begun to spill out into the public do-
main through recent statements and press interviews. It should be
resolved within the government in order to avoid presenting a picture
of division which will weaken us.
We have an interest in expanding areas of cooperation with the So-
viets, not only through direct exchanges but in diplomatic or program-
matic cooperation in their areas of the world.
But the harsh reality is that a growing Soviet military reach is being
translated into an increasingly assertive Soviet competitive drive in the
Third World, with a focus on Africa.
We cannot object to competition. It is inherent in our relationship.
To insist that detente be made perfect is to ensure that competition in
any area will prejudice the possibility of progress in other areas.
As you stated in your Chicago press conference7 and elsewhere,
we do not and should not link Soviet behavior in the Third World to
progress on issues in which we have so fundamental a security interest
as SALT. Yet Soviet behavior will of course affect the willingness of the
American people and the Congress to give approval to formal agree-
ments with the Soviets.
6 See footnote 21, Document 62 and Document 81.
7 For the transcript of the President’s news conference in Chicago on May 25, see
Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book I, pp. 972–979.
