United States under which such corporation is organized extend the right to
engage in business to foreign corporations.
The reservation making provision for the termination of paragraphs and
articles relating to shipping made by the Senate in giving its advice and
consent to the ratification of the treaty with Germany is included in the
Treaty with Esthonia as the third paragraph of Article XXIX. As stated
above on page 2 of this instruction no corresponding reservation is included
in the enclosed draft. The Department will instruct you by telegram whether
to include such a paragraph in the draft before submitting it to the Chilean
Government or at any time during the negotiations.
If it be included it will be added as the third paragraph of Article XXX. The
words “Except as provided in the third paragraph of this Article” will be
inserted at the beginning of the first paragraph of Article XXX and the new
paragraph will read as follows:
“The sixth and seventh paragraphs of Article VII and Articles X
and XII shall remain in force for twelve months from the date of
exchange of ratifications, and if not then terminated on ninety
days previous notice shall remain in force until either of the High
Contracting Parties shall enact legislation inconsistent therewith
when the same shall automatically lapse at the end of sixty days
from such enactment, and on such lapse each High Contracting
Party shall enjoy all the rights which it would have possessed had
such paragraphs or articles not been embraced in the Treaty”.
Further comment in regard to the differences between the enclosed draft
and the treaty of the United States with Germany will be included in the
detailed instructions.
When presenting the draft to the Foreign Office please state that this
Government reserves the right to propose changes therein throughout the
course of the negotiations. Please inform the Department by telegram of the
receipt of this instruction. You will, of course, not present the draft to the
Foreign Office, until the Department sends you a further communication
authorizing you to do so.
