650 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII think that Points Five and Three might be brought together with language calling for something along the lines of “respect by neighboring states for the territorial integrity, sovereignty and neutrality and for the principle of non-intervention in Afghanistan’s internal affairs.” Point Six. There was no quarrel with this formulation. De Laboulaye had some intellectual difficulties, observing that France retained an open mind on neutralization in Southwest Asia. There was a brief discussion of next steps. Hermes thought that the proposal should be kept in the backyard of the Islamic countries. Pansa reminded that memories are short. De Laboulaye thought we should proceed bilaterally. Hermes stressed that India is the key country in this matter. China—Vice Foreign Minister’s Visit Mr. Christopher briefed the Ambassadors on the recent visit.4 China had viewed with concern the proposal for neutralization of Afghanistan, fearing it would lead to permanent Soviet domination of the country. He had stressed to the Chinese that complete Soviet withdrawal had to be a pre-condition to any other action and the Chinese gave the impression that they could live with the approach. On the Olympics, China wholeheartedly supported the boycott and the alternative games. On Pakistan the Chinese urged us to be patient as Pakistan decided its strategy towards its neighbors, and they stressed the need for other countries to supplement Chinese efforts to provide military aid to Islamabad. They had expressed a willingness to work toward improved relations with India but were not sanguine about the prospects. The Chinese told us that the Democratic Kampucheans in Kampuchea had done better during the dry season than had been expected, and were pleased with the outcome of the recent EC/ASEAN discussions. 4 The visit of Zhang Wenjin, who met with Vance and Christopher March 17, was reported in telegram 75394 to Beijing, March 21. Regarding European proposals for the neutralization of Afghanistan, Zhang emphasized that it would not compel the Soviets to withdraw, that they could distort it for their political gain, and ultimately it was a decision for the Afghan people. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 9, China (PRC): 3/80) See also Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIII, China, Documents 303 and 304.
