690  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
indefinitely, especially if we give the Soviets a chance to concentrate on 
it. From that, in major part, flows the importance of restoring the ICBM 
survivability by the end of the 1980’s. Other factors include the C3 and 
accuracy associated with the ICBM force.6
(S) The MX achieves survivability by (a) forcing the Soviets to tar-
get shelters instead of missiles, and (b) building more shelters than 
they can realistically attack effectively. We achieve the first objective 
by concealing which one of the 23 shelters contains the missile. I 
believe the elaborate measures we have devised will allow the Soviets 
to know that only one shelter has a missile but will not allow them to 
know which one. If this belief proves unfounded, that is even if the 
Soviets were to locate the missiles and launch an attack, we could 
move the missile to a different shelter, before the ICBM reached its 
target. This rapid dispersal capability is intended primarily to com-
plicate the task of the Soviet war planner (thereby deterring him from 
attacking) and to give the President an insurance policy against loss 
of security, or assertions of such loss. As a result of these measures, 
we can have high confidence that any attacker wanting to destroy the 
MX missile force would have to target all of the shelters. [10 lines not 
declassified] In short, the Soviets would be in a worse position after the 
attack than before, even without considering a US retaliatory strike 
against residual Soviet forces.
(S) Larger Soviet ICBM forces are possible to envisage. These 
would require a correspondingly larger MX “force” (more shelters, and 
perhaps more deployment areas, depending on the nature of the threat) 
to achieve comparable levels of survivability. In the attached paper we 
describe, in addition to [21 lines not declassified]
[1 paragraph (15 lines) not declassified]
(S) Another crucial issue is verifiability of the system. I believe we 
have designed a system which deals effectively with that issue, both in 
fact and in perception. This system should be easier to verify than other 
mobile systems—SLBMs, bombers, and road mobile systems like the 
SS–20 that are not confined to a designated deployment area. CIA and 
[less than 1 line not declassified] analysts have done an outstanding job 
of assessing verifiability (and as a result have influenced some of our 
design features). They conclude that the system can be verified either 
as a US deployment or as a Soviet deployment. The verification issue is 
treated in detail in the attached paper. Also, Stan has prepared a sepa-
rate memo on this subject which you will want to review.7
6 Carter wrote in the margin to the right of this and the previous sentence: “ex 
schizophrenia.”
7 See Document 151.
