Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
663
leaders in the last few days. I must tell you tonight that if the Senate
fails to approve the SALT treaty, these leaders and their countries
would be confused and deeply alarmed. If our allies should lose confi-
dence in our ability to negotiate successfully for the control of nuclear
weapons, then our effort to build a stronger and more united NATO
could fail.
I know that for Members of Congress this is a troubling and a diffi-
cult issue, in a troubling and difficult time. But the Senate has a tradi-
tion of being the greatest deliberative body in the world, and the whole
world is watching the Senate today. I’m confident that all Senators will
perform their high responsibilities as the national interest requires.
Politics and nuclear arsenals do not mix. We must not play politics
with the security of the United States. We must not play politics with
the survival of the human race. We must not play politics with SALT II.
It is much too important for that—too vital to our country, to our allies,
and to the cause of peace.
The purpose of the SALT II treaty and the purpose of my actions in
dealing with Soviet and Cuban military relationship are exactly the
same—to keep our Nation secure and to maintain a world at peace.
As a powerful nation, as a super power, we have special responsi-
bilities to maintain stability even when there are serious disagreements
among nations.
We’ve had fundamental differences with the Soviet Union since
1917. I have no illusions about these differences. The best way to deal
with them successfully is to maintain American unity, American will,
and American strength. That is what I am determined to do.
The struggle for peace—the long, hard struggle to make weapons
of mass destruction under control of human reason and human law—is
a central drama of our age.
At another time of challenge in our Nation’s history, President
Abraham Lincoln told the American people: “We shall nobly save, or
meanly lose, the last best hope of earth.”10
We acted wisely then and preserved the Nation. Let us act wisely
now and preserve the world.
10 Reference is to Lincoln’s December 1, 1862, message to Congress on the State of
the Union.
