difficulties so long as each applies to every arrangement
suggested the test of whether it may conceivably enable the other
to claim a moral victory. I am not criticizing this attitude; I only
state it as a fact which militates powerfully against a territorial
compromise.
There remains the possibility of some arrangement by which
neither contestant shall face the possibility of giving up anything
to the other. Manifestly a solution of that character would possess
the distinct advantage of eliminating all apprehensions arising
from a comparison of relative territorial benefits secured. It would
involve a joint, as distinguished from a mutual sacrifice, and
would rest fundamentally upon the realization that m all the
circumstances neither country can expect to receive any
substantial part of this long disputed area, and at the same time
enjoy the security and satisfaction accruing from a complete
adjustment which they themselves, as well as the rest of the
world, could regard as permanent. Concerning myself with the
practical aspects of the problem, and conceiving it to be my duty
to find, if I can, a plan which both Governments can afford to
accept in the names of the peoples to whom they are responsible,
I have come to regard this third method as one meeting the more
vital conditions, and offering decided advantages from the point
of view of permanent peace. I am moved to this conclusion
principally because such a formula does not call for a moral
surrender, or anything that can be so construed, by one country to
the other.
5. In the course of the negotiations I have suggested for
consideration, in one form or another, all three of these logically
possible types of solution. On no one of them have the ideas of
Chile 
and 
Peru 
converged. 
I 
have 
suggested 
various
combinations, such as division of territory with the “corridor”
feature and the “free city” device annexed. Interesting discussions
of details as to boundaries, etc. have ensued, but these discussions
have led to no conclusion. I have also suggested the neutralization
