1142 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement country regarding American civilians in China unreasonable. They did not accord with fact. He therefore could not accept them. With regard question American correspondents who request go China, fact was US Govt did not want them go—is preventing them from doing so. He could only say this against plain common sense and entirely policy directed to duping people. Such policy would not bring any good to US Govt. 24. On my indicating I had nothing further, Wang suggested next meeting Aug 21. I agreed. Gowen 697. Letter 42 from Johnson to McConaughy1 Letter No. 42 Geneva, August 9, 1956 Dear Walter: Thanks very much for getting the Department’s August 7 press statement to me before the meeting. It was an excellent statement, saying the right things in the right way and I was able to make good use of it. However, I don’t think we should believe that it will in fact accelerate the release of the remaining prisoners. The Chinese Communists full well knew we would take this position before they approved the applications and they did so first as a propaganda gesture in an attempt to put us on the spot, and secondly in the belief that our position will be under­ mined by some of the correspondents going regardless of what we say. It is going to be very hard for them to go in face of the Department’s state­ ment, but I fear this may not deter some of them. Also they hope to set up controversy between the Department and the news agencies so that it will not be an issue between ourselves and the Chinese, but between the Department and the news agencies. It is a very clever move on their part and I am surprised they haven’t done so before now. You will note that in discussing it today I carefully avoided saying anything about our “for­ bidding” correspondents to go or making any flat statements that none would go. I very much had in mind our discussion with Hermann before I came over here on the whole legal position in this regard. I suppose if they do go and get away with it we will be faced with the problem of some of the relatives of prisoners wanting to go. 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Personal–­ Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.” The postscript is handwritten.
