14 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 Secretary Vance read through the instructions which were prepared for the two emissaries.4 The key part of the instructions involves two parts: first, a statement that the length of the stay of the Shah in the United States would be commensurate with the reasons for his admittance and the second phrase that the Shah will not remain permanently. Dr. Brzezinski recommended that the second phrase was really not necessary since it was already implied in the first phrase. However, the emissaries could be instructed to explain that the first phrase really meant that the Shah would not remain permanently. The President agreed and suggested that the emissaries could say that the Mexican government had extended an invitation.5 Secretary Vance noted that the Shah has expressed concern with the problems which have arisen about his presence and he did not want to be the cause of harm coming to the American citizens. The President said that Ramsey Clark could tell that to Khomeini and quote the rather effusive Mexican invitation for the Shah to return. Dr. Brzezinski said that he thought it important that the Iranians not interpret Ramsey Clark statement as a promise from the President that the Shah will leave. Rather they should say there is every reason to expect that the Shah will return. The less chance we give the Iranians to boast about their prevailing over the United States the better off we are. The Vice President agreed. He felt that it was better to keep any promise very fuzzy because it would be used against us. Dr. Brzezinski noted that the less we give them the better. Secretary Vance noted that we should not raise expectations that the Shah will immediately leave although he might be willing to. At the present time he has a tube implanted in him and also has cancer of the neck and could not easily be moved. 4 The instructions stated that the primary objective of the emissaries was to secure the early release of all U.S. citizens detained in Iran, and that the secondary objective was to meet with religious authorities in Iran and “hear their views on ways to overcome the difficulties in our relationship.” The instructions also stated that the United States had admitted the Shah for medical treatment and that he would not engage in any political activity, that the U.S. Government had little information on his U.S. assets, that the U.S. Government was not involved in Kurdistan and supported Iran’s territorial integrity, that some resolution with Iranian authorities had been achieved on military supply issues, and that the U.S. Government exercised no control over the U.S. press. (Telegram 290407 to Clark and Miller in Istanbul, November 7; Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Iran NODIS Cables Nov 1979) 5 See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXIII, Mexico, Cuba, and the Caribbean, Document 166.
