678 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement when only a few months ago we sold Guatemala several F–51 fighters for $1,090 each. RPA advises that while the F–51’s were obsolete and surplus, and that token prices could be quoted for them, the T–34’s are currently used by our armed forces and those requested by Guatemala must be released from our active stocks. Should the Ambassador raise this matter, it is suggested that he be told that his note is now being translated and that the Department will be glad to study it to see what, if anything, can be to be helpful to the Guatemalans in this matter, although nothing can be promised as Defense apparently has little or no leeway in negotiating token prices for sales of T–34 aircraft at this time. 3. Coffee Prices. A favorite theme of Ambassador Antillón is the economic and financial difficulties that Guatemala is experiencing because of the drop in coffee prices. He is well aware of what the United States is trying to do to be helpful in this situation, but tends to use the fall in coffee prices as a reason for requesting us to make all kinds of concessions to Guatemala. 4. U.S. Support for the Ydígoras Governments. Ambassador Antillón may express to you his view that there is need for the United States to make promptly some tangible and public gesture of support for the Ydígoras administration, such as granting loans or reducing the prices on the trainer planes. He seems to think that we have deliberately withheld support from the GOG. You might, whether or not he raises this subject, make a statement to the effect that we are cooperating with and supporting the Ydígoras Government. You might cite the fact that earlier this year we waited until Ydígoras took office before releasing and programming the $10 million dollars in special assistance that Congress appropriated for Guatemala for FY 1958,7 and that the programming of these sums was done in close cooperation with the GOG. You might say also that we have, wherever possible in conformity with our own laws and regulations and our capabilities, tried to comply with requests of the Guatemalan Government. President Ydígoras himself has repeatedly expressed to our representatives gratitude for U.S. assistance. 5. Lead and Zinc Quotas. The Ambassador may raise the question of Guatemala being assigned a specific quota for export of lead and zinc concentrates to the United States, instead of being included in the 10 per cent general 7 Reference is to the Mutual Security Appropriation Act, 1958, approved September 3, 1957; for text, see 71 Stat. 601.
