Peru  1091
increases. In addition, the Peruvian Government is negotiating: (a) a 
PL 480 Title I Agreement which would make available local currency 
for development purposes; (b) a DLF loan to provide initial capital for 
a savings and loan association, which will make loans to finance hous-
ing construction; and (c) IBRD and DLF loans for various road build-
ing and irrigation projects. This group of loans could total as much as 
$20 million.
31. Foreign assistance for this program may enable Beltrán to 
appease most significant political and economic elements and to suc-
ceed in his monetary stabilization effort, thus preserving the country’s 
free exchange system, which has been a model for similar efforts in 
other Latin American countries. Under these conditions he could move 
on to developmental measures and take some steps toward resolv-
ing the long-­range problem of the social and economic integration of 
Peru. An important problem is that of increasing agricultural output 
of the country, which will require heavy investment in transportation 
and irrigation in order to open presently unsettled lands. Execution of 
such measures would create favorable conditions for a resumption of 
growth in the modern sector of the economy, thereby providing addi-
tional employment opportunities for Indians from the Sierra.
IV. The Domestic Outlook
32. Barring a general worsening of Peru’s terms of trade, which we 
consider unlikely, we believe that Beltrán’s program will succeed over 
the short run. The measure of Beltrán’s success will in part be related 
to his ability to obtain the foreign financial assistance he seeks. There 
will probably be some rise in the production of Peru’s food supplies 
and exports, and prospects are good for increased efficiency in fiscal 
management under Beltrán’s guidance. Hence, the outlook for foreign 
and domestic investment will be favorable.
33. Under these circumstances, it is likely that the Prado gov-
ernment will serve out its term and that there will be reasonably free 
elections and an orderly transfer of power to a duly elected successor 
government in 1962. Although APRA may feel compelled to press its 
social and economic demands more vigorously in order to avoid loss 
of lower class support to Acción Popular and the Communists, it will 
probably seek to avoid going so far as to invite military repression. 
The military, for the most part, will probably be reluctant to return to 
authoritarian rule unless it believes this necessary to maintain the dom-
inant position of the elite.
34. The result probably will be an electoral campaign in which 
class lines are blurred. All the presidential candidates will probably 
be members of the conservative elite. The real contest will be between 
the candidate supported by APRA and the one supported by Acción
