September 18–December 16, 1978 449 litical meeting without restraint, as long as they are peaceful; to withdraw their military headquarters from Gaza, without any reciprocal action on the part of Egypt; to commence the negotiations on the West Bank and Gaza within a month; and to agree that the elections for the autonomous self-government would be completed next year. All of those things would apply to the West Bank and Gaza, except the military government would be removed, the headquarters would be removed from Gaza without regard to anything else. President Sadat: When will the first phase of withdrawal be, Mr. President, in Sinai? We can finish the whole thing about Gaza and the West Bank by keeping them together. President Carter: The first phase of withdrawal has to be within nine months. Is that correct? President Sadat: Right. President Carter: And complete withdrawal within three years. President Sadat: From two to three years. President Carter: Yes, from two to three years. What I am saying is that we will have the elections actually conducted for the selfgovernment in 1979 which would be just next year. President Sadat: When you say from six to nine months, it will be next year. President Carter: Mr. President, I understand that. I don’t care what you and the Israelis do, but I don’t think that this is reasonable request of you. I don’t think it is right to separate Gaza and make it a special case. President Sadat: This I can’t do, because it is detrimental for both of us. I am trying to make it easy for them and find some point to agree on the timing and the West Bank. It is because of the West Bank. If it takes six to nine months, this will mean June 1979. This may mean separate agreements. I want Sinai and nothing after six or seven months and nothing about Gaza, except negotiations. After June this will take more than one year in the negotiations. President Carter: I think they will agree to have elections by the end of 1979, so there would not be a delay. President Sadat: By the end of 1979? President Carter: That is correct. President Sadat: Quite frankly, I have found that in seven, eight, or even nine months to accomplish the first phase of withdrawal on Sinai without anything in the West Bank and Gaza. The West Bank could be at the end of the year. This is okay, but without Gaza, it is a separate agreement and this is detrimental for both of us. President Carter: President Sadat, I don’t agree with you because the final withdrawal from the Sinai is two or three years. There would
