Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III and sensitivity of currency markets’ reactions to them. I agree with Roy Jenkins. That is why we need a large basket of currencies. But we cannot reduce underlying trends. Also, I was surprised that after the Washington discussions3 our purpose is not better understood. Our efforts in Europe to create more stability in Europe are conducive to a better overall situation. None of us have yet gone fully into the technical considerations. But if we create stability in the EC, it will be conducive to high rates of growth for all countries. Some countries have more constrictive, and some have more outgoing, money supplies. We can achieve some harmony here. We should not put these comments into a final communique, although I am grateful to Giscard and Jenkins for what they said. Perhaps we can indicate that we have notified you of this, but we do not need to relate this discussion. We believe it essential to create confidence in business circles and we might indicate why monetary issues affect that confidence. Giscard: We might say we informed our main partners of our intentions and procedures on how we can create a zone of monetary stability in Europe. Schmidt: The dollar is the asset of central banks of the major industrialized countries outside of the U.S. The holdings have increased by 30 to 35 billion dollars in an effort to help stabilize the exchange rate. I do not believe that this level of intervention will continue in the future because to intervene means creating national currencies. I do not believe that the central banks of the developed countries will in the future intervene on the order of magnitude of $30–35 billion. There is a danger that the central banks will decide that they do not need more dollars. If this is the case, additional deterioration of the dollar exchange rate is bound to happen. Carter: My impression from this discussion—from the points made by you, Giscard and Jenkins—is that your objective is not to reduce the volatility in Europe, but to reduce instability between the dollar and the European exchange rates. (SCHMIDT: No, no, that is not the point. GISCARD: No.) CARTER: I don’t know that the dollar is now overvalued or undervalued. I can’t say. Your currencies have been undervalued in the past. Many things determine the rate of exchange. To a relative degree, the U.S. is obviously not as concerned about changing rates of currency as you are. But we have not detected the export problem that you describe. Our own exports have suffered more than yours. We had a decline in our trade deficit in oil by about 3–4 billion dollars in the first few months of this year, but we have had a large in- 3 Not further identified.
