1054
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
tion. Without control of population growth, however, any solution is
temporary or partial.
7. You should adjust your presentation to particular situation in
your country including population/family planning policies and pro-
grams already being implemented.
8. We would like to have a report from you of your conversations,
and we would appreciate any further suggestions you may have to in-
crease the effectiveness of our programs in this area by June 1, 1978.
Vance
313.
Editorial Note
On May 2, 1978, the White House issued a Presidential statement
on international health. In January, the President’s Special Assistant for
International Health Affairs Peter Bourne had recommended that Pres-
ident Jimmy Carter use either a message to Congress or a speech to ex-
plicate the administration’s international health strategy (see Docu-
ment 306). In addition to the Presidential statement, Secretary of
Health, Education and Welfare Joseph Califano, head of the U. S. dele-
gation to the 31st annual World Health Assembly in Geneva, Switzer-
land, would formally reiterate the administration’s commitment to an
increased role in international health activities. According to an April
26 memorandum from Bourne to Carter, it was necessary for the White
House to release the statement on international health prior to Cali-
fano’s scheduled May 9 speech, “both to reaffirm this as your initiative,
demonstrating your leadership in this vital area of human needs and
also to lend weight to the message Joe will deliver. I believe both parts,
your statement, and Joe’s speech are extremely timely and important to
counter the criticism that we have been too long on rhetoric with re-
gards to basic human needs, and short on specifics. It is particularly
useful to do this following shortly after your trip to Africa.” (Carter Li-
brary, Staff Office Files, Special Assistant for Health Issues—Peter
Bourne Files, White House Office File on International Health, Box 53,
Principles Statement, 4–5/78)
The President used the statement to provide a brief overview of
the world’s health problems and stress cooperation in an increasingly
interdependent climate before outlining the administration’s proposed
initiatives:
