International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1069 meatless months in the Alma Ata region.) The field trips the Soviets organized for Conference participants during the September 9–10 weekend to urban and rural Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan featured Soviet physicians and other health personnel in immaculate uniforms and surroundings reciting the usual stock phrases in praise of the Soviet system. Overstaging, and lack of visible patients, detracted from what could have been an impressive show. 4. Senator Kennedy’s address4 delivered to the plenary the evening of September 6 attracted wide attention, and brought warm response from the galleries packed with local Soviets. Hundreds of Soviets gathered in the square facing the conference hall to catch a glimpse of the Senator’s departure. 5. The Conference, in contrast to recent world health assemblies, was relatively free of extraneous political debate. Soviet Health Minister Petrovsky adroitly handled his duties as President of the Conference and assisted in the general move for consensus. The only political flap was created by the SWAPO delegate in the closing hours of the conference, who requested that “liberation movements” be inserted in a listing of groups supporting health care in the summary of discussions of the conference. A sharp exchange ensued with Algeria, Zambia, Afghanistan, Mozambique, GDR and the PLO registering support for the SWAPO proposal and the FRG, Canada, Australia, France, Guatemala, and Costa Rica noting opposition. The suggestion was referred to the Secretariat to work out appropriate wording for inclusion in the final conference report. Notwithstanding the heavy majority of LDCs participating, together with SWAPO and the PLO, the final conference document was moderate in tone. The racism-Zionism issue which had plagued previous WHO conferences was not raised. Garrison 4 Kennedy attended and spoke at the conference but was not part of the official U.S. delegation. See “Kennedy Will Visit Russia Next Week For Health Meeting,” The Wash-
