North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 773 a) Is a U.S. initiative in support of such a strategy feasible or not? Is it an initiative which might engage LDCs in a far more fundamental and productive set of discussions and negotiations than five years of CIECs? Or is it an initiative which would expose the Administration to too many domestic and international dangers to warrant the effort?13 Finally, for each set of questions and judgments, the programmatic implications for the U.S. (domestic and international) would be spelled out. Therefore, the reader would be able to choose one option (or some combination of the options discussed) in full recognition of the alternatives (with both their costs and benefits) forgone. To simplify things for you I’ll let you mark approve or see me below. If you choose the latter, I’ll call your office and set up a short appointment.14 13 Aaron wrote “Substance?” in the margin adjacent to this section. 14 Aaron indicated his approval of the “See Me” option, writing “Call Tues” below; presumably Tuesday, February 22. 257. Memorandum From Robert Hormats and Roger Hansen of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1 Washington, February 25, 1977 SUBJECT EPG Meeting on North-South Issues; Saturday, February 26 at 10:30 a.m.; Roosevelt Room This meeting will be the first Cabinet-level look at North-South strategy, particularly with respect to the issues with commodities.2 At the meeting you will have the opportunity to: —Ensure that the various options are discussed within the proper foreign policy framework—which has tended to be overcome at times by the nuances of various economic options at the Deputies level. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 25, PRM–08 (1 of 3) [1]. Confidential. Sent for action. 2 No memorandum of conversation of this meeting was found.
