International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
239
74.
Memorandum From Michael Armacost of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 10, 1977
SUBJECT
Major Export Promotion Drive
Our trade and payments position is atrocious, yet as far as I am
aware the Administration has made no determined effort to come to
terms with this on the export side. We are launching major efforts to try
and open up the Japanese market to manufactured goods exports; yet
when criticized for having a sheltered market, Japanese officials invari-
ably claim that our businessmen do not try hard enough to compete in
Japan. There is some truth to the contention, though it is essentially a
self-serving defensive ploy. Nonetheless, it points up the fact that an
important adjunct to our Japan initiatives should be a major effort to
launch an export promotion drive with the blessings of the White
House.
This has been attempted before. But the last attempt (four or five
years ago) foundered because it was run essentially out of Commerce
which enjoyed little confidence in the business community and little
clout in the White House. After a few meetings, it fizzled.
I would suggest that the President bring a few key businessmen
and labor leaders in to discuss launching a new export promotion drive
to advance foreign economic policy aims and spur employment. The
leaders of such a drive—if it is to have any prospect of success—must
be recognizable figures, known to the President, enjoying the confi-
dence of the business community and labor, and possessed of suc-
cessful experience selling products abroad (ideally with some success
in the Japanese market). This cannot be a venture limited to the big
multinationals; it must be geared at intermediate sized firms as well to
give a broad grass roots reach.
My knowledge of the giants of industry is limited, but Irving Sha-
piro, Chairman of DuPont, might be an ideal person to lead an effort of
this kind. Tom Clausen, President of the Bank of America, should be
drawn in on it. So perhaps, should John Connor, Allied Chemical
(former Secretary of Commerce); and Bob Ingersoll, former Chairman
of Borg Warner and Ambassador to Japan. Doubtless Bob Strauss, Mike
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 65, Trade: 11/77–4/79. Confidential. Sent for action.
