notes, only upon receipt by the Dominican Republic and Lee, Higginson & Company of evidence satisfactory to them that such notes were lost or destroyed and upon receipt also of indemnity satisfactory to them in their discretion. 23. All notices, demands or requests from Lee, Higginson & Company to the Dominican Republic in connection with this agreement or the notes shall be sufficiently given if mailed in a securely enclosed postpaid envelope addressed to the Secretario de Estado de Hacienda y Comercio of the Dominican Republic, Santo Domingo City, Dominican Republic, or if given by cable so addressed. All notices, demands or requests from the Dominican Republic to Lee, Higginson & Company may similarly be given addressed to them at 43 Exchange Place, New York, N. Y. 24. This employment of Lee, Higginson & Company as Fiscal Agents is irrevocable, except for good and sufficient cause, but they may resign at any time as such Agents by giving notice of such resignation to the Dominican Republic in the manner provided above, and by publishing such notice at least twice a week for six successive weeks in two daily newspapers published and of general circulation in the City of New York. Such resignation shall take effect upon the expiration of such publication. The appointment of a successor to the Fiscal Agents shall be by mutual agreement between the Dominican Republic and the Fiscal Agents who may be retiring. 25. The provisions of this agreement shall be applicable to said firm of Lee, Higginson & Company as the same now is or may be hereafter constituted. It is agreed between the parties that upon the death or withdrawal of any partner or partners of Lee, Higginson & Company, the remaining partners, with such persons, if any, who have or may become partners of said firm, shall have all the rights and duties and be subject to the obligations conferred or imposed upon said firm by these presents. 26. This agreement for the sale of said notes is conditional upon receipt by Lee, Higginson & Company of assurance satisfactory to their counsel as to the procedure in the issue and execution of said notes and said bonds as security therefor, and upon delivery to said firm of the temporary note or notes herein mentioned, duly executed, and upon delivery of the temporary
