Romania
539
US, even if taken (as Nicolae claimed) from US press, reflects GOR
policy and is interpreted accordingly by Romanian people. Nicolae
said there is no place for anti-Americanism in Romanian policy, but
the “increasing presentation of realities in capitalist countries is because
of increasing presentation of Romanian realities in Western press.”
6. Nicolae said it was important to look to the future course of
relations between Romania and US. In this connection, it was important
to arrange a meeting in the near future between Presidents Carter and
Ceausescu, so they could discuss issues directly. Ceausescu is very
interested in meeting Carter, preferably in Romania, where he could
get some first-hand impressions. Counselor replied that first months
of new administration are difficult time to arrange such travel, but
perhaps it could be discussed at an appropriate time. Under present
circumstances, in view of events such as arrest of a Baptist pastor and
professor who had studied in US, it would be impossible to propose
such a visit. Counselor and Armitage both pointed out that our intent
in this meeting was to be sure that President Carter’s views on human
rights were clearly understood and to underline that it was important
for our relations that handling of cases of those arrested for defense
of Helsinki obligations be restrained. Otherwise, public confrontation
might ensue. We asked that Nicolae convey this message to President
Ceausescu with whom US leaders had enjoyed such good relations.
Christopher
180.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Romanian Trade: Presidential Waiver
The Trade Act of 1974, as amended by the Jackson-Vanik provision,
requires a Presidential waiver to extend Most Favored Nation (MFN)
treatment and government sponsored credits to any “socialist” country.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Country Chron File, Box 45, Romania: 1977. No classification marking. Sent
for action. Hyland forwarded it under a covering memorandum to Brzezinski on May
26. Printed from a copy that does not bear Brzezinski’s initials.
