Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I (b) Aid. You pledged the US to a large increase in aid8 and commissioned internal and external studies9 as to how it might best be achieved. (c) Commodities. The US settled on a sensible commodity stabilization policy which, if agreed to by others, should reduce price fluctuations that are equally harmful to developed and developing countries. 6. Public Confidence. You have restored a measure of public confidence in US foreign policy by aligning it in greater degree with traditional American values. I am sceptical that your human rights policy will do much to change dictatorships around the world and that US African policy will avert continuing turmoil in Southern Africa; but I’m also sceptical that either of these policies does any harm, and both policies do considerable good at home—in re-establishing the connection between US foreign policy and US public opinion that was fractured by the seeming opportunism of the last Administration. 7. The Rest. Compared to these accomplishments, the matters on which the media tend to focus seem trivial: —Doubtless Giscard and Schmidt have moments of irritation with your ideas. This hasn’t prevented the important accomplishments noted above; indeed, it may well be the price of these accomplishments. And it seems to be tapering down, if not a thing of the past, to judge from Schmidt’s last visit. —Brezhnev is annoyed by your human rights campaign. But nothing in the past record of Soviet policy suggests that this will prevent him or his successors from entering into any agreements with us that they conceive to be in the Soviet interest—any more than a US retreat from human rights would cause him to offer us substantive concessions. He is probably also put out because you have made clear that progress in the US-Soviet relations depends on concrete agreements; but this was an overdue change in past US policy. 8. Conclusion. The success or failure of foreign policy isn’t determined by whether heads of government do or don’t say nice things about us. It’s determined by whether we’re successful in building the world order to which you pledged yourself in the campaign. This means looking for areas of common interest, particularly with the industrial democracies—but also with developing and Communist coun-
