248
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
(b) Aid. You pledged the US to a large increase in aid8 and commis-
sioned internal and external studies9 as to how it might best be
achieved.
(c) Commodities. The US settled on a sensible commodity stabiliza-
tion policy which, if agreed to by others, should reduce price fluctua-
tions that are equally harmful to developed and developing countries.
6. Public Confidence. You have restored a measure of public confi-
dence in US foreign policy by aligning it in greater degree with tradi-
tional American values. I am sceptical that your human rights policy
will do much to change dictatorships around the world and that US Af-
rican policy will avert continuing turmoil in Southern Africa; but I’m
also sceptical that either of these policies does any harm, and both pol-
icies do considerable good at home—in re-establishing the connection
between US foreign policy and US public opinion that was fractured by
the seeming opportunism of the last Administration.
7. The Rest. Compared to these accomplishments, the matters on
which the media tend to focus seem trivial:
—Doubtless Giscard and Schmidt have moments of irritation with
your ideas. This hasn’t prevented the important accomplishments
noted above; indeed, it may well be the price of these accomplishments.
And it seems to be tapering down, if not a thing of the past, to judge
from Schmidt’s last visit.
—Brezhnev is annoyed by your human rights campaign. But
nothing in the past record of Soviet policy suggests that this will pre-
vent him or his successors from entering into any agreements with us
that they conceive to be in the Soviet interest—any more than a US re-
treat from human rights would cause him to offer us substantive con-
cessions. He is probably also put out because you have made clear that
progress in the US-Soviet relations depends on concrete agreements;
but this was an overdue change in past US policy.
8. Conclusion. The success or failure of foreign policy isn’t deter-
mined by whether heads of government do or don’t say nice things
about us. It’s determined by whether we’re successful in building the
world order to which you pledged yourself in the campaign. This
means looking for areas of common interest, particularly with the in-
dustrial democracies—but also with developing and Communist coun-
8 At the CIEC meeting in Paris May 30–June 3, Vance announced that the adminis-
tration planned to seek an increase in bilateral and multilateral aid over the next 5 years;
see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. III, Foreign Economic Policy, Document 265.
9 Presumable reference to the DCC development assistance review and a Brook-
ings Institution study entitled An Assessment of Development Assistance Strategy. For sum-
maries of each study, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. III, Foreign Economic Policy,
Document 282.
