428
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Gombos, publisher of the largest American-Hungarian newspaper,
have told us they favor return. As part of this trend, US media reporting
last fall of the 20th anniversary of the Hungarian revolution reflected
a general recognition of the achievements of the Kadar regime and of
its relative acceptance by the Hungarian people.
Recently, movement to return the Crown has begun to emerge in
Congress, backed by Vanik (whose Cleveland suburban district
includes many Hungarian-Americans), Frenzel (R, Minn.), Frank
Thompson (D, N.J.) and Bingham (D–L, N.Y.). At a dinner we attended
last month at the Hungarian Ambassador’s, Vanik, Frenzel and Thomp-
son announced to all present that they were willing to gather supporters
on the Hill for a resolution urging the President to return the Crown.
Following the dinner, Vanik wrote to the Secretary and Frenzel to the
President (letters at Tab C).7 Jack Armitage talked to Bill Frenzel this
week and learned that Derwinski recently told him he would not have
a real problem with a return; Horton, however, was true to form in
stressing his opposition. Horton asserts that return of the Crown would
be contrary to President Carter’s position on human rights, a charge,
as indicated above, we think could be rebutted.
How it Should be Done
So as not to stir up opposition, return of the Crown should be
effected by a clean stroke and with no pre-event publicity, if possible,
though we will want to consult with a few key members of Congress.
You will find Clayton Mudd’s letter (attached at Tab D8) worth reading
with regard to modalities.
Following receipt of a green light from the White House, we would
have to proceed quietly and on a very closely-held basis to begin the
preparatory process which ultimately would lead to the Crown’s
return. For example, we will need to develop a logistical plan, which
involves numerous complex questions (e.g., how to move these fragile
and priceless objects, and how to pay for the move). Also, under any
circumstances, EE officers should soon inspect the condition of the
Crown and regalia and their containers, a precaution which has regu-
larly and discreetly been taken as part of our custodial obligations, but
which we have not done since December 1973.
7 Representative Bill Frenzel wrote Carter on February 22 urging return of the
Crown to Hungary “without strings and without bargaining.” (National Archives, RG
59, Bureau of European Affairs, Office of Eastern Europe and Yugoslavia, Hungarian
Holy Crown—Crown Follow Up 1979 and Prior Years 1945–1980, Lot 85D389, Box 7,
The Crown of St. Stephen)
8 Not attached.
