1110 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Government stood by the 1990 joint summit statement. Second, the summit had just been announced and the agenda was still under development. If the Soviet side wished to raise questions about follow-on negotiations in Moscow, it should indicate that fact through diplomatic channels as part of the preparations for the overall meeting. Naturally, the United States would be prepared to discuss the subject. Third, given the workload on the delegations in Geneva, the U.S. Government did not propose there be any discussion of follow-on negotiations in Geneva before the summit. 5. Nazarkin asked for confirmation that there would be no discussion of follow-on negotiations in Geneva before the summit. Brooks said Nazarkin was correct. Brooks asked that his information be passed on to Moscow. Nazarkin said he would do so. 6. Brooks proposed discontinuing the use of pages with asterisks to represent agreement on only part of a package. Brooks noted that the foreign ministers had agreed that nothing was agreed until everything was agreed, and that maintaining two sets of pages was a burden on translators and typists. Nazarkin said he agreed, but would give final approval after discussion with his delegation. 7. Brooks proposed a final plenary on Friday, July 26, to exchange the various statements now being developed. Brooks stressed that this would be a “no surprises” event. Nazarkin agreed. 8. Brooks said that one subject on which the U.S. side would wish to make a statement at the final plenary was the SS–N–23 SLBM. Brooks reviewed for Nazarkin the history of negotiations concerning this SLBM, which the U.S. side believed was a Type 1(A) missile under the throw-weight protocol, but which the Soviet side claimed was a type 1(B) missile. Brooks said the U.S. side had accepted the Soviet throw-weight calculations based on the SS–N–23 being treated as a 1(B) missile, but wished to make a statement to preserve its rights to raise issues in the joint compliance and inspection commission over the throw-weight of future, similarly designed, ICBMs or SLBMs. Brooks then handed over a copy of the draft U.S. statement.2 Nazarkin said he would discuss the subject with his experts. 9. Nazarkin asked when the two sides would sign the various letters which were to accompany the START treaty. Brooks said his preference would be to do so before leaving for Moscow, probably at the same time the treaty was initialed, but that it might be necessary to sign them in Moscow. 10. Brooks noted that there was agreement between the sides on a numbering scheme for annexes to the inspection protocol and to the memorandum of understanding. This numbering scheme would speed production of the final treaty by allowing the printing of individual annexes. 2 Not found.
