Panama  947
General Persons asked the President whether the various items 
should be given to the Budget Bureau for consideration. General 
Goodpaster asked whether steps should be taken with the Congress 
to permit the company to amortize the original construction costs. The 
President gave an affirmative answer to General Persons but recog-
nized that there were problems with the Congress and with the ship-
ping interests on the second point. The President pointed out that, with 
respect to any long range decision on a sea level canal, it should not be 
built in Panama if that country is uncooperative.
Secretary Brucker alluded to the subject of rates charged transiting 
ships and said that a very careful review would have to be made before 
attempting to obtain approval of an increase.
Assistant Secretary Roderick said that a study was now being made, 
looking toward legislative action, to enable the company to pay the 
government of Panama out of its own funds the $1.5 million increased 
annuity, resulting from the 1955 Treaty, since the authorizing legisla-
tion flowing from that treaty had required that the State Department 
seek an annual appropriation to make this increased annuity, although 
the original $430,000 annuity is still paid out of company earnings. The 
company is also considering steps enabling it to add $20 million to the 
financial base of the company, this being the cost of the bridge now 
under construction, in order that this might be chargeable against earn-
ings, at least insofar as interest, which is now being charged on the base 
annually, is concerned.
PM–37.	
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for 
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Secretary of 
State1

Washington, March 29, 1960.
SUBJECT
PANAMA - Policy Recommendations for Discussion with Secretary of the Army 
Brucker.
You attended a meeting at the White House on March 21, together 
with Mr. Merchant and me, on the subject of short-range policy 
1 Source: Department of State, ARA/OAP Files, Lot 63 D 127, “Panama 1960.” Secret. 
Drafted by Sharp between March 25 and March 28. The source text is an uninitialled carbon 
copy.
