494 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX tians want. Mubarak explained that the Egyptians want a redraft of what they call the American letter, or the Israeli letter, and some slight changes in Article VI, paragraphs 2 and 5. Weizman told the Egyptians that he was not in a position to negotiate, but that he could report to the Cabinet on what was agreed and on what were the differences. He asked the Egyptians to put their positions in writing, and they said they would do so. Weizman feels that there are important differences, but they should not be exaggerated or distorted. Weizman said that he had the strong impression that the Egyptians do not want to break off the talks. Mubarak said that he would even [be] prepared to come back to Washington, if necessary. He was reluctant, however, to accept the idea of meeting with Prime Minister Begin or other Israeli leaders in Jerusalem. In brief, Weizman believes that there will be no break in the talks; Article VI is a problem; and the West Bank and Gaza issue remains to be solved. On the West Bank and Gaza problem, they want a time period that is somewhat less than the end of 1979. They did not raise the question of substages of withdrawal in Sinai. In private, Mubarak told Weizman that Egypt will not go to war again. Weizman said that he believed that, but it was not so easy to convince his government. The Secretary said that he agreed that the Egyptians want to continue the talks. He asked Weizman what issues he would take back to the Cabinet. Weizman said that he would have to raise the question of the letter, but that he would not reopen the question of the preamble. He would also report that the Egyptians want to change Article VI, paragraph 5. He also understands from the Egyptians that if the West Bank does not go as expected, the Egyptians are prepared to proceed with Gaza alone. Secretary Vance asked if the Egyptians would give them a written statement on Article VI and on the joint letter. Weizman confirmed that they would. He also expressed some question concerning Mubarak’s basic message to him. He did not seem sure what the Egyptian position was. The Secretary asked Weizman when he would return. The Minister said he would wait until Sunday.3 The Secretary said that he hoped that it would be clear that Weizman was only returning on a temporary basis for the Cabinet meeting and that he would be coming back to Washington. Weizman said that he would be seeing Mubarak again at three-thirty. Ambassador Dinitz explained that this would not be for the purpose of negotiations, but rather to get an idea of [what] the Egyptians really want. Weizman said that Mubarak had made it clear that he does not want Gaza as a part of Egypt, but that he does have to face the Arab world. Therefore, he wants a specific date and an Egyptian police presence in Gaza. Weizman said that 3 November 19.
