Afghanistan With the exception of one or possibly two groups that have a small guerrilla capability, the exile organizations do not command forces that have been active in the Afghan insurgency. One organization, the Islamic Party operates a clandestine radio in the Pak-Afghan border area that has probably made some impact in whipping up sentiment against the “godless” Kabul regime. Some exile religious leaders, moreover, are reported to cross the border into Afghanistan occasionally to buoy the morale of insurgent tribes responsive to their religious leadership. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) The exile groups are likely to continue their infighting and probably will have no more than a marginal effect on the course of the insurgency unless Pakistan takes the lead in trying to unite or at minimum increase the coordination among the diverse groups. Without the assistance of Pakistan, moreover, the establishment of an exile command and control structure that could coordinate insurgent military action on a national scale would be beyond the capability of the Afghan exiles. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) The exile groups could become a more effective conduit for channeling arms, food and funds to insurgent groups if Pakistan took charge of overseeing logistical arrangements. The Saudis have withheld more substantial financial aid to the exile groups—their payments probably total no more than $5 million—because they regard their disorganized, and uncoordinated efforts as ineffectual in supporting the insurgency. Some of the Saudi money reportedly has lined the pockets of some exile leaders. If the Saudis suspect that their funds are being misused— and they probably do—this would inhibit them from making further contributions to support the insurgency. They might be encouraged to reopen their coffers if Pakistan took responsibility for overseeing the expenditure of funds by the exile groups. A key factor in any Saudi decision would be their perception of US intentions regarding possible support of the insurgents. The exile groups are the source of numerous misleading if not false stories that have appeared in the press on various aspects of the insurgency. Some of these stories allege the exiles exert command and control over guerrilla groups operating in Afghanistan. Other accounts have made exaggerated claims of rebel “victories” and, since Soviet intervention, of Soviet offensives against rebel strongholds.3 ([classification marking not declassified]) There are scores of exile groups based in Pakistan that have political and religious roots in Afghanistan of varying significance. The four
