Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1051
Minister of Finance Hector Hurtado Navarro
Minister of Information and Tourism Diego Arria
Permanent Representative to the United Nations Simon Alberto Consalvi Bottaro
Ambassador to the United States Ignacio Iribarren Borges
Ambassador to the OAS Jose Maria Machin
President Carter opened the conversation by saying that since the
United States and Venezuela shared so many goals and values, he was
looking forward to seeking President Perez’s advice on the many bilat-
eral and multilateral issues of concern to the two governments.
President Carlos Andres Perez thanked President Carter for his
generosity and said that “what you attribute to me is precisely what
you are.” He said that because he identified fully with many of Presi-
dent Carter’s policies, he felt that coordination of policies would be
easy. President Perez said that he would not only try to relate the Vene-
zuelan view of issues, but also the views of Latin America and the en-
tire developing world.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to nuclear non-proliferation.]
On the issue of nuclear energy, President Perez said that he
thought that a Latin American organization like OLADE (a Latin Amer-
ican Energy Organization set up by a Venezuelan initiative) or
OPANAL (responsible for implementing the Tlatelolco Treaty) would be
one way of approaching the problem of developing nuclear energy, and he
suggested SELA2 as a possible channel or perhaps as an organization
that could manage a reprocessing plant. On reprocessing, he said that
Brazil was basically using the need for a reprocessing plant as an ex-
cuse to obtain a nuclear weapons’ capability, which it wanted for rea-
sons of status.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to nuclear non-proliferation.]
President Carter reiterated his strong opposition to the creation of nu-
clear explosives capabilities in the Hemisphere, and said that Mrs. Carter
had made this point with many leaders, but particularly with Brazilian
President Geisel.3 In addition, we continue to put maximum pressure
on Germany and Brazil to try to get their agreement modified. Our gen-
eral policy will remain that we will continue to provide nuclear fuel for
these countries which do not have reprocessing capabilities.
The President said that Geisel had claimed his intentions were
peaceful, but Mrs. Carter had warned that his successors may not be so
peaceful. Speculating on Brazil’s motives, the President thought that
2 The Sistema Econo´mico Latinoamericano y del Caribe or Economic System of
Latin America and the Caribbean, a regional organization dedicated to promoting eco-
nomic cooperation and social development.
3 See Document 415.
