3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
860
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
problems the Soviets were already suffering from the small grain har-
vest in 1979. Instead of importing the 36 to 37 million metric tons
(MMT) of grain the Soviets had planned in 1979/80, they were able to
buy only an estimated 31.2 MMT. Moreover, the Soviets paid a consid-
erably higher price for the non-U.S. grain and may well have gotten
lower quality grain. We have heard reports that the switch in origin of
certain imported grain caused shortages and problems in formulating
animal rations, particularly for poultry.
3. Based on published statistics, it appears that the Soviets have
been able to maintain cattle and poultry numbers in spite of the em-
bargo, but they have been forced to reduce hog numbers due to limited
feed supplies. The rate of build-up in Soviet animal numbers has also
definitely been slowed, affecting future production potential.
4. It now seems clear that the crop failure in 1979, combined with
the embargo has resulted in a serious setback to Brezhnev’s plans to im-
prove the availability of meat and other animal products to Soviet con-
sumers. Not only will meat production fall in the short-term, but we
think the Soviets will have no chance of meeting planned production
goals for sometime into the future. In effect, this means that per capita
meat consumption, already at a low 57 kilograms (Poland is close to 82
kg), will not likely increase for sometime to come. Also during 1979/80,
the Soviets were forced to draw down their strategic grain reserves to a
level where we think it is causing considerable concern. Based on cur-
rent crop prospects, plus estimated grain import availabilities in 1980/
81, we see little, if any, chance of rebuilding these reserves without a
further cut in meat production in 1981.
5. Recently there have been many reports about food shortages in
the Soviet Union, mainly meat and dairy products. We believe such
shortages are in part related to the U.S. embargo on grains sales. Al-
though there are reports suggesting that current shortages are due to
the Soviets stockpiling meat for the Olympics, Soviet published sta-
tistics show that meat production has been declining steadily since the
first of the year. Cattle and hog slaughter weights are declining due to
the tight feed situation. Partly as a result, total meat output in May was
5.5 percent below the same month a year ago. We feel official statistics
will show that meat output in June will be as much as 8 percent below a
year earlier. State procurements of meat have been running at an even
lower level than production.
6. There is no question that the availability of dairy products is also
less, with the embargo aggravating an already bad situation. Milk pro-
duction in the Soviet Union has been trending downward for the past
three years, mainly as a result of the difficult feed situation. Milk
output so far this year has been running 5 percent under a year ago, and
government procurements 6 percent under. The butter shortage is
