The British Public Trustee is a corporation sole. It is at the same time an arm of the British Government to the same extent and in the same manner that the Alien Property Custodian is a governmental agency. The arrangement, therefore, between the Public Trustee (and later the Comptroller of the Clearing House) on the one hand, and the Alien Property Custodian, on the other hand, was an arrangement between official agencies of the two Governments and had the sanction of the two Governments, as is shown by the fact that the principal correspondence was conducted between the Department of State and the British Embassy. In view of these facts and the further fact that the arrangement was carried out in good faith on both sides, it would seem that it should now be observed. The court action is in effect a suit by the British Government against the Government of the United States. The Public Trustee states as a reason for the suit that at the time he entered into the arrangement with the Alien Property Custodian he had been misled by a mistaken interpretation by the Custodian of American law, and that relying upon such interpretation he delivered the securities to the Alien Property Custodian. The authorities of the United States do not admit that the arrangement was effected as a result of any alleged mistaken interpretation of the law, or that a mere mistake, if there was one, on the part of the Public Trustee as to his rights under the law is sufficient, in the absence of some element of fraud, to entitle him to repudiate an arrangement which was reciprocal in character and which has been fully executed. Generally speaking, the Government of the United States favors appeal to the courts for the settlement of justiciable questions, but it feels that the facts in this case hardly warrant the action which has been taken. There is, apparently, no allegation that the Alien Property Custodian took advantage of the Public Trustee. No fiduciary relationship existed. They were endeavoring to settle conflicting interests according to legal principles and on an equal footing, and neither should now be heard to complain that he failed to inform himself of his rights under the law. It is suggested that the British Government may desire to consider whether, under the circumstances, the Public Trustee should be instructed to
