disastrous to the latter’s prosperity. In regard to this quite natural fear, it may be said
that the Customs Attachés stationed abroad are men of long service and proved
reliability in the United States Customs Service. Their reports are strictly confidential
and are never accessible to any American or foreign individual or firm, nor are they
even available to other departments of the United States Government or to bureaus of
the United States Treasury Department other than the Customs Division thereof. Under
article 1323 of the Customs Regulations of 1923 the divulgence of information of this
character subjects the guilty party to dismissal or criminal prosecution or both. The
record of the United States Customs Service for preserving the confidentiality of data
given to it in confidence has been excellent and it may be safely assumed that cases of
the betrayal of such confidence, should any such case unfortunately occur, will be
punished with the utmost severity.
In making investigations into the cost of production abroad, where such investigations
have been permitted by the government concerned, the Customs Attachés have been
given specific written instructions, a copy of which is transmitted herewith.38 It will be
observed that these instructions make it possible for the Customs Attachés’ reports to
contain the data necessary for valuation purposes without disclosing all the individual
items which go to make up such cost. Thus, it is contemplated that only the Customs
Attaché himself will have information as to labor cost, finishing cost, etc., which the
manufacturer may be hesitant to divulge.
It has been alleged in certain foreign countries that the Customs Attachés, in requesting
data from foreign shippers, have threatened the exclusion of their goods from the
United States unless such data were furnished. In this connection it may be pointed out
that Customs Attachés are under strict instructions to make no such threats. They are
authorized, however, to explain the provisions of Section 510 of the United States
Tariff Act, in order that the foreign shippers may understand the possible result of their
refusal or the inability of the customs appraiser to obtain a legal basis for the
appraisement of the merchandise.
It is pertinent to call attention to the fact that the methods of valuation established by
the Tariff Act of 1922,—including the provision for the cost of production—were
arrived at after the most careful study by the Congress of the United States as
alternatives to the “American Valuation” of goods for customs purposes. As has been
explained above, the United States Treasury must enforce the existing tariff law, and as
a practical matter, it does not appear probable that an amendment of Section 510 of that
law will be seriously considered in the near future. Consequently, it should be made
clear to foreign officials, who question the propriety of investigations abroad by United
States Customs Attachés, that a failure on their part to cooperate with these Attachés in
their duties under the Tariff Act will in some cases operate to preclude shipments to the
United States.
