January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1259
379.
Memorandum From Edward S. Walker in the Office of the
President’s Special Representative, Department of State, to
the President’s Special Representative for Middle East Peace
Negotiations (Linowitz)1
Washington, June 3, 1980
SUBJECT
THE CURRENT SITUATION
The situation in the West Bank and Gaza, in the Arab world gener-
ally and in terms of the negotiations is deteriorating.
Begin’s first act as Defense Minister2 was to suspend publication of
two out of three West Bank Arab newspapers. (His action was, strictly
speaking, justified since the newspapers had evaded the censor by
placing editorial comment in news stories.) The Israeli authorities also
apparently suspended Arab women’s organizations after an attempted
sit-in organized by one such group in three homes which were sealed
by Israeli authorities in Nablus (the comparison of Government action
in this case to its lack of action against Israeli women sitting-in at the
Hadassah building is vivid in West Banker’s thoughts and in those of
many Israelis, some of whom reportedly had come to Nablus in a show
of solidarity with the Palestinian women). Attempts by shopkeepers
to close their businesses in reaction to the bombings3 of West Bank
mayors were forceably broken up by the IDF and two or three Arab
youths were wounded by IDF fire during a scuffle at one Arab town.
Several more schools have been closed just as students were preparing
for critical examinations and, as Mayor Freij told Brandon Grove, since
Weizman left there is no address in the Military Government to which
the Arabs can turn. As you know, Mayor Shawa of Gaza has resigned4
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-
ject File, Box 5, Autonomy Talks: 6/80. Secret; Nodis. Printed from a copy that does not
bear Walker’s initials.
2 Begin assumed the office of Minister of Defense following the resignation of
Weizman on May 25.
3 On June 2, Mayor Shaka of Nablus and Mayor Khalaf of Ramallah were wounded
in separate bomb attacks on their automobiles. (Telegram 1768 from Jerusalem, June 2;
National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800269–0981) On June 7, the
United States decided to offer medical assistance in the form of a military medical team
and transfer to a U.S. medical facility to Shaka, who was in a hospital in Amman, and to
Khalaf, who was hospitalized in Nablus. (Memorandum from Brzezinski to Brown, June
7; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 37, Is-
rael: 6/1–19/80)
4 Shawa resigned on June 2, shortly after the bomb attacks in Nablus and Ramallah.
(Telegram 10084 from Tel Aviv, June 2; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D800270–0060)
