1478  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
The Chinese Communists have announced that they are unwill­
ing to continue the talks except at the ambassadorial level. The United 
States is not prepared at this time to designate an ambassador for this 
purpose. However, it should be emphasized that the United States is not 
breaking off the talks. Mr. Martin will meet with a Chinese Communist 
representative at any mutually agreeable time.
The ambassadorial level talks at Geneva convened an August 1, 
1955, with the mission of settling, first, the question of the return of 
civilians desiring to do so. What seemed to be a satisfactory solution 
was reached on September 10, 1955, when the Chinese Communists 
publicly announced that they would take appropriate measures to 
permit Americans desiring to do so to return “expeditiously” to the 
United States. Now, nearly two and a half years later, six Americans 
are still held by the Chinese Communists. The next question the two 
Ambassadors took up was the matter of a mutual renunciation of force. 
The Chinese Communists, while stating that they accept the principle 
of the renunciation of force, refused to agree that it is without preju­
dice to the right of individual and collective self defense and that it is 
applicable to the Taiwan area. For the past year and a half, the Chinese 
Communists have refused even to enter into a substantive discussion 
looking toward a meaningful declaration of the renunciation of force. 
The American Ambassador has also repeatedly attempted to obtain 
from the Chinese Communist representative an accounting for the 
United States military personnel missing and unaccounted for from the 
Korean hostilities, as well as any other American personnel missing in 
or near Chinese Communist territory of whom the Communists have 
any knowledge. The Chinese Communist representative has not only 
refused to provide such an accounting, but has rejected this matter as a 
subject for discussion in these talks, insisting merely that his authorities 
are not now holding any American military personnel.
