Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  425
115) from the START totals if the U.S. accepted the rest of the Soviet 
position on ALCMs. Although we clearly were not ready to make that 
deal, we probably could pocket this Soviet concession at a low price. 
At the same time, there is a growing question about how much such a 
right will be worth: budget pressures are steadily dimming the pros-
pects that we can retain anything like 100 dedicated conventional B-52s 
in the active force, but a treaty provision would permit us to mothball 
rather than destroy them.
A Possible Approach
The following outlines some tentative bottom lines on ALCM 
issues which, taken together, describe the boundaries within which 
Baker could be authorized to make the best package deal he can.
On counting rules, agree to a differential attribution approach that 
would count B–52s at 10 ALCMs, B–1s and Blackjacks at 12 ALCMs, and 
Bear–Hs at 6 ALCMs. Such an approach would have the same impact 
on planned U.S. forces as our current position, but would not penalize 
the Soviets as much. Additionally, agree to a ban on “MIRVed” ALCMs. 
If needed to conclude an agreement, agree to a politically binding max-
imum loading of 20 ALCMs per bomber.
If there is a need to protect the option of deploying substantially 
more than 130 penetrating bombers, push to count B–52s (and probably 
B–1s at 8 ALCMs), recognizing that the Soviets probably will insist on 
major concessions on other issues.
If we are unlikely to expand our ALCM force much beyond the cur-
rently planned levels and we can get important Soviet concessions on 
other START issues, agree to count B–52s as well as B–1s and Blackjacks 
at 12 ALCMs.
On distinguishability/range threshold, press for Soviet acceptance 
of the current U.S. position (“distinguishable by NTM”). Agree to a 
range threshold of 1000 km in exchange. If necessary, accept an 800 km 
range threshold. Alternatively, agree to carefully circumscribed OSI of 
non-ALCM carrier bomber bases or of conventional ALCMs (to “con-
firm” the absence of nuclear ALCMs) in combination with a 1000 km 
range threshold.
On conventional bombers, press for Soviet agreement to exclude 100 
dedicated conventional bombers from START limits, but do not make 
major concessions on other issues to achieve that agreement.
Tradeoffs with other START Issues
Absent major (and probably undesirable) U.S. concessions on 
ALCMs, Soviet willingness to make major concessions on other START 
issues is problematical. There is no strong connection between ALCMs 
and either non-­deployed missiles or telemetry encryption (the other two
