Chapter 2, January–June 1989  243
is gained by denying the Soviets knowledge of which specific shelter 
among the large number of vertical shelters contains a missile.
We have provided no details to the Soviets and no treaty text. There 
is as yet no agreed verification approach for such ICBMs.
There is no program within the Department of Defense to develop 
such ICBMs. Some believe that, now that the President has made an 
ICBM modernization decision, the United States no longer needs to 
protect the option of deploying movable ICBMs, and that we should 
cease attempts to include provisions protecting such an option in 
START. We would not want to allow the Soviets this option if it would 
not be exercised by the United States.
Others believe that, until it is clear what the Congress will do, we 
can not rule out the prospects that we will need to find an alternate 
solution to both Peacekeeper and small ICBM deployment in order to 
ensure ICBM survivability. Further, they note that the President’s deci-
sion results in only part of the ICBM force being survivable, and that 
we may wish to increase the survivability of the remainder of the force 
in future years.
Option 1.  Drop further consideration of movable ICBMs in START. 
(favored by JCS, and Ambassador Rowny)
Option 2.  Continue to insist that a future START Treaty include provi-
sions allowing movable ICBMs; defer detailed discussions 
with the Soviets; develop detailed verification scheme for 
such ICBMs. (OSD, ACDA, State, pending Congressional 
reaction to the ICBM modernization package)
NSC staff note that movable ICBM concepts have been studied 
and rejected by several Administrations for reasons apart from arms 
control, and there is no evidence that such options will become more 
attractive in the future. Moreover, the vertical shelter concept that has 
been discussed recently is far less verifiable than mobile ICBMs because 
the shelters can be converted to hardened silo launchers rapidly and 
loaded with nondeployed missiles. Finally, in the unlikely event that 
the U.S. will want to deploy a transportable ICBM in the future, there 
is no reason why it cannot be accommodated within our definitions of 
fixed and mobile ICBMs. We do not need to add the complication of a 
third category of “movable” ICBMs to our position.
NSC Staff Recommendation
That you approve Option 1.11
11 Scowcroft initialed his approval.
