Human Rights —The interest rates on CCC credits are set at commercial levels and must be above the cost of money to the Treasury. The repayment period can be as long as three years. The CCC program is designed to meet the competition of the government entities which control trade in other major exporting countries and to maintain and expand American agricultural exports in the face of their competition. —In times of short supply CCC credits may be particularly beneficial to a potential importer. In such circumstances decisions regarding extending credit have occasionally included political considerations. Given the present situation of an abundant American and world food supply, however, we can gain no political leverage with CCC credits. If we withhold them, a potential importer will merely turn to one of our competitors. —We now have large agricultural surpluses in this country. If our human rights efforts were seen to be interfering with export efforts, it would be likely to cause a domestic political confrontation between advocates of human rights and agricultural interests to the detriment of the Administration’s overall political position. Con —CCC credits are provided by a United States Government corporation, established by action of the United States Congress. They are an official international activity of the United States Government. Human rights is a central goal of American foreign policy and, therefore, must be taken into consideration in CCC decisions. —CCC credits are at least partly concessional in nature and are viewed by other governments and by their publics as an element of American assistance, denoting a favorable political attitude. —The timing, amount and nature of any extension of credit is a foreign policy act. We should at least consider therefore, whether on balance it serves our interests, including our human rights interests. 2. That the Department adopt the position that all extension of CCC credits will be reviewed through the working group and the Interagency Committee for their influence on human rights. Pro (Con argument for Option 1 and the following) —This option permits the Interagency Committee to view all aspects of government-related economic relationships and human rights policy. —Human rights is the only aspect not reviewed by the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Policies.
