902 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI be enhanced by adding strategic defenses, which threatened no one. Moreover, the U.S. side aspired to an orderly, cooperative [garble] and wanted to discuss with the Soviet side the specific ways of implementing it. 17. Smith said Soviet proposals constituted an echo from the past—­a Gregorian chant—­the ABM treaty, as signed in 1972, was the cornerstone of stability for all time. Smith said he doubted whether this document, born in the strategic thought of the 1960s, could be immutable in the changing strategic environment. Even such paradigms of political forethought as the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Virginia and the U.S. Constitution had undergone amendments. The only document that had survived the ages without change was the Bible. 18. Smith said that, with regard to possible amendments of the ABM treaty, the Soviet side had never gone beyond vague hints. Curiously, Kuznetsov had failed to note that the U.S. draft DST treaty was on the negotiating table. The U.S. side was still interested in negotiating the measures contained in it. Considering the lack of a positive response from the Soviet side to numerous U.S. proposals advanced over the last two years, the sides had not been able to move forward even on peripheral issues. 19. As for Kuznetsov’s reaction to the U.S. accusation of Soviet secrecy in the ABM area, Smith said he thought this showed that U.S. statements had hit a raw nerve. Secrecy was the only explanation the U.S. side could find for Soviet intransigence. 20. Regarding Kuznetsov’s reference to the need to turn attention to ASAT and space-­to-­earth arms, Smith said this was new. Previously, the Soviet side had stated that these issues ought to be for the future talks. The U.S. had concluded that a comprehensive ASAT agreement would not be in its interest. It had considered a number of possible arms control regimes for ASAT, and not yet found one that would increase U.S. security. As for space-­to-­earth weapons, Smith said he had never known what those were. Each time he asked the Soviet side about them, he received vague statements about forest fires. 21. In conclusion, Smith said Kuznetsov’s statement was comprehensive but negative. What was its purpose? Detinov responded that the objective was, first, to refute U.S. accusations concerning the unwillingness of the Soviet side to achieve progress, and, second, to urge the U.S. side to take similar steps as the Soviet side had taken to fulfill the mandate for these talks. As for ASAT and space-­to-­earth arms, the 1985 mandate called for an agreement to prevent an arms race in space. The Soviet side had been saying these two issues ought to be considered at the current talks. Unlike the question of the ABM treaty, however, ASAT and space-­to-­earth arms issues had not been linked by the Soviet side to a START agreement. However, the Soviet side proceeded on the
