1460 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Attachment Memorandum of Conversation October 7, 1958 MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION WITH DR. BRADBURY The following points were developed in a conversation with Dr. Bradbury, with General Goodpaster and Mr. Harr present, Sunday morning, October 5: 1. Dr. Bradbury feels it is extremely important to continue experi­ mentation. As an example, he alludes to the current work in rocket pro­ pulsion (Rover). He believes that this process should continue although in the experimentation there could develop a situation in which a fis­ sion action could blow materials out of the nozzle which would appear to have been a nuclear explosion. 2. Dr. Bradbury thinks that it is important to continue high-­altitude activity primarily for scientific purposes. 3. Dr. Bradbury feels that it is very important to reserve explosions for peaceful uses. 4. It is Dr. Bradbury’s view that although it can be said in a tech­ nical sense that we are ahead of the Russians in weapons development this actually means nothing. His point is that although we seem to have developed weapons of high yield in smaller packages than the Rus­ sians, this is substantially meaningless if one makes certain assump­ tions about Russian war strategy and accepts the best information one has about delivery systems. Whether the Soviets have weapons of as high a yield as some we have tested is relatively unimportant because we know that they have weapons large enough now to destroy our largest cities. Incidentally, Dr. Bradbury feels that we have erred in insisting upon developing weapons of a precise size, and that there is a margin of error of from 10 to 15 to 20% in any case. 5. With respect to peaceful uses. Dr. Bradbury thinks that we could stand almost any kind of inspection although it would be a consider­ able nuisance. 6. Dr. Bradbury indicated that we now know that the British have little to learn from us and that we have little to learn from them. This is comforting, he feels, in the sense that their efforts have corroborated the correctness of ours, although disquieting from the point of view that it may be assumed that the Soviets have made equivalent progress. Gordon Gray
