January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1309 deteriorating position) or through incipient civil war involving Sunni troops. Even with an Alawite coup, the risks of civil strife would be high; and so would be the opportunities for Soviet exploitation of the situation. The Soviets are not likely to remain detached from Syrian internal strife. Should Syrian internal conflict become tangled with Lebanese and Arab-Israeli developments, the Soviets would welcome the chance to distract attention from Afghanistan and to assume a role toward Syria that gave them leverage over Syria’s internal affairs while appearing to protect against external threats. (S) A critical scenario could involve Syrian force withdrawals from Lebanon. The risks of a chain of events leading to renewed civil war in Lebanon would then be high—including high incentives for Israeli military engagement in southern Lebanon (and—in the extreme—in Syria itself). A less likely—but still plausible—scenario could entail coincidence between Assad’s collapse and Lebanon difficulties with paralysis in the autonomy talks occasioned by the (now virtually certain) passage of the Cohen bill3 on Jerusalem and the (highly likely) movement of Begin’s office to East Jerusalem. At that point, Israel would have even less to lose through involvement in Lebanon in support of Haddad, etc. (S) U.S. Efforts We concluded that there is little that the U.S. can do directly to affect events in Syria. We do not have the position there now to influence events either way; and any efforts (e.g. pumping up foreign aid) would be unlikely to matter in the context of Assad’s problems. (S) We also discarded efforts to deal with Iran, the UAE, and Kuwait on this issue. We noted, however, that if there is a Saunders mission to Iraq, that fact would be duly noted in Syria, and that could have an impact with Assad—whether or not Saunders discussed Syria in Baghdad (which would need to be considered further). (S) Our best approach, therefore, should be threefold: 1) gain more information; 2) share our concerns with appropriate others; and 3) at some point further increase sensitivities of interested parties to the potential problems of instability in Syria: —CIA should further refine the analysis in its alert memorandum; begin identifying possible alternatives to Assad; and give us a good analysis of the Soviet role now, Moscow’s interests and possible calculations (now and post-Assad); and the potential role of its direct involvement in Syria; 3 See Document 371.
