Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA 177 transmitters and that it is his present intention to raise the question directly with the President. 7. In addition to readying our positions on the Radios in anticipation of a possible discussion when Schmidt is in Washington, it occurs to me that it might be useful in defusing the situation if the President could communicate directly and informally with Schmidt about it before their meeting. If the President has occasion to telephone the Chancellor on other matters, a brief reference to the radio/transmitter problem and an expression of readiness to discuss the Chancellor’s concerns frankly could be helpful. Stoessel 52. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, undated SUBJECT Chancellor Schmidt’s Complaint About RFE/RL Expansion2 In the attached cable, Ambassador Stoessel reports that Chancellor Schmidt indicated he would raise the issue of Radio Free Europe/ Radio Liberty with you.3 Schmidt expressed irritation at not being consulted about the expansion of transmitter facilities near Munich (which you approved and sent to Congress in March) and more general unhappiness about having the radios broadcast from German soil but with no German control of content. The issue is an old one: 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of America: 1977. Secret. Printed from an uninitialed copy. A notation at the top of the first page indicates that this memorandum was retyped for Brzezinski on July 1. In a June 21 memorandum, Brzezinski asked Hyland to prepare a memorandum for Carter on Schmidt’s position on RFE/RL modernization as reported in telegram 10177 from Bonn, June 17. (Ibid.) 2 The Department of State prepared a memorandum on the subject, which it forwarded to the White House on June 29. (Memorandum from Tarnoff to Brzezinski, June 29; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 9, Board for International Broadcasting (RFE, RL, VOA): 2–12/77) 3 See Document 51.
