many of the foreign debts antedated the domestic debts and many domestic
loans had been made on security already pledged on foreign loans.
However, since it was clear that no distinction could be made between
domestic and foreign debts in any scheme designed completely to clear the
slate and re-establish the credit of the Chinese Government both at home
and abroad, which was one of the primary objects of the Debt Consolidation
plan, the Delegates proceeded on the basis that all debts which are actually
owed by the Central Government itself or which have been guaranteed by a
Ministry of the Central Government, or which have been officially
authorized or recognized by a Ministry or Bureau of the Central
Government, should be included in any scheme which had for its purpose
the complete rehabilitation of Chinese finance.
The British, Dutch, Belgian and Japanese Delegations evinced great interest
in the debt question, the first three particularly as regards the railways, and
the last named, as already stated, on the Nishihara loans. The other
Delegations showed only a passive concern, with the exception of the
French and Italian Delegations, who submitted concrete recommendations.
The British Delegation put forward views largely at variance with those of
the American and Japanese Delegations with respect to the allocation of
funds. The British plan, as already stated, contemplated that one-fourth of
the Customs collections on imports should be set aside as a special likin
abolition tax, not to form a part of the Customs revenues proper. After the
payment of the existing charges on the Customs revenue, the British plan
contemplated the disposition of the surplus by percentages: three-fourths to
be used for the service of the new consolidated bonds and one-fourth to be
used for constructive and administrative purposes. However, with regard to
the percentages to be used for constructive and administrative purposes,
there should be a first charge up to ten million dollars to be known as a
“railway contingent fund”. This fund was to be used, in so far as necessary,
to meet interest charges on Chinese Government railway bonds which
might be in default. Under this proposal the “likin abolition tax” and the
“railway contingent fund” would, in effect, become absolutely guaranteed
charges on the Customs revenue, whereas, the consolidated bonds would be
in a much weaker position, their service being limited to the amount that
three-fourths of the surplus, as above described, would provide. The
