1060 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 315. Issue Paper Prepared by the Task Force on International Health1 Washington, July 11, 1978 COORDINATION, ORGANIZATION, STAFFING I. Purpose. The U.S. must strengthen the means by which its several government agencies can relate and join their separate missions and activities in international health. It must do so in a way which supports and is supported by the activities of the U.S. private sector, other donor countries, and multilateral and voluntary organizations. This will require a government-wide policy on international health, interagency coordination at both policy and strategic levels, capacity for development and promotion of new initiatives, and improved intra-agency coordination. II. Policy. Although many distinct policies exist within and among individual agencies, the absence of a government policy on international health deters the achievement of a fuller humanitarian benefit to global health. In particular, if international health is to profit more from opportunities now available in various U.S. Government departments and agencies, explicit policy detailing the nature of the relation between international health and the various agency missions and activities must be established, understood and implemented by all. That policy must stress U.S. concern for basic health needs at the highest level of government policy-making and complement the President’s human rights policy, demonstrating real and effective concern for the health of people everywhere. It would serve as a model for changes in foreign policy decision making to better support economic and social development and efforts to improve international relations. It would seek to benefit from and improve domestic health activity. It would support and seek support from international economic and commercial policy. A clearly defined international health policy would also establish more direct guidance for U.S. relationships with multilateral agencies and international financial institutions. The policy must also recognize 1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Special Assistant for Health Issues—
