1060
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
315.
Issue Paper Prepared by the Task Force on International
Health1
Washington, July 11, 1978
COORDINATION, ORGANIZATION, STAFFING
I. Purpose. The U.S. must strengthen the means by which its several
government agencies can relate and join their separate missions and ac-
tivities in international health. It must do so in a way which supports
and is supported by the activities of the U.S. private sector, other donor
countries, and multilateral and voluntary organizations. This will re-
quire a government-wide policy on international health, interagency coor-
dination at both policy and strategic levels, capacity for development and
promotion of new initiatives, and improved intra-agency coordination.
II. Policy. Although many distinct policies exist within and among
individual agencies, the absence of a government policy on interna-
tional health deters the achievement of a fuller humanitarian benefit to
global health. In particular, if international health is to profit more from
opportunities now available in various U.S. Government departments
and agencies, explicit policy detailing the nature of the relation be-
tween international health and the various agency missions and activ-
ities must be established, understood and implemented by all. That
policy must stress U.S. concern for basic health needs at the highest
level of government policy-making and complement the President’s
human rights policy, demonstrating real and effective concern for the
health of people everywhere. It would serve as a model for changes in
foreign policy decision making to better support economic and social
development and efforts to improve international relations. It would
seek to benefit from and improve domestic health activity. It would
support and seek support from international economic and commercial
policy.
A clearly defined international health policy would also establish
more direct guidance for U.S. relationships with multilateral agencies
and international financial institutions. The policy must also recognize
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Special Assistant for Health Issues—
Peter Bourne Files, Subject Files, Box 35, International Health, 7/11/78–10/5/78. No clas-
sification marking. Bourne attached the issue paper, in addition to another issue paper
entitled “Legislation” and four draft reports prepared by the working groups: “Report of
Working Group II Science and Health Manpower Development,” “Report of Working
Group III Multilateral Agencies,” and “Report of Working Group IV International Health
Commerce,” to a July 11 memorandum to Benson, Califano’s Special Assistant Peter Bell,
Shakow, and Jayne, in preparation for a July 18 Consolidation Group meeting. (Ibid.) No
record of this meeting has been found.
