Arms Control and Disarmament  1639
457.	 Letter From Herter to McCone1
Washington, April 8, 1959
Dear John:
I appreciate your bringing to my attention the points in your letter 
of April 4, which are very important ones in our thinking about the next 
steps in the Geneva negotiations.
You ask the intent of the sentence in my letter to the President of 
March 28 which states “A limited program for underground testing, 
perhaps under international participation, might be undertaken as part 
of this effort to see whether the problem of detecting underground tests 
might be simplified.” This sentence was included in order to record 
the principle that, in event of an atmospheric test ban, there should 
be underground nuclear experiments in order to learn more about the 
detection problem. There was absolutely no intention to imply that we 
had agreed tests would be conducted for no other purpose. If there 
were to be a limited agreement for suspension of atmospheric tests, the 
United States would of course retain freedom of action to conduct any 
underground tests which we found necessary.
Your second point, which relates to the question of what constitutes an 
adequate policing system for a test suspension agreement, appears to reflect 
some misunderstanding of our view. Certainly we do not support what you 
refer to as the “principle of accepting a very inadequate monitoring sys­
tem”, nor do we believe that “deterrence” is different from “adequate polic­
ing.” Any acceptable agreement must provide for an adequate and effective 
monitoring and inspection system. In devising an “adequate” monitoring 
system, however, we believe that we cannot aim for an unachievable 100% 
fool-­proof system but rather for an effective system which will deter any 
other nation from attempting violation by the knowledge that there is a 
high probability that the system would detect any effort to violate.
Having learned of your concern on this point, I took the occasion 
of my call on the President on the morning of April 6 to tell him about 
it. You will be reassured to know that he too considers an adequate and 
effective monitoring system to be one which has a high enough probabil­
ity of detecting any attempted violation that it deters a potential violator.
With warmest personal regards,
Most sincerely,
Chris
Acting Secretary
1 Source: Response to McCone letter: U.S. would retain right to conduct under­
ground tests, detection systems. Secret. 4 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office 
Files, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Nuclear Testing.
