Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 277 poor countries, which would continue to receive top priority, but also in middle-income countries if enough aid were available. The dominant factor in allocating aid among countries would be where it would do the most good to help poor people; any aid to governments of middle-income countries would thus depend on the recipient’s commitment to helping its poor.” The paper also notes that Security Supporting Assistance will continue to be used to advance our political purposes; that global needs such as food, health, and population will be emphasized; that concessional aid will be provided for technological collaboration with both poor and middle-income countries; and that the international institutions’ hard-loan windows will aid middleincome countries while their soft-loan windows aid poor countries.)4 ACTION: State, AID, OMB 2. The moderate funding option is approved. This would raise bilateral and multilateral concessional development aid (including SSA) in FY 1982 to somewhat over $10 billion in current dollars and to around $8 billion in constant 1977 dollars, or an increase of about one-third in FY 1978 levels of concessional aid in real terms. (The paper notes that this could result (i) in an increase of 50% in real terms over the FY 1978 contributions to soft-loan windows of multilateral banks; (ii) in an increase of about 100% in real terms in bilateral development aid over FY 1978 levels; (iii) in SSA remaining about where it is now; and (iv) in an increase in PL–480 sales. The paper points out that this mix of programs is only one of a number that might be appropriate at this funding level.)5 ACTION: State, Agriculture, AID, OMB 3. The President has asked that a comprehensive program be developed to describe the need for development assistance to the American people, stressing both the conservative and idealistic implications of this assistance, and using well-known persons in a wide variety of fields for this purpose.6 tional Development and Food Assistance Act of 1977 (P.L. 95–88) placed a greater emphasis on nutrition, family planning, and the developmental aspects of aid. 4 On the November 9 paper, Carter approved this option and added a handwritten notation: “Supported by Peter Bourne.” 5 On the November 9 paper, Carter approved this option and added a handwritten notation: “Supported by Peter Bourne.” 6 On the November 9 paper, Owen and Erb added the following postscript: “Whatever your choice among these strategies and funding levels, we face a difficult task in carrying it out—in making needed improvements in bilateral development aid, and in selling both bilateral and multilateral aid to the Congress. But we can address both these tasks more effectively if we have a clear sense of your long range goals.” Below the postscript, the President wrote: “Need to sell to people—Develop comprehensive PR effort. Needs to sound conservative & idealistic—let’s use popular persons from movies, sports, etc. Also we do not need to use World Bank measurements which minimize importance of PL 480.”
