Chapter 6, June–December 1990 831 — At the next opportunity, raise with Shevardnadze the delay in having the Soviet negotiating team aware of decisions taken at ministerials. If necessary, propose that the October and November ministerials be in Geneva so that the Soviets get rapid feedback. — Have the State Department draft instructions following each ministerial documenting decisions. Do not have these reviewed by the interagency process; have them sent as White House text. Limit such instructions to a record of decisions taken. 2. Make more effective use of our assets in Washington. We should; — Forbid the drafting of treaty language in Washington. Guidance should come in terms of principles and objectives, with treaty drafting done in Geneva. — Expedite reaching U.S. positions on all outstanding issues so that no U.S. position remains untabled by September 15. (See attached list for specifics) — Establish a policy now that, on September 20, the Negotiating Group should accept Soviet positions in all areas in which there is no U.S. position. Allow exceptions only with the personal approval of a Cabinet Officer. 3. Make more effective use of our assets in Geneva. We should: — Assign two additional State advisors to the Negotiating Group as soon as possible. — Recognize that the Inspection Protocol and Memorandum of Inspection Procedures are as large, and contain as many issues, as all other Treaty documents combined. Therefore: (a) have three weekly meetings of the Inspection Protocol working group, (b) use subgroups to work the large number of technical issues, and (c) make special arrangements to extend or return experienced advisors (Mr. Schless (OSD), Dr. Scalingi (ACDA), and [name not declassified] (ACIS)). On September 15, reevaluate to see if progress is satisfactory; if not, split the effort into two separate working groups. — Continue three Burt-Nazarkin meetings weekly on major issues. Add an additional meeting weekly to review the status of subordinate documents, especially the Inspection Protocol and Memorandum of Inspection Procedures. 4. Improve Washington turn around time. We should: — Discontinue the use or Blackbird cables except for rare sensitive topics not intended to be disseminated beyond PCC principals. — Formally establish a new procedure for ad referendum agreements: — All ad ref agreements sent as normal RFGs from the Negotiator, flagged for delivery to PCC principals. — Ad ref agreements automatically approved after eight working days unless Washington directs otherwise. — Schedule a standing meeting of PCC principals every Wednesday evening and Saturday morning. At this meeting—­and only at this meeting—­consider whether to repudiate ad ref agreements.
