676  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
that we develop a joint statement that was very short and very general. 
The draft is at Tab I.
You will recall that the concept developed in your meeting of 
principals was that Secretary Baker would attempt to negotiate Soviet 
commitment to a de-MIRVing initiative in START II in exchange for 
the US foregoing additional limits on heavy ICBMs and mobile RV 
sublimits in START I. To this end, Baker would seek Soviet agree-
ment to a joint statement on START II that recorded the de-MIRVing 
initiative.
As you pointed out while reviewing an earlier draft of a joint state-
ment, it will be very difficult to come to agreement on the outlines for 
START II at this time—­the Soviets are unlikely to accept de-MIRVing 
without some US commitment to deal with SLBMs and SLCMs, and we 
are unlikely to be able to agree to anything along these lines within the 
US in the time remaining before the Summit.
As an aside, the Navy POM has no funds for TRIDENT beyond 
the 18 boats now under construction. Further, General Powell is 
developing a post-START/START II strategic force structure with 
about 5000 total strategic weapons. That in itself will require a reduc-
tion in SLBM warheads below numbers permitted in START. In brief, 
agreeing to START II constraints on SLBMs may not be as difficult as 
we thought.
Our proposed draft may meet Secretary Cheney’s concerns that 
any statement concerning follow-­on negotiations include a reference 
to strategic defense—­it does this by stating that the future negotia-
tions will deal with strategic systems rather than strategic nuclear 
weapons.
One point you should focus on in the draft statement is when 
the new negotiations would begin: “as soon as practical” or “soon 
after Treaty ratification.” Negotiations that get underway before rat-
ification may prove politically difficult; delaying START II until after 
START I is ratified could imply a negotiating hiatus of between sev-
eral months to a year or more. “As soon as practical” is a deliberately 
vague phase that does not prejudge the question of when START II 
talks would begin. “Soon after Treaty ratification” would make clear 
to the Soviets that we were not prepared to concede their objective of 
early follow-­on negotiations.
At a minimum you will need to discuss this proposed statement 
with Baker because it is much less ambitious than his tactic for clos-
ing off the mobile RV sublimit and the heavy ICBM issues. In essence, 
if we do not intend to negotiate a substantive START II statement, 
then we will be telling the Soviets that we are simply and uncondi-
tionally deferring limits on heavies and on mobile ICBM warheads. 
Even this broad statement may give the Soviets the commitment they
