22 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX dence that the “hawks” won out. The extent of differences within the leadership is hard to measure, however, and probably varies from case to case depending on the circumstances. Within the Polish leadership there has been some pushing and shoving on how to react to the dissidents; those favoring a moderate response have thus far been on top. A high-ranking Polish official claims that Poland’s fastest rising political star, the new Central Committee economic secretary and former foreign minister Stefan Olszowski, has argued for continued tolerance for a degree of dissident activity. Proponents of a harsher course have been noted in the upper managerial levels of the media. The Politburo as a whole recently indicated its support for the moderate course by criticizing the past performance of the media. The East European leaders have differed among themselves on the appropriate way to deal with the dissidents. According to one account, strong differences with regard to approaches to the dissident problem were expressed at the Warsaw Pact summit last November. Kadar reportedly was extolling his own conciliatory approach, implicitly as an example for others (“after all, there is no great dissident problem in Hungary, comrade”), but it seems more likely that he was on the defensive, holding out against Honecker and others who want a tough line across the board in Eastern Europe and believe that anything less is dangerous. The Soviets Moscow is obviously concerned about the unrest in Eastern Europe. A blowup anywhere in Eastern Europe has important implications for the stability of the regime affected, for its ties to the USSR, and even for the internal tranquility of the USSR. Moscow’s first concern must be Poland, where, as we have indicated, the situation is both volatile and unpredictable. Worse, there is no quick or easy fix for what ails Poland, and there is little that Moscow can do to help, except, perhaps, by sending in large amounts of economic assistance. This the Soviets have been unwilling to do, possibly because of their own economic needs or because they are not certain that such aid would help that much, or because they are not persuaded that the situation in Poland has reached critical proportions. Whatever the case, the Soviets have, at least until now, been willing to go along with Gierek’s moderate approach to Polish dissidents and also to Poland’s economic problems. In East Germany, Moscow has supported Honecker’s efforts to get on top of the problems caused by the Helsinki accords and the increased Western influence on the East German population. But the problem for Honecker, and Moscow, is that the steps he has taken to promote an East German identity, for example, by eroding the special status of
