946 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 590. Letter 40 from McConaughy to Johnson1 Letter No. 40 Washington, April 30, 1956 Dear Alex: I went to Charlottesville on Friday to make a speech before the Committee on Foreign Relations there. I have just returned and have not yet had much opportunity to digest your reports on the meet­ ing of April 26. There was no meeting on Geneva over the week­ end, either with the Secretary or with Judge Phleger. The Secretary leaves on Wednesday for the NATO session. I doubt if we will see him before then. It may not be necessary since we seem to be locked tight in the present position. There is general agreement that we must stand firm. Hence, no high-­level pow-­wow seems to be called for at the moment. We agree that you can only reiterate your position at the next meeting, emphasizing the firmness of our stance on this position and picking away at the chinks in Wang’s armour. I believe you very effectively exploited the point that his objections are all related to the fact that he envisages a PRC resort to use of offensive force in certain contingencies. We have finally received a preliminary acknowledgment from Immigration to our letter of April 5 requesting a survey of all the ­Chinese in US prisons. A copy of this acknowledgment, dated April 24 is enclosed. You will note that 8 of the prisoners claim American citi­ zenship and another one is a mental patient rather than a convict. This leaves 42 known Chinese aliens in penitentiaries. Enclosed are 42 sheets giving the INS reports on each of the names of Chinese mentioned by Wang as encountering interference with departure. We have not yet received INS reports on the remaining 7. I also enclose as of background interest a good example of the kind of propaganda drive Peiping has been conducting to bring about defec­ tions on Taiwan. Such broadcasts by former officials of the GRC, now with the Communists, addressed to their ex-­colleagues on Taiwan are an almost daily occurrence. So far they have had no perceptible effect. This particular broadcast is interesting in that it expressly links “peace­ ful liberation” of Taiwan with the world-­wide Communist drive for “relaxation of tensions”. This suggests that the Chinese ­Communists are well aware of the damage military action in the Taiwan area would cause to their general political posture. You will note that the broad­ cast speaks not only of the “peaceful liberation” of Taiwan (which the 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret. Drafted by McConaughy.
