Yugoslavia 875 that careful attention should be paid to decisions that they will face shortly.2 (S) The basic policy guidance on this issue is that we wish to enhance our military supply relationship with Yugoslavia, with emphasis on the political impact. Since that policy was articulated in 1977, wideranging discussions have been held with the Yugoslavians. The results of those discussions—proposed arms sales—are now upon us. The two most pressing sales are (1) DRAGON shoulder-fired anti-tank missiles and (2) MAVERICK air-to-ground missiles. (S) DRAGON: We have agreed to provide 1000 of these missiles, and discussions are continuing concerning cost, test sets, and other technical details. Apparently, however, the 1000 missiles earmarked for Yugoslavia have recently been discovered to be defective, and the Army is looking at whether it would be willing to provide 1000 functional missiles from its already depleted stocks. The Army may say no to this idea, but Harold3 can overrule them. We believe that not providing the Yugoslavians with 1000 functional missiles could do irreparable damage to our emerging relationship, and we recommend that you ask Harold to look into this issue, with an eye toward nipping in the bud any suggestion that we transfer the defective missiles instead.4 (S) MAVERICK: The interagency consideration of this sale is nearing completion, and State is preparing to go to Congress for appropriate consultations. While we believe that such consultations are necessary because of congressional interest in both Yugoslavia and MAVERICKs, we strongly believe that only Church and Zablocki should be contacted because the potential for a leak would be exacerbated by wider discussions (a proposed sale of TOW anti-tank missiles fell through recently because of premature disclosure of the sale).5 We recommend that you ask Vance to limit the congressional consultations. (S) 2 The issue was discussed at the VBB lunch on July 12. In a memorandum later that day, Robert Gates informed Larrabee, Brement, and Kimmitt that Brzezinski tasked Larrabee to clarify what decisions were needed by the principals. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 57, Yugoslavia: 1–8/79) 3 Secretary of Defense Harold Brown. 4 In a July 13 memorandum to Brzezinski, Larrabee recommended that Brown ensure that the 1,000 Dragon missiles committed to Yugoslavia “should be functional, not defective, even if this means taking them out of the Army inventory.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Larrabee Subject File, Box 68, Yugoslavia: 8/78–12/79) 5 In his July 13 memorandum to Brzezinski, Larrabee noted that “Vance should be aware that Lucy Benson is prepared to go ahead with the sale of Mavericks.” Larrabee also recommended that “Vance should formally inform the President” and that “we should limit consultations with Congress as much as possible in order to prevent leaks which could seriously damage relations with Yugoslavia.” Brzezinski asked for draft memoranda to Brown and Vance with White House guidance. (Ibid.)
