922 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 283. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of State1 Belgrade, February 15, 1980, 1513Z 1248. Dept pls pass to OSD/ASD/ISA. Subj: Yugoslavia After Tito: The Short Term. 1. (S-entire text). 2. This cable summarizes my views on the short-term prospects (immediately following the death and for some 6 months thereafter) for a smooth transition to the post-Tito era. A second cable will consider the longer term.2 3. Outwardly the Yugoslavs, and their government, will remain calm. There will be some military alert measures taken; the police will increase surveillance of known or suspected internal opponents, and may even take a few into custody; there will be a host of public statements about Yugoslavia’s internal stability and its willingness and capability to defend itself from external threat; the collective presidency will ostentatiously take decisions; there will be a real effort to show that business is going on “as usual.” 4. To a great degree the perceived picture will be the real one. There will be no panic; the decision-making process will function smoothly; the Croats will not rise up against the Serbs, or vice versa. There will, in fact, be an extraordinary effort to compromise differences (of which there are many) and to avoid any hint of controversy. 5. But the collective presidency will not be—even at this early stage—a collegium of equals, all of whom have similar weight in the making of decisions. The evidence during Tito’s earlier illness was clear (even if the identity of all the players was not) that there will be an inner group (drawn from the State and Party Presidencies) that will decide most questions. Bakaric’s role can probably best be described as chairman of the board. He will oversee the system and his colleagues, 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800082–0524. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Sent for information to Zagreb, Moscow, USCINCEUR, and USNMRSHAPE. 2 In telegram 1258 from Belgrade, February 16, Eagleburger analyzed the prospects of stability in Yugoslavia over the longer term. The conventional analysis on Yugoslavia, Eagleburger wrote, ranged “from mild to extreme pessimism.” Disagreeing with that interpretation, Eagleburger wrote that, over the next five years, “Yugoslavia will remain stable, the collective leadership concept will work,” its foreign policy will “remain committed to non-alignment,” and that “so long as the Soviet Union continues its current policies, basic Yugoslav interests will be in conflict with those of Moscow, with little chance for much more than a cosmetic accommodation.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800084–0050)
