3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 138 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI be some definite targets to be reached before 1985. The Ambassador said he doubted it, but some initial reductions could come before SALT III. Secretary Vance said that Brezhnev told him that presenting as a fact that Backfire was not an intercontinental weapon was saying enough. We need better assurances, and the ability to verify. Brezhnev sees the problem differently; it is important for the Ambassador to get the US view over to him. The Ambassador said it was first a psychological matter. If the President were to make a similar statement, he would be believed. His sincerity would be enough for Brezhnev. It would be clear that the President would not cheat. Even more, trying to cheat on such a small thing would be worthless. The United States can also check. The Soviet Union could not have 200 to 400 intercontinental bombers without testing them. He was speaking as an engineer. It was not possible that they would suddenly have 1000 of them. Besides, Brezhnev as chairman of their defense council personally approves all these programs. He knows that this is a medium bomber. If these points need strengthening, however, the US should raise them. Secretary Vance said we would do so. CHINA The meeting concluded with an exchange on a State Department press announcement yesterday, in which it was noted that the Secretary had met with the head of the Chinese Liaison Office to discuss the Secretary’s visit to Moscow. Ambassador Dobrynin asked if this meant that every time there was a negotiation between the United States and the Soviet Union, the Chinese would be involved. The Secretary said no; and that a lot of other items had been covered. The President joked that if we were revealing all the proposals the Soviet Union had made, then there wouldn’t have been much to talk about. 28. Editorial Note Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko and Secretary of State Cyrus Vance met May 18–20, 1977, in Geneva to discuss SALT II and the Middle East. Four of the five meetings addressed SALT and especially how the United States and Union of Soviet Socialist Republics could reach an agreement despite differing goals and objectives following the Vladivostok negotiations. For a summary of those meetings, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, volume XXXIII, SALT II, 1972–1980, Document 167.
