Chapter 6, June–December 1990  867
We intend to use converted ballistic missile stages to launch satel-
lites and sounding rockets, including payloads for SDI tests. Up to three 
of these launches are currently planned for Brilliant Pebbles, which 
could possibly be captured by the Soviet proposal. Although converted 
ballistic missiles could be used to deploy Brilliant Pebbles, there are no 
present plans to do so.
Options. In terms of the practical effect on U.S. plans, the Soviet 
proposal could increase the cost of certain SDI tests, but would not pre-
vent any planned tests. In weighing options, the balance to be struck is 
between removing this issue, which is very important to the Soviets, 
versus seeming to acquiesce to the Soviet position on banning space 
strike arms, which has been directed at prohibiting SDI. The appear-
ance of such acquiescence would be used by some to argue against 
START ratification.
158.	 Note From Arnold Kanter of the National Security Council 
Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs 
(Scowcroft)1
Washington, September 23, 1990
Brent:
Following is a run down of the first session of the Bartholomew-
Karpov working group.2
We met Sunday3 from 10:00 to 1:00, going over START issues. 
Although there were a few hopeful signs, for the most part each side 
once again went over what is by now painfully familiar ground. 
(Woolsey met separately with Grinyevsky and reported having made 
some real progress on CFE verification.) Mercifully, the scheduled 3:00-
6:00 session was cancelled when Karpov was unexpectedly summoned 
(along with Grinyevsky, but not Nazarkin) to New York to meet with 
Shevardnadze. No one knows what is behind the Shevardnadze sum-
mons, although it may be no more than a reflection of the fact that 
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National 
Security Council, John A. Gordon Files, Subject Files, OA/ID CF00953–027, Washington 
Meetings—September 1990. No classification marking. Copied to Gates and Rice. All 
brackets are in the original.
2 No formal memorandum of conversation was found.
3 September 23.
