996
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
and other forums. On the other hand, failure to move forward will sour
our relations with the LDCs in multilateral forums.
Negotiating an agreement with the LDCs on this issue, however,
poses considerable difficulties, which merit careful consideration:
—We will have major difficulties securing Congressional ap-
proval—a treaty will be involved—and may not succeed.
—The Common Fund will compete for Congressional support and
financing with other foreign economic policy issues which Mike Blu-
menthal and others consider to be of greater substantive economic im-
portance to us and the LDCs.
—The contribution of a Common Fund to world economic welfare
would be modest.
Issues
Differences between developed and developing countries revolve
around four issues: (1) direct contributions to the Fund versus cash de-
posits via individual commodity agreements, (2) need for a “second
window” to finance development-type measures, (3) the precise terms
of reference of the Fund, and (4) voting arrangements.
The U.S.—together with other industrialized countries—has pro-
posed a Common Fund financed through pooling of the assets of indi-
vidual commodity agreements. We have argued that the Fund does not
need a second window because the financing of non-stabilization
measures is best handled by existing international institutions—
though we have agreed the Common Fund could play a coordinating
role. Finally, we want voting shares that reflect our stake in commodity
trade and equity in the Fund.
The G–77 say there can be no Common Fund without direct contri-
butions, although limited possibilities for compromise may exist. The
G–77 position on voting may be more flexible, and they may agree that
contributions to the second window can be voluntary.
Direct Contributions for Price Stabilization (First Window)
The LDCs, particularly ASEAN, see direct contributions (the U.S.
share probably amounting to $50–100 million) as the sine qua non of the
Common Fund. This level represents a scaling down of earlier de-
mands. While direct contributions may not be essential to the financial
viability of the Fund, the LDCs view them as: 1) symbolic of our polit-
ical support for the Common Fund and for their objective of greater
participation in the international economic system, 2) a means of
shifting the burden of financing commodity agreements from devel-
oping to developed, socialist, and OPEC countries.
Our agreement to “up front” direct contributions would signifi-
cantly improve prospects for the success of the negotiations, but it
would not remove all obstacles. For instance, our insistence on voting
