Dominican Republic  507
effect a change of regime before uncontrollable disorder develops. At 
the psychological moment in this progression, it would be in accord 
with Latin American custom for the military to call upon the dictator to 
depart before the situation got out of hand. In such matters, however, 
timing is of the essence. A premature move could be fatal. On the other 
hand, to hesitate too long would permit an uncontrollable situation to 
develop.
9. If its timing were right, a junta with military, upper and mid-
dle class, and Church participation could probably take over the 
Dominican Republic without serious resistance. Such a junta would 
probably also take over in the event of Trujillo’s flight, natural death, 
or assassination. Once in power, however, such a regime would face 
serious difficulties. The fall of the dictatorship would entail a consider-
able amount of disorder and confusion. Although its fall would mean 
liberation to the upper and middle classes, the new regime would not 
automatically command the support of the urban proletariat and the 
peasants. Returning exiles, who are generally radical in their political 
views, would probably seek to incite these elements against a moderate 
government. Within the government itself, there might be a struggle for 
power between military and civilian elements. Finally, the Trujillo fam-
ily has so dominated the Dominican economy that the confusion atten-
dant upon their sudden departure would probably worsen an already 
bad economic situation.
10. Although Castro is probably incapable of overthrowing the 
Trujillo dictatorship, the political turmoil which would follow the fall 
of that dictatorship would afford him opportunities for political inter-
vention in the Dominican Republic. Castro would certainly do all in his 
power to incite the masses against a moderate regime and to call for a 
radical revolution on the Cuban model. Unless a moderate Dominican 
government received prompt support from sympathetic governments 
of an undoubtedly liberal character (Venezuela, for instance), Castro 
might emerge as the ultimate victor.
U.S.-Dominican Relations
11. The fall of the Trujillo regime would present new problems in 
U.S.-Dominican relations. Even among moderate opposition elements, 
there is considerable resentment of past U.S. support for and failure 
to intervene against the Trujillo dictatorship. Furthermore, almost any 
new regime would feel a need to demonstrate to the Dominican people 
and to other Caribbean peoples that it was not under U.S. domination. 
However, a moderate government would also be in desperate need of 
U.S. assistance. If the U.S. were to render essential aid discreetly, while 
tolerating occasional demonstrations of Dominican sovereignty, such a 
government would probably cooperate in fundamental matters. If, on 
the other hand, a Castro-­type government were eventually to come to
