Afghanistan
423
147.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
[assessment number not declassified]
Washington, January 1980
[Omitted here are the report cover, a security information page,
and a cover page.]
The USSR in Afghanistan: An Interim Appraisal
([classification marking not declassified])
Key Judgments
The growing insurgency that threatened to topple a pro-Soviet
Marxist regime and create further instability on Soviet borders was the
major factor behind Moscow’s invasion of Afghanistan and elimination
of Amin. The Soviets thought the Amin regime was incapable of arrest-
ing the disintegration and calculated that Soviet troops were necessary
both to change the Afghan leadership and to ensure that the new
regime held onto power.
The fall of a pro-Soviet government in Afghanistan would have
dealt a major blow to Soviet prestige, slowing the momentum behind
the broad extension of Soviet influence in the Third World. Moscow
probably also thought that dramatic, forceful action would enhance its
role as a major regional actor in the Middle East and South Asia and
that a Soviet military presence in Afghanistan would place pressure
on Iran and Pakistan to accommodate.
From Moscow’s perspective, the time probably seemed propitious
for the invasion. US-Soviet relations were already at an ebb, and Mos-
cow probably discounted adverse political effects on its international
position.
Once they decided to remove Amin, the Soviets acted decisively
to ensure that the new regime would retain control in the face of
opposition from dissident Afghan military and insurgent elements. On
27 December, Soviet airborne troops moved quickly to seize control of
Kabul. Simultaneously, Moscow moved two Ground Forces divisions
into Afghanistan to seize key cities and communication routes.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81),
Box 6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Soviet Moves/Options. Top Secret; [codeword and handling
restriction not declassified]. A statement on the cover page reads: “This assessment was
written by [less than 1 line not declassified] based on contributions from members of
the NFAC USSR-Afghan Task Force, and the Office of Strategic Research. It has been
coordinated with the Office of Political Analysis, the Office of Strategic Research, and
with the National Intelligence Officers for the USSR and for the Middle East.”
