904 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 343. Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 Washington, undated SUBJECTS 1. Views of Iranian Exile General Oveissi that Control in Iran Could be Claimed by the Radical Left Within the Next Six Months 2. Funding and Support Provided to General Oveissi 1. In early August 1980, Iranian exile oppositionist General Gholam Ali Oveissi remarked that the pace of Iran’s unraveling has accelerated to the point where the country in all likelihood will be claimed by the radical Left unless action is taken within the next six months to stop it. In Oveissi’s opinion, six principal factors are responsible for the current crisis: a. There is an apparent concerted effort by Ayatollah Khalkali, a revolutionary cleric who is a member of the Islamic Republican Party, and by what Oveissi called Palestine Liberation Organization-inspired elements to destroy and demoralize what is left of the officer corps through a systematic program of trials and executions. These are carried out arbitrarily, frequently without formal charges. Selected officers are arrested almost daily while at work or at night at home, and the next day they are executed. Random killings occur of other Iranians imprisoned for one reason or another, or for none, under the aegis of Khalkali. These killings also serve as part of a program to terrorize potential opposition to the current regime into submission or into exile. As a result, according to Oveissi, a mood of fear and despair is sweeping the country; more and more people are coming to accept a radical Leftist takeover, or even a Soviet takeover, so long as the present regime is removed. b. Inflation and increasing unemployment both fuel political discontent. c. The U.S. Government is perceived by Middle East leaders as being indecisive. There is almost a universal view among these leaders that the U.S. Government is weak and undependable, and few have confidence that the U.S. is willing and able to take steps necessary to shore up Western interests in the region. Many of these leaders are equivocating with traditional allegiances and feel obliged to come to terms with the “new Left.” Oveissi said his conclusions are derived from recent conversations with leaders and senior intelligence officers 1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Intelligence Files, Box I031, Carter Intelligence Files Sep–Dec 1980. Secret. [name not declassified] sent the paper to Saunders and Hunter of the NSC Staff under an August 15 covering memorandum.
