Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX of Charter 77 supporters. The trials of the activists were reportedly planned for July, but apparently have been postponed twice—to give the public prosecutor more time to prepare his case. The trials are now said to be scheduled for late October. —the September 10 police raids carried out in several Czech cities against Catholic priests and laymen. Between six to twelve Catholic activists are reported to have been arrested and charged with circulating samizdat Catholic literature and with impeding state control of religious activity. There is yet no information that the Catholics are associated with the Charter movement, but the operation itself comprises perhaps the harshest measure against Catholics in some 25 years, and reflects the determination of the regime to crack down on all dissidents. The Czechoslovak samizdat movement, the so-called Padlock Press, has not been subjected to nearly as much harassment as the Charter movement. The regime may view the underground literary movement as much less a threat than the Charter movement. Popular Acceptance Lacking The Czechoslovak population has avoided active commitment to Charter 77. While there is little doubt that the overwhelming majority of Czechoslovakia’s 15 million inhabitants privately sympathize with the aims and goals of the Charter movement, few are willing to identify publicly with it—thereby inviting regime reprisals. The 1968 invasion apparently reinforced the belief that any political activity not sanctioned by the regime is fruitless. Even among the 1,000 signatories that are claimed, a solid social base is lacking. There are only a few workers, peasants, or Slovaks. The vast majority appear to be intellectuals, with the movement itself concentrated in Prague. The professions of some 750 signatories are known: two-thirds claim to be members of the intelligentsia; the remaining one-third are registered as workers, artisans, or manual laborers. Even these figures are misleading, since some manual laborers or workers are in fact intellectuals forced into menial positions in order to survive. Charter 77 is thus the product of the Prague intelligentsia—with a considerable number of this intelligentsia comprising communists ousted from the Party for their opposition to the present regime. The Slovak Factor The reasons for the failure of the Charter to obtain Slovak support may be more complex than mere communications difficulties or geographic distance from Prague. Traditional Czech-Slovak animosities evidently play a role: some Slovaks, reportedly reject any association with the Charter on the grounds that it is a Czech-conceived stratagem intended to weaken Party leader and President Husak, a Slovak. While
