1957 1395 the work so well in hand. We want John to have a week or two of consul­ tation with Bob either in Washington or Geneva depending upon how the schedule of meetings is running at that time. The ideal thing would be for him to sit in with Bob at a meeting before he takes over on his own. Mr. Robertson will be away the last two weeks of August and I am hoping to take off the last week myself. It would therefore be much more convenient for us if your September meeting could fall on September 12 rather than September 5th. Regarding the sorting and preparation of material received in Geneva during your absences, I believe that if we keep the volume down to the necessary minimum, and follow your suggestion of send­ ing copies whenever possible to Ed in London as well as to Prague, it should prove possible for Bob or Ed to arrive in Geneva a few hours ahead of you and complete the sorting in that time. We have asked that the FBIS Daily Reports no longer be sent you, and will scan them here for items of interest to you. However, we asked that the ticker service for the few days before each meeting be contin­ ued, as the volume should not be too great, and as otherwise you might miss something of importance. I believe that we have taken care of the other points you raised in your letter following the last meeting. However, we received only the original of that letter, and it had to be routed to the front office, where it seems temporarily to have disappeared. I hope you will remind your secretary to send us a carbon in the future, and if you have a copy of the last letter we would appreciate your enclosing it in your next. Sincerely yours, Ralph N. Clough Enclosures: 1. Copy of memorandum of conversation of July 18 re Meeting with Radio and Press Representatives. 2. Copy of Text of speech by Chang Han-­fu. 3. Copy of Draft Statement for use in MAC. 4. Copy of Exchange of Telegram between ARC and Chinese Communist Red Cross re Release of Fr. Wagner. 5. Copy of letter to Mr. Dalal with extracts from the Foreign Assets Control Regulations. 6. Copy of Memorandum of 8/2 to Mr. Clough on Currency & Commodity Controls on Chinese Aliens Departing for Communist China.
