Arms Control and Disarmament 1549 All four of the advisers strongly endorsed the principle that we must keep the pressure on the Soviet Union to show its basic position on international staffing of control posts, on majority vote in the Con­ trol Commission, and similar issues, and that we should not let them escape this pressure by prematurely changing our proposals. 2. Surprise Attack Safeguards. Mr. Foster said that it was wrong to think that the Geneva discus­ sions on surprise attack safeguards were futile because they failed to reach agreements. He urged study of the key documents published by the United Nations. Among the mains he listed were: a. Some useful intelligence on Soviet military thinking; b. Exposure of the Soviet thinking on inspection techniques, which was accomplished by their tabling of a proposal for obviously inade­ quate inspection measures in a zone 800 kilometers on either side of the dividing line in Europe; c. The complete unanimity achieved among the five Western states which participated, and the very considerable education of many of the experts from other countries; d. The greater appreciation we ourselves achieved of the value of inspection, whether partial or comprehensive. Mr. Foster said that he thought Soviet attitudes as revealed during the discussions gave us useful information as to what the Soviet Union attaches value to, and thus as to where we may be able to bargain with advantage in future discussions. The Soviets attach great importance to secrecy. This is not just a psychopathic attitude toward the outside world but a very valuable military asset. In effect their ability to keep their missile bases secret is the equivalent of being able to harden them against attack. The Soviet Union also feels very strongly about ­Germany and the threat a reunified Germany might come to constitute for the Soviet Union and its security. Also apparent, Mr. Foster said, was a broad acceptance by Soviet experts of the belief that there must be a concentration of ground forces before a major surprise attack is launched. General Gruenther and General Smith were skeptical that this represented the real thinking of Soviet policy makers. It might be the belief of the experts who were chosen to go to the Geneva talks, but it appeared unlikely in view of Soviet missile achievements that this position was taken for any reason other than as an attempt to evade inspection of missiles. Mr. Foster continued that the Soviets also showed great self-confi­ dence and even arrogance regarding their missile achievements and their economic growth. It was possible in view of this growing strength that the Soviet interest in the surprise attack problem was no more than an effort to keep us talking while they keep gaining. It is also possible that there is some possibility of agreement on mutually advantageous mea­ sures. Otherwise the future over the next ten to fifteen years is bleak. Even many of the officers from the Department of Defense who were on
