178 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 62. Alert Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 NI IAM 79–10012K Washington, September 14, 1979 [additional memorandum number not declassified] ALERT MEMORANDUM2 USSR-Afghanistan The Soviets may have begun to give more serious consideration to the spectrum of possibilities for direct combat intervention in Afghanistan. We are watching Soviet forces near Afghanistan closely but our collection capabilities there are poor, and we cannot confirm or deny reports that the Soviets have introduced or are preparing to introduce small combat units into Afghanistan; however, we do not see preparations for a large scale ground force intervention. There are no indications of changes in the status of the Soviet [1 line not declassified] near the Soviet border. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) Our judgment of an increased Soviet concern is fortified by the mid-August arrival in Kabul of General Pavlovskiy, Commander of the Soviet Ground Forces, and a high-level delegation which includes several other generals and colonels, reportedly to prepare a detailed report on the Afghan insurgency and the Afghan military. Pavlovskiy is probably charged with assessing the extent of the threat to the Afghan government and preparing contingency plans which will outline the amount and nature of Soviet military support needed to contain that 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, National Intelligence Council Files, Job 94T00046R, Box2, SWS Products on Afghanistan. Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]. Attached but not printed is a September 14 memorandum from Turner to the National Security Council that read: “The Soviet leaders may be on the threshold of a decision to commit their own forces to prevent the collapse of the Taraki regime and protect their sizable stake in Afghanistan. Small Soviet combat units may already have arrived in the country. I am concerned that the Soviets may be underestimating the difficulties of shoring up the regime and may find themselves under growing pressures to escalate the scope of their intervention in the next few months. Moreover, the Soviets may now be more inclined to gamble on a substantial intervention in Afghanistan because of their perception of a downturn in relations with the US and the uncertain prospects for Senate approval of the SALT treaty.” 2 The Alert Memorandum is an interagency publication issued by the Director of Central Intelligence on behalf of the Intelligence Community. Its purpose is to ensure that senior policymakers are aware of the serious implications for US interests of impending political developments. It is not a prediction that these developments will occur. This memorandum has been coordinated at the working level by CIA, [less than 1 line not declassified], NSA, and State/INR. [Footnote is in the original.]
