March 27–December 31, 1979
1045
—Clearly, the Arab-Israeli dimension is important. We recognize
the significance and importance of moving forward towards a compre-
hensive peace on the development of events in the whole region. We
are working hard on Camp David and want to find a way to work
closely with our friends to build on that.
This approach is reflected in the attached instructions for
Hermann.
Recommendation
That you approve Hermann making the exploration with Fahd
outlined above.7
7 Carter neither approved nor disapproved the recommendation.
321.
Presidential Determination No. 80–91
Washington, December 20, 1979
Subject
Determination under Section 25 of the International Security Assistance Act of
1979—Assistance for Jordan.
Pursuant to the authority vested in me by section 25 of the Interna-
tional Security Assistance Act of 1979, I hereby determine that Jordan is
acting in good faith to achieve further progress toward a comprehen-
sive peace settlement in the Middle East, and that the expenditure of
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 50, Presidential Determinations: 8/79–5/80. No classification marking. In an at-
tached December 20 memorandum to Carter, forwarding the Presidential Determination
for signature, Brzezinski pointed out that without Carter’s official determination “virtu-
ally all military assistance” to Jordan “halts immediately.” Brzezinski continued, “De-
spite our differences over Camp David and the King’s ill-advised intemporance earlier
this year, the fundamental relationship is very important to U.S. interests,” citing Jorda-
nian cooperation on Iran and Yemen and the possibility of cooperation in contingency
planning for Saudi Arabia. A termination of military assistance, Brzezinski argued,
would “irreparably damage” the security relationship with Jordan and “terminate any
chance of a positive Jordanian role in the Camp David process over the coming year. It
would tend to reverse Jordan’s present efforts to repair the damage done to our ties and
would drive them toward the rejectionists and Moscow.” In a handwritten note at the
bottom of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “It is a very close call, & difficult for me—but
ok this time. J.” (Ibid.)
