664 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III need a lot of convincing, however, before they agree to the import cuts needed to put this system into effect. They are unpersuaded that cuts are necessary; and they believe that it will be politically difficult to convince their people that they should use less oil, so long as US gasoline consumption continues to be relatively unrestrained by taxes comparable to those in most other industrial countries. (C) A clear statement soon that you were prepared to impose a petroleum import fee if US imports and consumption do not decline by appropriate amounts would strengthen our influence in pressing for import cuts in the IEA negotiations. Making the scale and timing of the US fee dependent, in some degree, on the outcome of these negotiations would further enhance the likelihood of a favorable outcome. (C) If we can make the system set up at the December 10 IEA meeting work, we will both reduce pressure on oil prices and encourage the moderate OPEC countries to follow sensible production policies. This would be a notable success for US policy in the first half of 1980. It might set the stage for a major effort at and after the Venice Summit to seek a long-term agreement with the more moderate OPEC countries. (C) 2. The Dollar. The dollar’s strength between now and Venice will depend partly on how foreign countries see US energy and antiinflation policies. Energy is treated above. Their view of our antiinflation policies will hinge, in some measure, on your FY 1981 budget. In Paris last week, the question I was asked repeatedly was whether you would hold to tight fiscal policies in an election year. Skepticism on this point increases pressure on the dollar. (C) Many Europeans believe that we have repeatedly under-estimated the strength of the US economy and that current US inflation is due partly to excessive US stimulus in 1976, 1977, and 1978. A tight budget (reserving a decision about stimulus until we can see whether it is actually needed later in the spring) would be a clear and welcome signal to them that you still consider inflation the main threat and mean to act accordingly. (C) This would help the dollar in a crucial period: Our negotiating position at the Venice Summit, in giving a push to the substitution account and in debating the international monetary reform that Giscard intends to propose, will be stronger if the dollar is in good shape. If we can get agreement on the kind of substitution account we favor, this will be a major step toward a more effective international monetary system—one that will reduce the continuing pressure on the dollar that has been a major source of political tension and economic instability in the industrial world. (C) 3. War on Hunger. Your urging, at the Tokyo Summit, that countries increase aid for LDC food production has borne some fruit. Ger-
