86  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Mobile ICBMs
(S) Mobile ICBMs tend to be more survivable than those in fixed 
silos, although the degree of survivability of mobile systems depends 
upon the specifics of the mobile basing scheme, whether or not the 
mobile systems are dispersed, and the ability of the enemy to locate 
and hold at risk those systems. The Soviets currently deploy two types 
of mobile ICBMs.
(S) There is broad consensus that mobile ICBMs would be more 
stabilizing than silo-­based ICBMs in a crisis, providing that actions 
necessary to ensure their survival are taken. There also is broad con-
sensus that mobile ICBMs will pose serious monitoring, verification, 
and breakout problems. Much work has been done to date; however, 
whether a verification regime that meets our standards (with accept-
able risks and impacts) can be identified and negotiated remains an 
open question (see pages 17–18 for a more detailed discussion of mobile 
ICBM verification). It also is unclear whether the U.S. can muster the 
sustained political support required to deploy a robust mobile ICBM 
force. A post-START world in which only the Soviets deploy mobile 
ICBMs would adversely affect the strategic balance. We would not have 
a survivable ICBM force (in the absence of effective defenses) to hedge 
against a failure in one of the other two legs of the U.S. strategic triad. 
It would also compound U.S. targeting, verification, and threat assess-
ment problems.
Downloading/De-MIRVing
(S) Another potential approach—­downloading our ICBMs—­
would lower the weapon-­to-­target ratio, but in the long run would not 
improve US ICBM silo survivability. There are, however, other reasons 
to download. Downloading (sometimes called de-MIRVing) refers to 
removing some reentry vehicles from existing MIRVed missiles like the 
Minuteman III, possibly modifying the attachment points for the reen-
try vehicles, and counting the missiles at the reduced warhead loading 
for purposes of satisfying the START numerical limits. Downloading 
would allow flexibility to deploy a greater number of silo-­based ICBMs 
under START. Downloading also is attractive from the perspective of 
the operational flexibility it affords a post-START ICBM force. On the 
other hand, if not tightly constrained, downloading could undercut the 
purpose of placing strict limits on ballistic missile warheads in START. 
Downloading is a reversible process and poses both verification and 
break-­out problems. For example, RVs could be replaced on Soviet mis-
siles over a period of months, allowing the Soviets to deploy additional 
weapons. No U.S. decision has been made yet on how to handle down-
loading in START.
