692 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI United States needed politically-­binding Soviet commitments on limiting Backfires to 400, and on not increasing range. — Nazarkin took note of Burt’s statements, but said he did not have the authority to comment on their substance. He then asked what the 400 Backfire figure would entail. Burt explained that it would be a global limit for all Backfires, and reminded Nazarkin that the Soviet side had been willing to limit total production figures for all Backfires in SALT II. There was, therefore, nothing new in the concept. — Noting that the Backfire was also subject to limits being negotiated in Vienna, Nazarkin asked what the ratio of those limits to the 400 would be. Burt responded that he did not know, but emphasized that the 400 limit would be a form of non-­circumvention assurance, much like the political commitments on SLCM. It was not so much a reduction provision as one which accorded with the existing reality. — Nazarkin, emphasizing that he had no authority to negotiate Backfire, offered his personal observation that with a politically-­binding statement not to give Backfires intercontinental operational capabilities, there would be no need for the second restriction on numbers. Burt pointed out in response that without numerical limits, the Soviets could build 5,000 Backfires, not capable of intercontinental operations, and then quickly refit them with probes and other refueling equipment. That was why the U.S. side proposed two components. Nazarkin said he understood and would report the U.S. proposal. — Summing up the status of START subgroup discussions, Burt said the ball was in the U.S. court on non-­circumvention, and in the Soviet court on heavy missiles, PPCM, phasing of reductions, and Backfires. Nazarkin offered one amendment to Burt’s summary; he said half a ball was in the U.S. court on heavy missile phasing. Burt suggested that Nazarkin not be overly optimistic on this score. Nazarkin responded that he had been discussing procedure; substantive outcome was another matter. Joint Statement on Future Strategic Negotiations — Discussion of the joint statement on future strategic negotiations began with an exchange of competing drafts.4 Nazarkin proposed beginning with some comments on the Soviet revised draft, since the U.S. text was totally new and the Soviet side would need some time to examine it. He recalled that the initial Soviet draft had been submitted at the Washington ministerial in April and asserted that the revised draft had taken into account subsequent discussions in Geneva. Burt commented that the Geneva discussions were very informal in nature. 4 Not found.
