882 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 (pp. 10–17). Each of those options is argued in that paper and was considered by the PRC. This memorandum explains my recommendation to the PRC that we broaden the immediate effort already begun with your telegram to friends around the world to probe the Iranian situation from every angle and generate approaches in light of this new situation urging the Iranians to resolve the crisis.5 As the results of those initial probes begin coming in, we will sharpen specific initiatives of our own, such as hostage family6 and Congressional contacts with the Iranians. Even before the results of those probes are in we can begin laying the foundation with possible family and Congressional groups while avoiding immediate public identification with them. The discussion in the PRC, as you will see from the minutes, produced general agreement that we should begin by pursuing the course outlined in this memo. There was detailed discussion of such issues as how we might handle a trial situation as it arose, and it was agreed that this should be the subject—along with other specific ideas— of some follow-on work7 which will be done by a very small group for the next PRC meeting on this subject. The course of action outlined in this paper, in addition to introducing the new ideas mentioned above, is designed to develop a range of active approaches on which we could call as the situation in Tehran clarifies. It was agreed in the PRC that the work that we will next be doing will focus on refining further the ideas which we may have to put into such exchanges. The Last Three Months and Where We Stand Now The strategy you approved on May 8 was designed to broaden our channels and range of contacts in Tehran in preparation for the moment when the top Iranian authorities would be devising their approach to the parliament on the hostage issue. A number of exchanges took place with new contacts, but the internal power struggle so preoccupied the key figures that no one in Tehran in the end was able to give systematic thought to how they would manage the decision on the hostage issue with the new Iranian parliament. The power struggle is now approaching one of its climaxes over the selection of the Prime Minister and his cabinet. Whatever the outcome, it is expected to signal a further weakening of Bani-Sadr and the moderates, and at least the temporary ascendancy of the clerics. 5 Presumably telegram 202298; see footnote 2, Document 327. 6 Carter underlined the words “hostage family” and wrote in the left margin: “Why wait?” 7 Carter underlined the words “follow-on work” and wrote in the left margin: “Expedite.”
