114
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
(c) Is it in our interest to assist Iran to maintain its oil industry,
even if such assistance has to be extended on Mossadeq’s present
terms?
(d) Are Mossadeq’s present terms in fact completely unreasonable
and uneconomic from the point of view of a foreign concessionaire?
(e) If they are, is it in the interest of the US to subsidize a US oil
company to operate Iran’s oil industry?
(f) Would it be better to adopt such a course of action than to be
compelled at a subsequent date to use force in Iran to put down a Com-
munist uprising?
6. All these questions raise serious problems in connection with
US–UK relations. The time appears to be rapidly approaching, how-
ever, when they will have to be answered unless the West is prepared
to: (1) fight to retain in Iran what it appears unable to retain by negotia-
tion; or (2) abandon Iran to Communism.
William L. Langer3
3 Printed from a copy that bears Langer’s typed signature.
38.
Memorandum for the Record1
Washington, undated.
IRAN
A tribal revolt in the South led by the Qashqais would suggest
British collusion, even though the Qashqais are violently anti-British.
The U.S.S.R. might plausibly invoke the treaty of 1921 in the event of
such an uprising. Very confidentially, the Qashqais state categorically
that they will not recognize any government in Iran formed with Tudeh
(Communist) participation, and will formally notify the “powers” in
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.00/7–651. Secret.
Drafted by John Wiley of the Bureau of European Affairs, former Ambassador to Iran.
The memorandum is attached to a July 6 memorandum from Lucius D. Battle, Special As-
sistant to the Secretary of State, to the Executive Secretariat, which reads: “Ambassador
John Wiley left the attached memorandum with the Secretary today. He said that he had
recently had tea with some of the group referred to in the memo. Ambassador Wiley feels
that the strength of this tribal group is great and that in this situation we could even have
the roots of a world war. Could this be passed on to Mr. McGhee for his information?”
