196 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement I emphasized essential point was for both to clearly understand what term meant and expressed hope he would be able define for me much more clearly than in past and terms of definite period of time further appropriate measures to be taken by his government which would enable all detained Americans exercise their right return. 4. Wang studied our draft carefully and commented in detail. A. He said “return of nationals” had been used in our August 16 draft and conformed with announcement on agreed agenda made fol­ lowing first meeting August. B. “As soon as possible” was translation they desired for Chinese term (chin su) and they felt “promptly” has feeling of compulsion. He added however as each side had own opinion on appropriate word perhaps best find another English translation while retaining original Chinese. He suggested “expeditiously”. C. In paragraph 2 he said [garble—the] phrase “US agrees that [­garble—GOI is entrusted] to assist” implied authorization. However they willing delete “US agrees” and simply say “GOI will be entrusted to assist”. Since announcement comes as result Ambassadorial discussions such a statement would imply agreement on part our two governments. D. He agreed to deletion “on behalf of PRC (USA)” in paragraphs 2(B). He concluded that they had with these changes met requirements our side to a very large extent. 5. I replied that his draft still contained word “entrusted” while ours contained “authorized” which expresses exactly and more clearly what each government will do. I asked if he would be willing use “authorize” in place of “entrusted”. 6. Wang said “authorized” did not convey same feeling of polite­ ness toward third power which they were trying to indicate by using word “entrust” which implied request. 7. I said possibly we could use “request”. 8. Wang objected because “request” too had some feeling of an order in Chinese which he did not desire in speaking of third party. 9. I agreed to see if we could find a suitable word. I then said in introductory paragraph announcement we simply returned to lan­ guage our two governments used in July 25th announcement. After considerable discussion in which it appeared he was objecting to word “repatriation” but not to “civilians” I agreed consider “return” in place “repatriation”. 10. Wang then read introductory paragraph leaving out “who desire to return” following word “civilians”. 11. I asked that “who desire to return” be included. He replied it was naturally included by implication and had not appeared in agenda announcement of August 1st. He said not necessary include “who
