Special Session on Disarmament
1207
cutoff proposals, several agencies (including State) would recommend
that the US agree to noncommittal consultations on the subject. An-
other meeting will be held next week to further consider possible US re-
sponses to cutoff proposals from other countries.
The meeting reviewed a draft speech for SSOD,3 agreeing on a
number of textual changes that will be reflected in the next draft. The
section on defense and NATO should be strengthened, particularly if
the President delivers the speech. Generalized wording on a scale-
down in strategic arms was accepted. The meeting confirmed that the
initiative on nuclear accidents reporting will be offered if and only if
the PRC does not express opposition in our bilateral consultations. De-
tails of the peaceful nuclear cooperation initiative will be omitted from
the speech. Agencies will suggest alternative wording for the section on
disarmament/development.
After receiving a report that key allies had not objected to the idea
of US negative security assurances that would go beyond the Presi-
dent’s October 1977 statement,4 the meeting discussed alternative for-
mulations for the proposed assurances. The tentatively agreed formu-
lation is:
The United States will not use nuclear weapons against any non-
nuclear weapon state party to the NPT or any comparable internation-
ally binding commitment not to acquire nuclear explosive devices, ex-
cept in the case of an attack on the United States, its territories or armed
forces, or its allies by such a state allied to a nuclear weapons state, or
associated with a nuclear weapon state in sustaining or carrying out the
attack.
If the President approves this proposed declaration, we will in-
form Israel, Iran, and our allies of the proposed declaration. (JCS op-
posed any change in the statement of October 1977.)
The proposal for US technical assistance for regional confidence-
building and peace-keeping (“eyes and ears”) was approved, provided
that (1) the assistance be offered under UN or regional peace-keeping
auspices; (2) references to U–2s be deleted; (3) non-military capabilities
be used to the extent possible; and (4) there be a further review of budg-
etary implications.
Some strong support was expressed for a Presidential appearance
at SSOD, as evidence of his continued commitment to arms control and
disarmament. However, some concern was expressed about the impli-
cations of the proximity of an SSOD appearance and the NATO
Summit.5 Both international and domestic considerations will be laid
out as the basis of a Presidential decision on the question.
3 Not found.
4 See footnote 2, Document 486.
5 The NATO Summit was scheduled to be held in Washington May 30–31.
