16
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Our Secretary of State2 simply does not trust the judgment of the
American people, but constantly conducts foreign policy exclusively,
personally, and in secret. This creates in our country the very divisions
which he has lately deplored. Longstanding traditions of a bipartisan
policy and close consultation between the President and Congress have
been seriously damaged.
We are losing a tremendous opportunity to reassert our leadership
in working with other nations in the cause of peace and progress. The
good will our country once enjoyed, based on what we stood for and
the willingness of others to follow our example, has been dissipated.
Negotiations with the Soviets on strategic arms are at dead center,
while the costly and dangerous buildup of nuclear weapons continues.
Public Confidence Eroded
The policy of de´tente, which holds real possibilities for peace, has
been conducted in a way that has eroded the public confidence it must
have.
The moral heart of our international appeal—as a country which
stands for self-determination and free choice—has been weakened. It is
obviously un-American to interfere in the free political processes of an-
other nation. It is also un-American to engage in assassinations in time
of peace in any country.
The people of other nations have learned, in recent years, that they
can sometimes neither trust what our government says nor predict
what it will do. They have been hurt and disappointed so many times
that they no longer know what to believe about the United States. They
want to respect us. They like our people. But our people do not seem to
be running our government.
Every time we have made a serious mistake in recent years in our
dealings with other nations, the American people have been excluded
from the process of evolving and consummating our foreign policy.
Unnecessary secrecy surrounds the inner workings of our own gov-
ernment, and we have sometimes been deliberately misled by our
leaders.
For many nations, we have two policies; one announced in public,
another pursued in secret. In the case of China, we even seem to have
two Presidents.3
No longer do our leaders talk to the people of the world with the
vision, compassion, and practical idealism of men like Woodrow
Wilson and John Kennedy and Adlai Stevenson.
2 Kissinger.
3 Presumable reference to Ford and Kissinger.
