723.2515/2028: Telegram
[Document 187]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 18, 1926—4 p.m.
For Lassiter. It is quite clear to all of us here that the controversy should be
disposed of, if possible, by diplomatic settlement; but if this is to be
reached, way to it must be kept open. Please understand that our policy in
this matter is dictated entirely by what seems to me to be the absolute
necessity for creating and maintaining state of affairs which will lead both
Chile and Peru eventually to accept good offices or mediation, and, by this
means, to arrive at permanent settlement of existing differences.
Let me try to make clear to you precise situation in which for the moment
we find ourselves. Principal difficulty lies with Peru who has now second
time declined our good offices, although Chile has unqualifiedly accepted
them. I intend to publish at once the exchanges on this subject with both
Chile and Peru. From these notes it will appear that Peru occupies the
extraordinary position of attempting to dictate our policy on plebiscite and
at same time to reject all offers of good offices. If these tactics are
successful, I am convinced that the issue of Tacna-Arica will be kept alive
and will remain impossible of settlement for many years to come. Peru is
evidently now striving for an official declaration in this arbitration that
plebiscite provided for in Treaty of Ancon has been frustrated by Chile; she
undoubtedly attaches importance to such a finding as enabling her
thereafter to assert legal title to provinces in dispute. Only way to keep door
open for an appropriate settlement is by publishing correspondence over
good offices and by voting down both resolutions now pending before
Plebiscitary Commission, so that Peru must either continue with plebiscite
or withdraw. She will have to do one or the other. If she goes forward with
plebiscite, even though under protest, she will do it with eyes open to risks
after having twice rejected opportunity for avoiding plebiscite and
