Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
119
Duncan said that we first needed to define our interests in the
hemisphere, and said such a definition would be necessary to decide on
the need for a “special relationship.” Then, he prefers the option of
“limited intervention.”
Brzezinski returned to the question of whether we should have a
special policy to Latin America. He said that the notion of a special
policy is ahistorical. In the past, it has done nothing more than lock us
into a cycle of creating unrealistic expectations and then having to live
with the subsequent disappointments. The Monroe Doctrine which un-
derlies this approach is no longer valid. It represents an imperialistic
legacy which has embittered our relationships.
He recommended that if our relationships are to become healthier,
then we need to put them on a more normal footing. He said that we
can do this by stressing our bilateral relations and in seeing the region’s
problems in a global context, as the President said in his UN speech.
And we should use this as a point of departure in the Pan American
Day speech. What was needed was a normalization of our relations
with Latin America. We did not want another Alliance for Progress.
Christopher said that he agreed with Brzezinski’s assessment.
General Brown agreed and said that we should put the statement
in the context that we have recognized that Latin America had reached
adulthood. Brzezinski warned, however, that such an approach was
also patronizing. Instead, he said that we should encourage Latin
America to diversify its relationships with other countries and regions,
and that we, in turn, should differentiate our approach to different
governments.
Duncan agreed that a bilateral approach makes sense, but he said
the relevant question on intervention is how should we react to the So-
viets in this hemisphere.
Brzezinski said that we should not react reflexively; rather we
should judge our response in terms of the likely consequences if the
U.S. did not intervene. Nevertheless, he does not see a great likelihood
of the U.S. intervening in Latin America in response to Soviet probes.
He said that individual governments have a good sense of their own in-
dependence and therefore our reactions should be contingent on the
way the other Latin Americans respond. But we cannot accept a blanket
policy for all cases. Later, he said, and Solomon agreed, that a statement
on nonintervention might be misinterpreted.
Leon Sloss of ACDA said that he agreed with Brzezinski’s em-
phasis on a global and a bilateral approach, but he said that we should
not discourage some regional institutions which have potential to con-
tribute to the solution of certain problems—for example in arms control
areas.
