452 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Warnke: The description on pages 10 and 11 of Soviet motives in arms control applies precisely to us as well. Brown: Some events in Europe already can be attributed to the military trends and Soviet power. The 3 percent defense budget increase is one. But Norway backed off FRG participation in an exercise and, though there are domestic reasons, I think perceptions of Soviet power were involved. The Germans themselves may be starting to negotiate with the Soviets on different security premises—I am thinking of Bahr and Wehner. It is hard to see how much all this has to do with military power, but it has something to do with it. Turner: On the President’s remarks, the Soviets would not be bothered if Angola turns somewhat to the West. They would still have 20,000 Cuban troops there. The UNITA still gives them reason to remain. As for more trade between the West and Eastern Europe, it is not a major factor in their economy and they are now turning back to the Soviets in any event. On Cuba, we can open relations, but Cuba will still be so dependent on the Soviets that the Soviets cannot be replaced. The Soviets would see all of these steps as retrograde but they would not tremble. Vance: I think we should work with the Germans on Poland. The Germans just turned down a loan. Zbig and I have been discussing this. The Vice President: I think we have made impressive progress in Eastern Europe. In Yugoslavia, we have good relations where before we were barely able to talk to them. The return of the Crown to Hungary had a strong psychological effect.4 We have good relations with Romania. The President: I think our relation with Nigeria is a notable achievement in our African policy. I sense in Harold Brown’s memo5 and in the NIE a feeling of despair and of abject inferiority. I don’t feel this. If I look at the globe from Brezhnev’s standpoint, I see tremendous problems everywhere, starting with uncertain allies. I don’t feel the sense of Soviet superiority that is in these memos. We should start to be more hard-nosed about our defense expenditures. There are things we can do that would cause the Soviets concern. We should not tell Brezhnev that we are building a big nuclear carrier and a fleet of escorts, and not GLCMs or medium-range 4 Documentation on the January 1978 return of the Crown of St. Stephen to Hungary is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XX, Eastern Europe. 5 Not further identified; however, Brown did send a memorandum to the President focusing on the Soviet Union and U.S. defense capabilities on August 13. On the cover memorandum, Brzezinski noted that he had underlined portions of Brown’s memorandum that “bear on the forthcoming NSC meeting.” Brown’s memorandum is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. IV, National Security Policy.
