196
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
62.
Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Congressional Relations (Bennet) to the Deputy Secretary
of State (Christopher)1
Washington, June 18, 1977
SUBJECT
Congressional Strategy on Human Rights
Human rights represents the Carter Administration’s most dra-
matic foreign policy departure. Sustaining this leadership will require a
strong constituency on Capitol Hill which understands and supports
the Administration’s efforts and opposes excessively specific legisla-
tion. We are fast approaching the time when general statements of sup-
port for human rights will not be accepted as a comprehensive policy,
and our credibility will be brought into question. We must be in a posi-
tion to explain each specific human rights-related action as fully as pos-
sible in terms of country-by-country plans.
I. Ongoing Human Rights Issues
1. International Financial Institutions
As you know, we have been trying to shape acceptable language
which will permit us to deal with human rights concerns in the IFIs
without harming their overall structure.2 We may succeed this year in
avoiding language mandating a negative vote on human rights of-
fender countries.
ACTION: We must demonstrate that we will use our voice and
vote in a consistent manner in the IFIs to gain the credibility to protect
the IFIs from further attacks in the future.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P770115–0474. Con-
fidential. Drafted by Swift. Wisner initialed the memorandum on June 18. Additional no-
tations read: “WC” and “Copy to SO.” Christopher also initialed the memorandum.
2 Reference is to the pending IFI authorization bill (see Document 35). On June 14,
the Senate passed H.R. 5262, whereupon House and Senate conferees began drafting
compromise language. (Congress and the Nation, Volume V, 1977–1980, pp. 42–44) During
the Senate debate over H.R. 5262, Humphrey challenged an amendment introduced by
Hatfield and Abourezk, which was based on the Harkin–Badillo language, asserting that
its rigidity “would be of less real use” than the more flexible language adopted by the
SFRC during its markup session. The Senate did approve an amendment on June 14,
sponsored by Dole, which directed U.S. representatives to the IFIs to vote against any aid
to Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia. (Spencer Rich, “Hill Steps Into Human Rights Debate,”
The Washington Post, June 15, 1977, p. A–12)
