Special Session on Disarmament 1217 494. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1 Washington, May 24, 1978, 1813Z 132087. Subject: Guidance for US Delegation to the UN Special Session Devoted to Disarmament, May–June 1978. 1. Summary. This message outlines the US objectives with respect to the UN Special Session devoted to disarmament (SSOD) and provides the US Delegation with general guidance. In addition, more detailed guidance is provided on major disarmament issues and on the final document which the SSOD is expected to produce (including sections on declaration on disarmament, program of action, and disarmament machinery). End summary. 2. US Objectives. This administration is actively pursuing a number of specific arms control and disarmament negotiations with a view to enhancing US security interests and promoting international stability. The arms control and disarmament efforts of this administration are both a high-priority and a high-visibility element of its foreign and national security policy. During the course of the SSOD, the US will have an opportunity to present its position on all major disarmament issues currently under consideration and to outline what we see as appropriate tasks for the future. In general, what we are seeking as the main outcome of the SSOD is to sustain or accelerate the momentum of current disarmament negotiations and to lay the basis for realistic new programs in years ahead. With the foregoing in mind, the US objectives for the SSOD include the following: —Enhance understanding of and support for our overall arms control objectives by other countries, and extend and improve our dialogue with important Non-Aligned and other countries which have not shared these objectives; —Create a receptive environment and broaden support for the arms control agreements currently under negotiation with the USSR on high priority arms control issues (e.g. SALT, CTB, and CW); 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780219–0805. Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information to Belgrade, Bonn, London, Rome, The Hague, Ottawa, Tokyo, Paris, Moscow, Stockholm, New Delhi, Mexico, USNATO, USUN, the Department of Defense, the Central Intelligence Agency, and the National Security Council. Drafted by Arch Turrentine (ACDA/MA/IR); cleared by Lyall Breckon (EUR/RPM), Williams (DOE), Thomas Miller (P), Adam Yarmolinsky (ACDA), Robert Putnam (NSC), Allen (CIA), John Marcum (NSC), Roger Fritzel (JCS), Steven Steiner (PM/DCA), Susan Flood (DOD/ISA), Alexander Shakow (AID), Robert Reis (EB), John Joyce (S/MS), David Macuk (IO/UNP), and Cameron Hume (S/P); and approved by Gerald Helman (IO).
