antagonism none the less intense because such action on our part had been controlled by a former chief executive who is regarded universally as a tool of the Japanese. 3. In the same spirit I venture to comment upon the procedure I am directed to take, if possible by June 30th, by your number 97. To intimate definitely to the Chinese an intention to abandon hope of executing the Federal contract and to arrange radio communication by means of combination with the interests of other nationalities, I fear, would be regarded by the political leaders of China as a challenge they could accept with impunity. Relief from the embarrassment they are subjected to by conflicting American and Japanese pressure would be thereby given to them, and they would be enabled to take against any proposals of a wireless consortium a purely defensive position—a position as strong tactically as the position they have taken in resisting a financial consortium. Competitive bidding for piecemeal construction contracts would probably be the result. By their adherence to the consortium the two American companies might be excluded from such bidding. In any case no Chinese Government, in the present state of aroused Chinese feeling against what is called foreign domination, can be expected to grant another contract (except through intimidation [sic] or corruption) as favorable as the Federal contract. If we once give up that contract, whose essential elements are already accepted and accomplished facts, my belief is that American interests, whether independently or associated with other nationalities, could not obtain in any foreseeable future a contract containing financial and technical safeguards which would be adequate to make the enterprise safe as a commercial venture. Therefore, I should urge that we should avoid, until the very last moment that the American radio interests can afford to hang on—and I for my part realize fully the fine spirit shown by the Radio Corporation in meeting the disappointments and delays—conveying any intimation of our contemplating a possibility of abandoning hope that the Federal stations would be built under the contract. Therefore, to try to bring this matter to a head in connection with
