3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
486
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
158.
Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to
President Carter1
November 17, 1978
Dear Mr. President,
I consider it necessary to use the channel of our private corres-
pondence to draw your attention to the question that causes our
growing concern.
The question is of the events in Iran2 and, to be more precise, that
according to numerous reports actions are being taken on the part of
the United States to influence events in that country. This is confirmed
by information from various sources. Information is also coming in
about even a possibility of a military interference by the US in Iran. We
would not want to believe it. But, unfortunately, it is difficult for us to
judge real intentions of the United States, the more so that no denials
followed press reports to that effect.
Therefore it is important that there should be no ambiguities in this
matter.
Firstly, any interference in the internal affairs of Iran contradicts
the principles embodied in the UN Charter3 which must be observed by
all states, especially by big powers which bear special responsibility for
the destinies of the world. Besides, it would be also appropriate to re-
mind of agreement stated in the Basic Principles of Relations Between
the USSR and the US, signed in 1972, that both sides will “do every-
thing in their power so that conflicts or situations will not arise which
would serve to increase international tensions” and that “they will seek
to promote conditions in which all countries will live in peace and secu-
rity and will not be subject to outside interference in their internal
affairs”.4
Secondly, there should be no misunderstanding that an interfer-
ence, and especially military, in the affairs of a country which directly
borders on the Soviet Union and with which we established normal
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside
the System File, Box 69, USSR: Brezhnev–Carter Correspondence: 1–12/78. No classifica-
tion marking. Printed from an unofficial translation. A handwritten “C” appears in the
upper right corner indicating that Carter saw the letter.
2 On November 6, the Shah appointed a new government under General Gholam
Reza Azhari, who enforced martial law and began an anti-corruption campaign in an ef-
fort to regain control. (Keesing’s Contemporary Archive, 1979, pp. 29735–29737)
3 For the text of the U.N. Charter, see Yearbook of the United Nations, 1978, pp.
1185–1194.
4 See footnote 3, Document 4.
