624 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement and as you will see, things got fairly tight and sticky. However, the most excellent instructions contained in the Dept.’s 1410 I think exactly fitted the siutation and enabled me to finish up with no serious losses. (Incidentally, the Dept.’s. 1410 was a model of drafting fully covering the situation and I was completely clear in all the points contained.) It will be noted that at today’s meeting I deliberately avoided attempting to pick up and answer all his points and being drawn into discussion of other topics. It left me with a somewhat unsatisfactory feeling at the meeting to do this but I feel that overall it worked out well. As I said in my summary telegram, I do not believe that his threat at today’s meeting was to break the talks but rather to go to the public. However, I am not absolutely positive on this and thought it well for you to immediately have his exact words. I naturally did not want to show too much worry or concern by attempting to get him to clarify at today’s meeting. Fortunately I had made my statement on discussion of his December 1 draft prior to his making this statement. Otherwise I feel that it would have been impossible for me to make my state­ ment. I have difficulty in interpreting the reason he made his statement after my statement except in the light of an assumption that they were prepared to go to the public today if I had said nothing on their draft and that my statement left him in a somewhat half-way position which he felt that his instructions required him to make the statement. They were all somewhat nervous at the beginning of today’s meeting and at the close of his opening prepared statement and I had a feeling that they were building up to something. However, we now have a respite until January 12 and I know that good use will be made of the time back there to think through our future course. As you can appreciate it would be most helpful for me to have all the background guidance possible. I think it likely that their present estimate of the situation is that our only interest is in obtaining the release of all of the Americans and that if and when this is accomplished we will be quick to cut off any further negotiations. I feel that our future moves should take account of this probable estimate on their part. Thanks for the quote from Nehru which I am sure I will be able to put to good use. Dave is now making and will send you a copy of the original ­Chinese text of Wang’s letter of September 16 and all of his December 1 draft Agreed Announcement. I sent you all of the substantive portion of his draft by telegraph. With respect to the proposed information campaign my princi­ pal thought is that the decision as to whether or not such a campaign should be carried on officially by the U.S. Government must be care­ fully related to our overall objectives with regard to these talks and
