400
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
overcome: (1) The date on which the proposed treaty would come into
force, (2) Various verification problems, and (3) Peaceful nuclear explo-
sions. Regarding the date of entry into force of the treaty, the United
States had suggested a treaty of limited duration, which would become
effective upon signature. The reason was that once the treaty became
effective, even though it had only three signatories—the Soviet Union,
the United States and Great Britain—this would put more pressure on
the French and hopefully on the Chinese to join and become signatories
to the treaty. The Secretary thought that if we waited until other coun-
tries signed the treaty, we would be putting off a necessary and desir-
able action for too long. On the question of verification, the Secretary
had received an indication from Mr. Warnke that this was an issue that
could be resolved in the working group. He believed progress should
be made at the next meeting of the working group. And finally, on the
question of peaceful explosions, as the President had indicated, we
were prepared to provide to the Soviet Union information which we
had gathered in the course of our own investigations of peaceful explo-
sions, should that be considered desirable. Insofar as methods of
dealing with peaceful explosions were concerned, it was our view that
the best and the proper way to handle them was to include a provision
in the treaty banning peaceful explosions, and provide for reconsider-
ation of that issue after a certain date at the request of either party.
Mr. Warnke wanted to say a few words to supplement what the
Secretary had said. What we had in mind was to find some way to pre-
vent the dispute over peaceful explosions from holding up conclusion
of a treaty that would be of great benefit to both countries. The debate
on how to devise measures to prevent a side’s gaining military advan-
tages from peaceful explosions involved some very difficult technical
matters. Therefore, we would suggest that the parties agree to complete
cessation of all nuclear explosions, that a provision to that effect be in-
cluded in the treaty, in addition to a provision in the treaty stipulating
that we would continue to work together to find ways of distinguishing
between peaceful nuclear explosions and weapons-related explosions.
This would leave open the possibility of peaceful nuclear explosions for
the future, except that we would prevent delaying resolution of the
much more important matter in a general comprehensive treaty.
Gromyko said that the Soviet Union certainly attached great im-
portance to such a treaty, and will continue negotiations and do all in
its power to bring them to a successful conclusion. The Soviet Union
did indeed attach signal importance to the question of peaceful nuclear
explosions. In the conditions of the Soviet Union they had tested this
method to an adequate extent, and had come to certain conclusions
about its usefulness. Of course, if they received the information about
US experience that had been promised by the President, they would
