584  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
of Communism in Central America and one which concerned him very 
much.) When all of the neighboring countries had been disaffected by 
Communism, the final blow was reserved for El Salvador.
9. He brought out literature and records seized from Arias Gomez 
and two or three other individuals who had been to Moscow and Cuba, 
and read passages from the books, especially those by Khrushchev, 
translated into Spanish.
10. Since we seemed to be arriving nowhere in spite of a long dis-
cussion, I said that as far as assistance in developmental programs both 
in the country and in the city were concerned, I saw no problem about 
what the U.S. might do to help. However, the correction of the internal 
situation and his wishes there were another matter. [text not declassified]
11. He replied he appointed a committee of high government offi-
cials to deal with security matters in the Presidency. He wished to raise 
this question with them. I commented that the U.S. had developed 
organizations to deal with Communism, including the enactment of 
specific laws. [text not declassified]
12. The Foreign Minister said there were two Cuban experts in 
anti-Communism to whom the Government of El Salvador had granted 
asylum. He thought they might be of assistance in connection with 
Communism here. The President said he would like to place the entire 
matter before the above-­named committee.
13. [text not declassified]
14. The Foreign Minister, after the interview with the President, 
said his desire and the desire of a number of other members of the 
Cabinet was that the President should create a bureau for action against 
Communism in El Salvador [text not declassified].
Thorsten V. Kalijarvi
ES–9.	
Editorial Note
On October 1, 1959, the International Monetary Fund set up a 
$7,500,000 standby credit which the Salvadoran Central Bank could 
draw on for balance of payments purposes until March 31, 1960. By 
using this credit the Central Bank could maintain a high level of liquid 
reserves without selling gold before coffee sales added to reserves at the 
end of the year. For additional information, see International Monetary 
Fund, Annual Report of the Executive Directors for the Fiscal Year Ended 
April 30, 1960 (Washington, D.C., 1960), pages 18 and 21–23.
