408 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II posal to create national commissions or ombudsmen. India views the UN role as a catalyst for national (rather than international) action. All in all, the prospects do not look very good, but we won’t know until late next week what will actually happen. 121. Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter1 Washington, February 26, 1978 SUBJECT Human Rights Foundation While I share the concerns2 that prompted the proposal for a Human Rights Foundation, I have serious doubts about it, and would prefer to see it deferred for the following reasons: —A new US-sponsored organization would tend to duplicate and possibly confuse our present efforts. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 19, PD/ NSC–30. Unclassified. Another copy of the memorandum indicates that the original was delivered to the White House on February 26 and that copies were sent to Oxman, Derian, and Lake on February 28. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Withdrawn Material, RC # 1126, Box 6 of 13) Brzezinski sent a copy to Tuchman and Huntington under a February 27 covering memorandum, attached but not printed, noting: “I attach the reaction from Cy. With OMB, State and the Vice President less than enthusiastic, I think the proposal will have tough sledding. Perhaps the most we can do is simply to encourage the Congressmen to go ahead, and give them our informal blessing, and finally hop in once the project gets off the ground and generates momentum of its own.” Brzezinski added the following sentence by hand: “But I am still trying to galvanize support from our domestic people.” A February 27 memorandum from Brzezinski to Eizenstat requesting that Eizenstat provide his reactions to the Human Rights Foundation proposal is ibid. 2 In an earlier version of the memorandum edited by Lake and Jennone Walker, February 24, Vance “reviewed” his thoughts on the Human Rights Foundation, noting: “I share the concerns that apparently prompted the proposal: emphasis on promoting human rights (rather than ‘punishing’ violators) in different social and cultural contexts; institutionalization of American concern for human rights beyond this Administration’s span; cooperation with other governments and international organizations; and a less defensive and reactive posture toward human rights advocates on the Hill, are all important goals. The human rights PD gives us new impetus in moving toward them.” Several points raised by Vance in this memorandum appear in the version sent to the President on February 26. (National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Director, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 3, TL 2/16–2/28/78)
