Romania
675
Ceausescu’s Leadership Style
7. During the fourteen years Nicolae Ceausescu has been in power,
he has centralized decision making in his own person, extended party/
state control over all sectors and aspects of Romanian life, consolidated
his own position so that today he is the unchallenged master of the
entire party/state apparatus, moved systematically to prevent any rival
groups or persons emerging as viable contenders for power, and estab-
lished a cult of personality unrivaled within Warsaw Pact area in its
extent and intensity since Stalin. Such a picture has led some observers
(e.g. RFE Background Report 212, September 27, 1978)3 to conclude
that Ceausescu has thus isolated himself from Romanian reality, is
insensitive to changing conditions, and may therefore be unable to
cope successfully with future destabilizing forces and events.
8. We do not agree. We view Ceausescu as an extremely able and
pragmatic politician who has shown the requisite flexibility, including
concessions and backtracking when necessary, to defuse potentially
explosive situations (e.g. Jiu Valley), maintain power, overcome opposi-
tion, and advance his own policies. Strategies to meet new challenges
are today being incorporated into preliminary planning for Quinquen-
nial Party Congress scheduled for late 1979. Role he has defined for
himself is the classic one of enlightened but absolute despot, and Roma-
nia has had predominately despotic governments since time immemo-
rial, although many rulers were neither enlightened nor Romanian.
We are reliably informed that Ceausescu really does read position
papers, absorb details of projects, and listen to advice. Persons out
of favor are not purged, killed, disgraced, or otherwise turned into
martyrs, but are isolated in some honorific job with no important
functions (General Ion Ionita, Emil Bobu) or are otherwise buried in
the system (Trandafir Cocirla, Constantin Babalau); indeed, it is not
unusual to find such persons eventually returning to important posi-
tions after serious reverses in their careers (e.g. new Party Secretaries
Ilie Radulescu and Dumitru Popa). Ceausescu’s blend of fervent nation-
alism coupled with foreign policy independence and activism is still
widely endorsed by most Romanians even if it may be wearing thin for
some. Personal popularity in Western sense of public opinion ratings
of a leader’s performance is not a relevant consideration here except
within extremely broad limits, and Ceausescu’s personal standing
among populace [garble] could plummet drastically without seriously
3 In a September 27, 1978, Background Report on Romania, Patrick Moore of Radio
Free Europe argued that Romania was facing a crisis of leadership, compounded by
Ceausescu’s preference for fast, immediate solutions rather than more considered
responses. (Open Society Archives, Records of Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Research
Institute, Publication Department, Background Reports, Box 52, Folder 5, Report 56. HU
OSA 300–8–3–52–6–56, Budapest, Hungary)
