September 18–December 16, 1978 385 It is probably appropriate at the Friday15 luncheon for the President to mention with appreciation to the King the Fahd message. In conclusion, I would like to note the key role that Isa Sabbagh has played in bringing about this new and positive position. His personal rapport with Fahd, and his unsurpassed knowledge and understanding of the Arab mind in general and the Palestinian problem in particular have contributed much to the progress which I believe has been made. 15 October 27. 107. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, October 25, 1978 SUBJECT Letter from Foreign Minister Dayan In his letter at Tab A,2 Dayan asks how we propose to discuss with Israel the question of our “assurances as to the full implementation of the Treaty of Peace between Egypt and Israel.” I propose, and State concurs, that Secretary Vance should meet with Dayan after his return on Friday3 to find out what he has in mind. Insofar as Dayan wants us to commit the moral authority of the United States to the good faith implementation by the parties of the peace treaty, we can state this in a number of ways, including your signing the treaty as a witness. It is hard to see how we can go further and guarantee the performance of Egypt or Israel. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 49, Israel: 10/25–31/78. Secret. Sent for information. In the upper right-hand hand corner of the memorandum, Carter initialed “C,” indicating that he saw the memorandum. 2 Attached but not printed. Dayan’s October 21 letter to Carter stated: “During our discussions last night we proposed that the United States give assurances as to the full implementation of the Treaty of Peace between Egypt and Israel, in its role as signatory to it. I would be grateful if you could, upon my return from Israel, be kind enough to inform me as to the channel through which talks would be held concerning this issue.” 3 October 27.
