1186  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
6. I replied was disappointed he had not this morning been in posi­
tion contribute anything that would enable us move forward on what 
I thought we both agreed was central issue—renunciation force. Use of 
such words as “internal affairs”, “liberation” and other such terms did 
not change facts of situation Taiwan area. I had not asked him accept 
my interpretation those facts but nevertheless they did exist.
7. I said facts were Taiwan lawfully administered by government 
with which US and majority countries world had long maintained dip­
lomatic relations. It administered by government which member UN. 
It administered by government with which US had defensive treaty 
arrangements. A treaty which registered with UN. These were all facts 
which must be recognized in situation there. However, I had not asked 
him here and we had not asked him in any our drafts accept our inter­
pretation those facts.
8. I said Wang’s government had long threatened use force to bring 
Taiwan under its control. He in effect seemed to have been saying and 
continued say if they could not do this by negotiations they intended 
use force. Fact that could not be overlooked was that use force to bring 
Taiwan under their control would involve solemn international treaty 
obligations of US.
9. I continued this was factual situation with which we confronted. 
In order make certain this did not lead to hostilities between us I had 
made my proposal last October that both of us without in any way 
prejudicing views on merits situation simply say we would not use 
force. This had been and must remain central issue. US had offered 
state this principle in unconditional and clear form. His government 
still unwilling do so. Until this resolved too difficult to see how other 
problems existing between us could be resolved. If this central issue 
resolved, other issues should be capable resolution. From beginning 
these discussions on second part our terms reference, I had striven 
to do utmost to resolve central issue. However, It difficult to see how 
could be resolved as long as his government threatened go war about 
it if it not otherwise able gain objectives.
10. I still earnestly hoped his government would see that its inter­
ests and interests peace could only be served by clearly and unequivo­
cally saying it would not go war about this issue. For his government 
to state this in no way prejudiced its position with regard merits whole 
matter. I had never said that they do so and nothing I had said here 
nor any draft I had presented could be so interpreted. To attempt so to 
interpret it misrepresented situation and was attempt to obscure real 
responsibility for our not having reached agreement this subject.
11. I said as preliminary comment on proposal he had made this 
morning I first wanted to note did not see how it could be divorced 
from continued threat of hostilities. US had consistently throughout
