International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 311 3. recognition that with the German economy (and others) growing very slowly, our exports were not likely to show much expansion; and 4. a perception that the U.S. was not concerned about its exchange rate. Recently the situation has stabilized as a result of: —your December 21 statement that we would intervene in the markets to the extent needed to counter disorderly conditions;4 —announcement of a new Treasury swap facility with the German central bank, providing us with additional DM for intervention; —a greater perception of U.S. concern about the dollar exchange rate; —more U.S. market intervention: since December 21 we have sold foreign currencies (Deutschemarks) to the extent of $977 million. Recently the problem has been particularly the DM–dollar rate. The markets have been calmer lately. Nonetheless it is not clear that the psychology has turned, and the situation could deteriorate rapidly at any time. Our options: More Intervention in the Exchange Markets We are considering several techniques to obtain more foreign currency to finance intervention: A. Expand short-term Fed and ESF swaps with the Bundesbank and possibly other foreign central banks. A problem is that intervention expands the German money supply, which worries the Bundesbank. Treasury and the Fed are exploring possible ways to mitigate this effect, which could increase the Bundesbank’s willingness to enlarge the present $3 billion of swap arrangements. B. Sell special drawing rights for foreign currency. The U.S. could use some of its SDR holdings of SDR 2.3 billion ($2.8 billion equivalent) to acquire foreign currencies. Preliminary discussions with the Germans suggest some willingness to sell us DM for SDR, up to several hundred million dollars. C. Issue medium-term, DM-denominated Treasury securities, as proposed by Arthur Burns. There are two possibilities: issues on the market or to official holders. This approach could provide us with substantial intervention resources that would not have to be repaid in the shortterm. But there are major disadvantages: —Such issues would imply long-term support of the exchange rate, which we do not want to commit and which could draw substantial Congressional criticism; —If the terms were attractive enough to induce foreigners to purchase the securities, the offer could induce exchange transactions in the 4 See footnote 2, Document 86.
