advances and had gained much territory in the region north, east, south and southwest of Peking. On March 5 Chia Te-yao was appointed Premier and Dr. W. W. Yen, Minister for Foreign Affairs. Dr. Yen, however, declined to accept office and an effort was made, but without success, to induce Dr. Wang to continue to retain the portfolio of Minister of Foreign Affairs. Following a series of demonstrations, ostensibly in connection with the so-called Taku Bar incident, a climax was reached on March 18 when a score or more of students were killed or wounded by Tuan Chi-Jui’s bodyguard when a large group of demonstrators attempted to enter the offices of the Chief Executive. This event created grave concern and both Chinese and foreigners entertained serious misgivings as to what the next turn of affairs would be. The military situation was daily growing more tense. At this time there was no Minister for Foreign Affairs and Hoo Wei-teh, to meet the emergency, was induced to take the office. On the morning of April 10 a coup d’état brought about the sudden overthrow of the Tuan Government and Tuan, the Prime Minister and several members of the Cabinet fled to safety in the Legation Quarter. The siege for the capture of Peking had been in progress for some days at this time and a general retreat by the Kuominchun forces towards Nankow had already begun. Almost daily bombing of Peking by airplane was taking place and this added much to the anxiety of the populace. There were several killed and a number wounded from these attacks. Heavy cannonading to the east and south of Peking was heard on practically every night from April 11 to April 17. On the last named date a heavy attack by the Allied troops put the Kuominchun troops to flight and by the next day they had given up control of Peking and were rapidly withdrawing toward Nankow. Much looting by soldiers in the suburbs of Peking was a further factor contributing to an already deplorable situation. After being in hiding for several days following the coup d’état, the Chief Executive returned on April 17 to his residence with the announced intention of continuing in office, but on April 19 he again took refuge in the Legation Quarter and on April 20 fled precipitately to Tientsin. Before his departure for Tientsin Tuan issued a Mandate resigning from office and
