886
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Palestinian state be formed with an undefined link with Jordan. Under-
standing, so he said, Israel’s security problem he thought this could be
solved by demilitarization.
I put it to him that demilitarization is feasible and proper in the
context of the Sinai desert as we had agreed. I added: “Besides the fact
that we trust you there is an objective factor. In a desert demilitar-
ization is verifiable. In a populated area it is a hoax. One can keep a
katyusha in every garage and in every home.”
On the matter of autonomy, President Sadat said that we may start
with the Gaza Strip. When asked whether he meant that we begin with
an agreement in relation to the Gaza Strip he made it clear that the
agreement should be general and include, in his formulation, the West
Bank. But, he explained, the introduction of the autonomy for the in-
habitants could begin with the Gaza District first.
President Sadat turned to the matter of the settlements. He had
mentioned the issue the previous day using the expression: “it creates
difficulties” and “it is intimidating”. Now he added that he had told Dr.
Burg when they met a few weeks ago: “Even if you have the right to
build settlements it shouldn’t be done during the negotiations.” I re-
called my letter5 to you, Mr. President, on this issue, whose contents
were confirmed by the Secretary of State a number of weeks ago. About
Jerusalem he said: the city will not be divided. Part of the city where the
Moslem and Christian holy shrines are located will be under “Arab
sovereignty with a flag”. (He did not say what flag). The “Wailing”
(Western) Wall will be excluded. The city will be run by a common
council.
In the course of our second talk President Sadat again mentioned
an idea which he had first raised with me in private during our El Arish
meeting,6 namely the construction of a water pipeline from the Nile to
the Negev. He then went on to ask for an early return of Santa Kath-
erina to Egyptian sovereignty. His wish is that this occur a day before
November 18, the eve of the second anniversary of his visit to Jeru-
salem. Perhaps I will be able to give President Sadat a response during
his forthcoming visit to Haifa.
In replying to President Sadat’s presentation I said that a Pales-
tinian state would be a mortal danger to Israel. It would inevitably be a
PLO state, bringing with it permanent bloodshed. Furthermore, it
would be a peril to the free world turning in no time to a Soviet base,
menacing thereby Egypt itself.
5 See Document 259.
6 May 25.
