280
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
contain, the Lebanese crisis will require international support.” “Equally
important,” Vance continued, “it will require pressure on Israel to re-
duce significantly and ultimately to end its military relationship with
the Maronites” and “particularly to refrain from employing their pres-
ence in Lebanon to alter the political balance. Syria will also have to
keep the Palestinians under control.” Vance’s suggested initiatives
called for inviting greater United Nations participation, including UN
military and police forces, the appointment of a special UN repre-
sentative to Lebanon, and the expansion of the mandate of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Southern Lebanon (UNIFIL) to include
the entire country (Options 1–4, 7, 11); organizing a high level interna-
tional conference under UN auspices with Saudi assistance (Option 5)
or a conference of Arab States exclusively (Option 6); imposing an arms
embargo and blockade of Lebanon (Option 7); initiating direct U.S. in-
teraction with the Lebanese Government through the establishment of
a U.S. military training mission (Option 9) or the formulation of a U.S.
proposal to resolve the “domestic political aspects of the crisis” (Option
10); and urging Lebanon to invite a “Wise Man’s Group” of interna-
tional statesmen “acquainted with Lebanon’s problems” to visit the
country (Option 12). In a series of handwritten annotations on the doc-
ument, Carter indicated his views: United Nations involvement was a
“possibility” and an arms embargo and blockade would bring a “prob-
able confrontation w/Israel.” At the top of the memorandum, Carter
wrote: “There don’t seem to be any really good ideas. Saudis and UN
best hope.” (Memorandum from Vance to Carter, undated; Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office
File, Subject Chron File, Box 71, Brzezinski, Chron: 10/1–10/78)
On October 4, French President Vale´ry Giscard d’Estaing wrote to
President Carter, suggesting a ceasefire solution. Giscard informed him
that he had been in touch with Lebanese President Sarkis who had sug-
gested redeploying ADF forces “in the most exposed sectors of the
Beirut metropolitan area in such a way as to avoid contact between the
military elements of one side or the other,” with the objective of eventu-
ally replacing these forces with Lebanese army units. The French Presi-
dent agreed to support this initiative and to take it to Syrian President
Hafez al-Assad for the latter’s approval. Giscard stated to Carter that he
had done this “in the most urgent terms.” Carter responded to Giscard
on October 5, stating his strong support for the initiative and empha-
sizing the need for the continuation of U.S.-French cooperation over
Lebanon. The texts of Giscard’s October 4 letter and Carter’s October 5
response are in telegram Tosec 110083/253369 to Secretary of State
Vance and Damascus, Tel Aviv, Beirut, and USUN, October 5. (Na-
tional Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840156–2201)
Carter also sent a letter to Assad, who was then in Moscow for talks
with the Soviets, urging him to accept the ceasefire terms. The text of
