Panama  951
all matters affecting11 United States relations with Panama. This, in 
addition to the appointment of a civilian governor responsible to the 
Ambassador, would simplify the problem of coordination and reduce 
the military and “colonial” coloration of the Zone.12
It is recommended that you seek Secretary Brucker’s concurrence that 
Executive Order 10575 be recognized as applicable to the Canal Zone vis-a-
vis the Republic of Panama as it is elsewhere in the conduct of United States 
foreign relations.13
The appointment of a State Department representative to the Canal 
Company Board, the appointment of a civilian governor and the estab-
lishment of the primacy of the Ambassador would have two immedi-
ate effects: It would (a) “civilianize“ the Panama Canal Company and 
(b) ­supplant the present primacy of the Department of the Army by elevat-
ing the Department of State to new responsibilities vis-a-vis the Zone and 
the Canal.
Civilianization of the Company would still permit the special com-
petence of the Corps of Engineers vis-a-vis the Canal to be available to 
the civilian management.
The result of appointing a civilian governor would be to reduce 
the role of the Department of the Army in the Zone to that of furnishing 
technical acceptance in the operation of the Canal and of maintaining 
a security force. 
4. [illegible in the original]
It is believed that the forthcoming meeting with Secretary Brucker 
would be the appropriate time to raise once again the Panamanian 
request that the United States fly its flag in the Zone.
As you will remember, a decision on the request of November 25 
has been delayed on a result of Congressional opposition. However, 
Governor Potter’s precedent of March 1 in displaying ceremonial 
Panamanian flags received no unfavorable comment from Congress, 
which leads to the belief some of the “sting” of this issue may have 
been drawn.
The House Foreign Affairs Committee as yet has not made public 
its attitude toward flying the Panamanian flag. Moreover, it is under-
stood that the Senate Foreign Relations Committee does not intend to 
take action on the flag issue.
11 At this point, an unknown hand inserted the following in the source text: “the 
Govt. of.” 
12 At this point the following handwritten notation appears on the source text: ”(see 
Mr. Merchant’s comment, Tab F, para. 2).” Merchant, according to his memorandum or 
March 30, suggested that, in the interest of clarity, the reference to the Ambassador’s respon-
sibility “on all matters affecting United States relations with Panama.” Should be amended 
to read “. . . United States relations with the Government of Panama.” (719.00/3–3060)
13 According to a handwritten notation on the source text, Herter approved this 
recommendation on April 1.
