Chapter 7, January–May 1991  989
Points to make:
 Amb. Obukhov sought assurances that the solution we worked 
out in Houston would not permit rapid and massive conversion of B-1s 
to ALCM carriers.
 Amb. Bartholomew has offered some information on how long 
conversion would take and where it would be done, if this would close 
this issue once and for all.
 (If he asks for it formally, i.e. in a letter or binding statement:) 
That’s too formal for something this detailed and operational. But we 
are willing to read it into the negotiating record.
PPCM
Houston:	
PPCM will be established in the Soviet Union at facil-
ities that produce mobile ICBMs (and their silo-­based 
variants), and in the US at facilities that produce the 
accountable stages of mobile ICBMs (and their silo-­
based variants), or such assembled missiles.
	
	
This translates into Pavlograd and Votkinsk in 
the USSR, and (because we have agreed to treat 
Peacekeeper as a mobile ICBM) Promontory, Utah.
	
	
For reciprocity, we accept a second site in the US, but 
the location was not discussed in Houston. (Our pro-
posal is to continue the INF site in Magna, Utah.)
Obukhov:	 In Geneva, the Soviets assert the second US site should 
cover the Small ICBM from the beginning of the treaty, 
based the position in Shevardnadze’s pre-Houston 
letter.
	
	
Obukhov, however, has only asked privately when in 
the development cycle the Small ICBM would become 
subject to PPCM. (I explained to him that the Small 
ICBM would be included in PPCM if we decide to 
make it a mobile missile, once it reached certain mile-
stones that are years away.)
Points to make:
 When we agreed to permit mobile ICBMs, that depended on 
working out an effective verification scheme. Then I made a big move 
in Houston, accepting PPCM at assembly facilities rather that solid 
rocket motor plants.
 We have also agreed that each side should have 2 PPCM sites 
when START enters into force, even though we do not have any mobile 
ICBMs.
