3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 June–December 1977 243 making good progress in regards to strategic arms limitations and the Comprehensive Test Ban; I am also encouraged by the fact that we have opened new discussions regarding arms transfers, and that our delegations are fruitfully pursuing reciprocal arms restraint in the Indian Ocean. In spite of continuing differences between our two countries, and these differences admittedly are deep-rooted and will take time to fade, we are making steady progress in widening the scope of our collaboration. I was especially gratified by your comments regarding nuclear weapons. It is my fervent hope that you and I will succeed in significantly reducing, and perhaps even eliminating, the dependence of our countries on these terrible weapons of mass destruction. I am—as you are—deeply dedicated to that goal. At the same time, I would be less than candid if I did not register some concern over recent developments in two important regions. I was disappointed to learn that Minister Gromyko feels that the recent peace initiatives by President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin were somehow contrived by the United States, in part in order to move away from the principles to which we jointly subscribed earlier in the year. As Secretary Vance has already stated, these events were not initiated by the United States; nonetheless, we do welcome them as potentially positive steps toward peace, and we hope that both the United States and the Soviet Union can continue to encourage all of the parties to reach a comprehensive settlement. Such a settlement will have to be negotiated finally at Geneva, and we count on collaborating closely with you in making these negotiations as fruitful as possible. In our view, present trends in the Middle East do involve an increasing willingness on the part of the parties concerned to adopt positions which make a compromise solution more likely. We would hope that the Soviet Union would be party to that process and would help to discourage the extremist positions of some of the Arab parties. Without such Soviet help, it might prove difficult to reach the common goals of a comprehensive settlement negotiated in Geneva, as emphasized in your letter of December 15. Also in your letter, you make the point that the representative of the Palestinian people is a necessary element in the Geneva Conference, with which I agree, but I confess to a sense of disappointment that the leadership of the PLO has not been more helpful to our efforts to work out a formula for Palestinian representation at the conference acceptable to the parties. In response to the questions you raise about the procedures to be followed at the Geneva Conference, I am inclined to feel that these matters can best be settled in consultations with the parties to the conference. I understand your concerns, and I am confident that these
