1955 473 reconciliation with US. He hoped US would also show its reconciliation by actual deeds. 56. Wang said I had stated that no third parties were involved. 57. I replied that he had not quite grasped my question. My ques­ tion was whether or not the Ambassador agreed that factual situation Taiwan area was such that initiation of hostilities by either side would endanger international peace. 58. Wang replied that of course international peace was being endangered. It was not question of resort to force by both sides. In fact US already using force in area. 59. Wang said he was sure all his statements today were intended answer my questions. If I would study his remarks I would get my answers. 60. I replied that I could not agree that US using force in area but that I was trying to avoid controversy this point. I had presented views of my government at preceding meeting and would not take time to repeat. I would study what he had said and would discuss this subject further at subsequent meeting. 61. I then presented prepared statement on missing military per­ sonnel as follows: A. At last meeting when I raised question of missing military personnel, you used phrase “non-­existent”. I do not know whether you interpret this to mean missing men are now non-­existent or were non-­existent. B. I mentioned Mr. Craig at our last meeting. Evidence indicates he was alive and in your hands at one time. I want to assure you our purpose is not to embarrass or make charges but simply to obtain infor­ mation for families of these men. I would like to mention another name in list I discussed last week. Name is Corporal Russel F. Morris of US Army. Corporal Morris’ name was listed as prisoner of war in Shanghai News of June 30, 1951. August 1951 issue of China Monthly Review also listed his name. C. In listing his name along with others, China Monthly Review states list compiled on basis New China News Agency list of POW’s who have broadcast statements over Peking Radio or who have asked Chinese correspondents in Korea to publish their names so that their families may learn that they are prisoners. D. In regard to your statement last week, I want to ask whether this means that responsible correspondents of your side in Korea would take names of missing Americans and state that they are POW’s in order to mislead their families? Would your authorities permit such false information to be circulated by New China News Agency? It is difficult for me to believe that this is case. If it is not case, this man was
