723.2515/1657: Telegram
[Document 236]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, October 25, 1925—1 p.m.
[Received October 26(?)—11:55 a.m.]
From Pershing:
(1) Edwards came to see me on the evening of October 19 to discuss in general way
substitute resolution he is preparing. He insisted that any recognition by Government of
Chile of authority of Plebiscitary Commission as we understand it would be impossible
and that Chilean Government would not agree to it. I took direct issue with him and
said that that recognition must be accorded and question must be decided very soon.
After some further talk he became quite confidential and said that he thought plebiscite
as contemplated by our construction of award was entirely impossible, that for some
time he had been of this opinion, and that he had telegraphed his Government apprising
them of his opinion. He said he did not mean any reflection personally, and that if he
were in my place he would do exactly as I was doing. Continuing, he said that it would
make no difference how many officials it might seem necessary to remove, their places
would have to be taken by Chileans and that all Chileans were alike in attitude toward
Peruvians. He pointed out that I had seen conditions here and could judge for myself,
and that Government could not control Chilean sentiments as they were outgrowth of
the past 45 years’ relations between the two peoples. He said no Chilean carabineer or
policeman could be expected to intervene in favor of Peruvians against his own people.
He repeated with emphasis that it was an impossible situation. He thought it possible to
postpone plebiscite 6 months to see if there might not be some other way to settle
differences and suggested that he, Freyre, and I might be designated by our
Governments to discuss matter here and try to find a solution.
I then said that if plebiscite were found impossible someone would probably be held
responsible and I asked him whether his Government would accept whatever blame
might attach to such a finding. He answered that it would be unnecessary to blame
anyone as situation was inherent in very nature of things. He suggested that I approach
Freyre and I said that I would think it over.
On October 21 I called to see him on another matter, but broached the subject only to
say that it did not seem expedient for me to speak to the Peruvian Commissioner, and
suggested that Chilean Government might take it up with the Secretary of State. He
