536 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV As planning for NIFTY NUGGET progressed, its potential value in identifying serious deficiencies and energizing remedial work became apparent. Three things were done to make the exercise of more value: —A complementary exercise, PETITE NUGGET, was designed and held prior to NIFTY NUGGET to examine the premobilization assumptions of the latter exercise. Less an exercise than a discussion, PETITE NUGGET was nevertheless situation oriented and it forced the players to make what in reality would be very difficult decisions. PETITE NUGGET shed light on our lack of preparation for such decision making. —A decision was made to involve senior level civilian personnel in NIFTY NUGGET. Heretofore, Joint Staff exercises had used exercise control groups or a few, action level OSD staff members to represent the Secretary of Defense and his staff. As a result, crucial decisions that must be made by civilian authorities were assumed away. For NIFTY NUGGET the Under Secretary of Defense (Policy), Stanley R. Resor, acted as the Secretary, and Richard Danzig, DASD for Program Development (MRA&L), acted as Deputy Secretary of Defense. Many Deputy Assistant Secretaries of Defense participated. The Military Departments established a similar policy. This level of participation was unprecedented, and led to an extremely rich harvest of insights. —An evaluation of DoD performance and OSD management preparedness was commissioned. Although each Military Department and the Organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff had designed its own evaluation, it was believed that much would be gained by specific focus on policy, planning and procedures at the OSD level. A former Assistant Secretary of Defense (M&RA), William K. Brehm, assisted by two recently retired general officers and a small staff, undertook this difficult task. Now almost complete, that evaluation is reflected in this report. B. (C) An Assessment of Capability The two exercises, PETITE and NIFTY NUGGET, tested thousands of functions and relationships under extreme conditions. Many passed with flying colors. However, the exercises also underscored important respects in which the DoD can and ought to improve its capacity to mobilize and move forces rapidly to reinforce our NATO Allies. The exercises bred a conviction that more attention should be given now to management of the systems that would mobilize, augment and deploy national resources. Planning for mobilization needs to be improved. The current plan is an assembly of old and unconnected Presidential emergency orders, policies, regulations and procedures. Each covers a single aspect of the process but not all aspects are addressed. With little warning, mobilization execution would have to be decentralized; but plans need to be improved if the process is to proceed without major blockages. More must also be done to plan for a graduated build-­up. We can profit
