338 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI affect the determination of when missiles become deployed. Agreement on this compromise would clear away numerous brackets in the JDT. Nazarkin said the Soviet side shared the desire to resolve this issue in Washington or Wyoming this week so that the delegations could implement the solution in Geneva. In fact, while the U.S. was studying the issue in Washington, the Soviet side had come up with a similar solution in Moscow, one that also involved a combined unit of a launcher and a missile. But in our Russian version, the order was different—“ICBM launcher and its associated ICBM” or “SLBM launcher and its associated SLBM.” Burt asked himself how he knew the Soviet side would put launchers first. Nazarkin acknowledged there was a slight difference. But, he argued, it was more logical to put launchers first. This was clear when one looked at SLBMs. Joseph said that, from the U.S. perspective, it was clearly more logical to have missiles first. Nazarkin suggested that the issue be revisited at the next meeting of the sub-­group. Burt said the two sides seemed to agree conceptually that we should be limiting two things as a unit. It should now be possible to find a solution. If possible, we should avoid having to send the issue to Ministers to resolve. Nazarkin agreed and suggested turning to non-­deployed missiles. He said limits on non-­deployed arms should apply to all types of arms, including cruise missiles, and he recalled Soviet proposals to limit spare ALCMs at air bases and spare SLCMs at stationing points. Burt said the U.S. position on non-­deployed missiles was still under review, so he would not have anything new to say. However, he continued to believe that it made no sense, both from a military and verification standpoint, to limit either non-­deployed ALCMs or SLCMs (deployed or non-­deployed). Nazarkin wanted to return briefly to the question of unit of account. If agreement could be reached, how could it be recorded? Would we prepare a text that would provide guidance to the delegations? Burt said he didn’t think a text was necessary. He suggested that the two sides think about the issue overnight. There was agreement in substance; the question now was which term to put first, missiles or launchers. Emphasizing that he was speaking personally, Burt wondered whether a way out of the dilemma was to put missiles first in the English text and launchers first in the Russian text. Nazarkin said he would give it some thought.
