Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980 While we seek to attain our broad ultimate objectives, we must never lose sight of immediate human suffering. We’ve not forgotten and we will not forget the 53 Americans imprisoned in Iran. Our Nation places a great value on human life and on human freedom. We will continue to make every effort, using peaceful means if possible, and through collective action with our allies, to obtain the release of our countrymen. And we will remind the Iranian leaders that the integrity and the independence of their own country can only suffer from this policy of theirs that led to international isolation and also internal disintegration. We have no permanent quarrel with the Iranian people. We wish to fashion a relationship of dignity with them, once this illegal action has been put behind us. Our Nation has continued to act responsibly and in good faith toward both the people and the leaders of Iran. Our rescue attempt was a mission of mercy, not a military attack. No Iranian was killed or harmed in any way. Its only aim was to rescue innocent victims of terrorist exploitation. I regret only that it did not succeed and that eight gallant young men died in the accident as the rescue team was leaving its desert rendezvous. This morning I participated in a memorial service for those eight young men.11 And before the service I met individually with every family involved. As I approached them I had some trepidation, but in every instance they reached their arms out for me, and we embraced each other, and I could tell that their concern was about me, not about them. And they made comments to me, “God bless you, Mr. President. We are praying for you, Mr. President. And we are proud of our son or our husband, who was willing to give his life for our country and for freedom.” Our commitment to a world that represents human rights has been heard by all people, by free people and also by those who do not know the meaning of freedom. The eagerness of large numbers of Cubans, for instance, to flee their own country is eloquent testimony to the failure of the totalitarian Castro regime. We must ensure that the Cubans who arrive in the United States and the Haitians who arrive in the United States will be treated with all the humanity and the compassion which we’ve extended to other groups and which we extend to each other. Every family, probably, in this room which came to our country came here as immigrants, sometimes as refugees, and we should not be callous to those who come in our present day and age under the same or even more difficult circumstances. In order to bring an end to the suffering and the death on the high seas and to permit us to best allo- 11 The memorial service took place at Arlington National Cemetery. For the Presi-
