Yugoslavia 767 240. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, August 31, 1977 SUBJECT Military Sales to Yugoslavia As requested in NSC memorandum 5468 of August 23,2 the State Department has reviewed the interagency study on this subject.3 Provided that the outcome of the September mission to Belgrade4 is satisfactory and that we receive necessary assurances concerning unauthorized retransfers of US-origin equipment, the State Department recommends that a refined version of Option III (Expand the relationship moderately, with an emphasis on political impact) set the general direction of future US policy. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 56, Yugoslavia: 1977. Secret; Sensitive 2 On August 23, the White House tasked the Department of State, the Department of Defense, the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Central Intelligence Agency to review an interagency study on U.S. options for arms transfers to Yugoslavia. The memorandum requested that substantive comments on “major problems or necessary additions” as well as a clear indication of which option the agencies favor be forwarded to the White House by August 31. (Ibid.) On August 30, ACDA notified the White House that it supported either option II or III of the interagency study. On September 1, the CIA responded that it had no substantive comments on the paper. In telegram 5865 from Belgrade, August 30, the Embassy reported its own strong support for option III. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770313–0596) The Department of Defense response is Document 241. 3 Following Admiral Holloway and Vice President Mondale’s visits to Yugoslavia, Brzezinski requested a interagency memorandum to review U.S. options on military sales to Yugoslavia based on Yugoslav requests. The full study, forwarded by the Department of State to the White House on August 19, discussed four possible alternatives: “1. Curtail the Relationship; 2. Maintain the Status Quo; 3. Expand the Relationship Moderately with emphasis on political impact; and 4. Expand the Relationship Substantially, with emphasis on force modernization and improvement.” The study concluded that options 2 and 3 most closely matched U.S. interests, and that option 3 would “be an unmistakably favorable indication to the Yugoslavs about U.S. intentions.” While option 4 “is most consistent with the U.S. strategic interest in maintaining Yugoslavia’s ability to protect its independence,” it “could add stress to U.S.-Soviet relations” and “would tend to commit us to supporting the Yugoslavs in the event of conflict.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 56, Yugoslavia: 1977) 4 A U.S. team met September 14–15 in Belgrade with Yugoslav officials to discuss the uses and disposition of MAP military equipment previously provided to Yugoslavia. The Embassy reported in telegram 6256 from Belgrade, September 17, that “our objectives and concerns have been met.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770339–0574)
