1514 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Tab A Agenda It is suggested that the meeting scheduled for December 30 consider three items in connection with the Geneva nuclear test negotiations: 1. The link with disarmament. The U.S. Delegation and the U.K. have both strongly urged that the element of the President’s August 22 statement tying continuation of test suspension to disarmament progress be abandoned. This ques­ tion has been considered in the Interdepartmental Working Group on Disarmament, and representatives of all interested agencies other than the Department of Defense have indicated no objection to the recom­ mendations of the U.S. Delegation. Suggested action: that the Department of State prepare a memoran­ dum to the President seeking his approval of the abandonment of the disarmament link. 2. Implications of new data on detection and identification of underground tests. A working group of seismologists convened by AFOAT–1 has reviewed the seismic data obtained during HARDTACK II and has concluded that the problem of detecting and identifying underground explosions is more difficult than is indicated in the Geneva Conference of Experts Report. Although based on admittedly inadequate data, the Working Group concludes that “statements by the Geneva Conference of Experts concerning the detection and identification of earthquakes equivalent to 5 KT apply more nearly to about 20 KT.” Suggested action: that Dr. Killian undertake to review the Geneva system to study possible modifications to improve system capability, and the Department of State, coordinating with other agencies, prepare instructions to the Delegation to propose a technical working group of the USSR, U.S. and U.K. to review this data with a view to recommend­ ing modifications on the system and a program of joint U.S.–U.K.–USSR underground tests to provide further data under varying conditions on this problem. 3. Fallback Positions. The U.S. should develop a plan which could serve as an alterna­ tive proposal to a complete breakdown in the Geneva talks. We should consider proposing in this event an immediate end to atmospheric tests with the simple inspection system this would require, and charging the control organ created by such agreement to undertake research and
