118  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
the feasibility of effective strategic defenses and to avoid the need to 
withdraw from the ABM Treaty in order to complete such testing. (S)
1. Affirm the current position. This option would entail continuing 
to use the current U.S. working paper when we return to negotiations 
in Geneva. (S)
Those who favor this option believe that the U.S. unilateral assur-
ance and predictability protocol proposal would gain implicit Soviet 
acknowledgment of certain ABM Treaty testing rights during the non-­
withdrawal period, reduce treaty interpretation debates during and 
after ratification, provide a militarily meaningful distinction between 
permitted testing and prohibited deployment of OPP ABM systems 
in space, and satisfy stated Soviet concerns regarding that distinction. 
They argue further that the U.S. completed its Defense & Space position 
only late in Round X, and that we have not yet even had an opportunity 
to explain fully the position to the Soviets. (S)
Option 1. is supported by: State, ACDA, OSD, Amb. Rowny and 
the Defense & Space Negotiator. (S)
2. Negotiate a new space-­testing proposal. This would entail negotiat-
ing an agreement with the Soviets based on the space testing initiative 
described above. However, it would apply to testing of all space-­based 
weapons systems whether or not they are OPP:
In order to ensure that the testing of space-­based ABM intercep-
tor missiles or components capable of substituting for ABM interceptor 
missiles does not represent the deployment of such components, the 
United States proposes that the Parties confine such testing to desig-
nated ABM test satellites. Any platform based in space from which an 
ABM interceptor missile or a component capable of substituting for an 
ABM interceptor missile is tested to counter a strategic ballistic mis-
sile or its elements in flight trajectory, shall be designated an ABM test 
satellite. Further, the number of designated ABM test satellites orbited 
simultaneously by either side shall not exceed X. (S)
Those who support this option argue that despite some progress 
on the Predictability Protocol and hints of maneuver room on the sen-
sor proposal, a unilateral testing assurance does not provide a common 
U.S.-Soviet understanding of what is and is not allowed during the non-­
withdrawal period, and would constrain the U.S. without constraining 
the Soviets. They believe that negotiating reciprocal space-­based testing 
constraints and allowances is the best mechanism for reaching agree-
ment on research development, and testing activities during the non-­
withdrawal period. Finally, they argue that such an approach would 
likely enhance the probability for Congressional ratification and allay 
Allied concerns about strategic imbalances. (S)
This option is supported by [omission in the original] (S)
