Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1061
421.
Telegram From the Interests Section in Cuba to the
Department of State1
Havana, September 22, 1977, 1800Z
170. Subj: Cubans and NPT.
1. USINT Chief and First Secretary (Glassman) made courtesy call
on Soviet Charge´ Narlen Manasov and Political Counselor Aleksander
S. Seletsky, September 20. In course of tour d’horizon, USINT officers
inquired whether Soviets had urged Cuba to sign Non-Proliferation
Treaty (NPT). Manasov, a veteran of six years here, said that Soviet Em-
bassy here had never rpt never made approach to Cubans on NPT; he
did not comment on approaches elsewhere.
2. Manasov recalled that Cuban UN Perm Rep Alarcon had some
time ago set forth position that Cuba would not sign NPT until Guanta-
namo base removed, Panama Canal problem settled, and U.S. embargo
on Cuba lifted. (FYI on Panama Canal treaties, Manasov remarked that,
in his personal opinion, treaties were best that could be negotiated at
present time. He said that Cubans definitely support treaties.) With re-
gard to Treaty of Tlatelolco and its Protocols, asserted that lack of So-
viet and Cuban adhesion stemmed in part from fact that U.S. main-
tained right for its warships carrying nuclear weapons to transit
Panama Canal, implying that this would be special privilege.
3. British Ambassador told USINT Chief, during recent call, that
during visit early this month of British MP Eldon Griffiths, latter
pressed Cuban Vice-President Carlos Rafael Rodriguez for GOC to sign
NPT. Rodriguez reportedly stated that Cubans would not sign NPT as
matter of principle while it had powerful nuclear neighbor with which
it has serious differences. Implication, consistent with Alarcon’s re-
ported position, was that change in this position in long term is pos-
sible when major problems with U.S. have been resolved.
4. Action requested: Department and ACDA requested to forward
available information on bases of Soviet and Cuban objections to Treaty
of Tlatelolco and its Protocols. Also request background on any condi-
tions, other than those cited above, which Cubans have posed for
signing NPT.
Lane
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770345–1044.
Confidential. Sent for information to Mexico City, Moscow, Panama, and London.
