3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1979
609
States and its allies were no longer satisfied with such a balance and
that they had decided to gain military superiority? If that was the situa-
tion, what sort of cooperation, what sort of strengthening of peace was
that? That would mean a new round in military competition. The So-
viet Union, for its part, believed that the only way of ensuring security
and lasting peace in Europe was to preserve the existing balance of
forces and to reduce them on both sides without changing the existing
correlation of forces. Accordingly, the Soviet Union was in favor of mil-
itary detente.
Brezhnev continued by saying that it was his particular wish that
the States-Parties to the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Eu-
rope conclude a treaty on refraining from first use of nuclear or conven-
tional arms in Europe. Was it not clear that this would create a healthier
climate in Europe and between our two countries? To be quite honest,
what objections could there be to that? In this area, in addition to the
Vienna discussions that had been discussed, the USSR and its allies
had submitted a package of specific proposals to the Western countries.
All these proposals were still on the table and an answer was being
awaited.
Brezhnev recalled that the Warsaw Pact members had recently pro-
posed holding a conference at the political level with the participation
of all the European countries, as well as the U.S. and Canada, to discuss
and agree on practical measures of military detente in Europe, in-
cluding confidence-building measures. Could a favorable reaction to
this initiative be expected from the U.S.?
In conclusion, Brezhnev wanted to note that not everything was
well with implementation of the Quadripartite Agreement regarding
West Berlin, yet that was an important element in European stability.
We had created that agreement in a spirit of cooperation and clearly it
was in our mutual interest to suppress attempts to undermine that
accord.
Turning to the Middle East, Brezhnev said that he presumed the
President was well acquainted with the Soviet position of principle in
its appraisal of the U.S. policy. Brezhnev had written to the President
about it. Now, at this personal meeting he wanted to re-emphasize it.
The fact that the October 1977 Soviet-U.S. understanding on joint action
in the Middle East was violated and supplanted by an anti-Arab policy
argued nothing good for the people of that region nor for the relations
between us. Brezhnev thought that it was clear to everyone now that
the Egyptian-Israeli treaty3 had failed to tranquilize the Middle Eastern
3 The Egyptian-Israeli Treaty was signed March 26, 1979, and provided for, among
other things, each country’s recognition of the other, cessation of the state of war, and Is-
rael’s complete withdrawal from the Sinai Peninsula.
