1955  301
his nationals so that his government could confirm whether those who 
desired to return could actually do so.
21. He said delay in past during first phase of talks was entirely due 
my insistence on return these criminals. My insistence and demands 
contained an element of infringement on his sovereignty. The imple­
mentation of the agreement on the return of civilians could never be 
made an obstacle to the discussion of item two. His side considered 
this argument was an excuse and a pretext which he interpreted as an 
attempt at intentional stalling. He could not see why we should again 
return to our repeated discussion of item one.
22. He said we had come here for talks as a result proposal ini­
tiated by our side. Furthermore his side had accepted an agenda 
which had been proposed by our side. He had come to talks to resolve 
questions and to make progress. He was not here to further discuss 
agreement concluded two weeks ago, and he could see no reason for 
our stalling these talks. He had put forward two topics for discussion 
under agenda item two. At last meeting I had given my opinion and 
now he had commented on my opinion. I had said I would discuss 
practical matters at issue between the two countries and he was pre­
pared to do likewise.
23. I replied he had said something which I wanted to be sure I 
understood. Was it correct he considered terms of agreed announce­
ment did not apply to persons in prison in his country?
24. Wang said he did not say that agreed announcement did not 
apply to persons in prison. Agreement concerned return of civilians 
rather than return of persons who had committed crimes. Cases of 
latter must necessarily be handled according to Chinese law. It was 
a matter of course for a sovereign state to deal with these cases, as it 
also conformed with practice in international law. Any demand that 
these persons did not come under Chinese law was tantamount to an 
unequal treaty known as extraterritoriality. A country which could be 
so humiliated had perished forever.
25. I remarked I simply wanted to say that I had asked what I 
thought are reasonable questions regarding implementation of agreed 
announcement. I was sorry I could not say replies I had received had 
been satisfactory. I had noted UK Charge now being able assume his 
functions. I hoped at next meeting I would have replies to questions I 
had raised today.
26. Wang asked if I had any comment regarding his proposals for 
topics under item two.
27. I said I had no more to say today.
28. Wang asked if I could state whether next time I would be able 
to comment on his proposals.
