Chapter 2, January–June 1989 161 proposal called for a to-­be-­determined aggregate numerical limit on all nondeployed ICBMs and SLBMs. Following interagency review, in August 1988, President Reagan modified the U.S. START position. Reasoning that mobile systems (SS–24 and SS–25) and highly lethal systems (SS–18 and SS–24) posed the most serious threats to the United States, the President exempted SLBMs and older fixed-­silo ICBMs from numerical NDM limits. Under the new guidance, only heavy ICBMs, mobiles, and “modern ICBMs comparable to the SS–24” would have numerical NDM constraints. Heavy ICBMs and moderns would have a single, fixed numerical limit. Mobile ICBMs, if allowed, would have a second fixed, numerical limit. Different verification regimes apply to the two different limits. The United States has not determined what an appropriate numerical limit would be in either case. The President’s decision is at Tab A,5 an extract from a paper used by the President is at Tab B.6 In the U.S. definition tabled in Geneva, a mobile ICBM is one which “has been contained in a roador raillauncher of ICBMs after______,7 or that has been launched from a railor road-mobile launcher of ICBMs.” The Soviets have been told that the date criteria is intended to exclude Minuteman I, which was once transported in a mobile launcher for evaluation purposes. Similarly, a “modern” ICBM is one “that uses a launch canister or has been transported fully assembled, with a throw-­weight of 1,900 kilograms or greater or a launch weight of 60,000 kilograms or greater.” We have not told the Soviets which missiles this definition is intended to capture. The U.S. intent was to capture the SS–24 and SS–25 under the definition of a mobile ICBM. The intent on “modern” ICBMs was to constrain larger Soviet ICBMs which could be made mobile in a breakout scenario. The United States assumed that Soviet “modern” ICBMs do not now exist and thus that the limit on modern ICBMs would apply to future systems only. A strict reading of the tabled definition of “modern” ICBM, however, reveals that it inadvertently captured the Soviet SS–17 and SS–19. No explicit decision was made on whether Peacekeeper would be captured under the modern ICBM definition if mobile ICBMs were not allowed. Peacekeeper would be captured if 5 Attached but not printed. Tab A is an August 20, 1988, memorandum from Reagan to Bush, Shultz, Weinberger, Herrington, Webster, Crowe, and Burns, titled “Nondeployed Ballistic Missiles in START.” 6 Attached but not printed. Tab B is an extract from a July 25, 1988, Arms Control Support Group Paper. 7 Omission is in the original.
