August 8–September 17, 1978
147
claim to sovereignty. Begin talks about sovereignty to justify the exten-
sion of the Israeli occupation.
El-Araby noted that an agreement between Jordan, Israel, and
Egypt should not have a provision giving Israel the right to continue
the occupation in five-years time or to veto a change in regime. Quandt
asked what happened if agreement cannot be reached on the matter of
security. Does the occupation continue? El-Baz responded that the Pal-
estinians should be brought in on everything. It should then be possible
to work everything out, even at the beginning. If too many loose issues
are left undecided, problems are bound to develop. Ghorbal recalled
that the phrase was included in the Aswan language, “legitimate
rights.” He asked where this is being taken into account. If in five years
the Israelis do not leave or the Palestinians have the right to self-
determination, where does this leave us?
The Egyptian three-stage procedure is vitiated if the Israelis retain
the right to veto. The Palestinians should be given self-determination.
They should have the right to determine their own future. The issue
should not be cast in terms of a security threat to Israel.
Brzezinski pointed out that we do not believe that the sovereignty
question needs be resolved at this time. We concede that sovereignty
rests with the people. But we must also recognize that there is a
problem of security. We believe that the security problem must be re-
solved at an early stage. The solution of the Palestinian question should
not be deferred until the end of the five-year period. If one attempts to
do so, it amounts to an interim, partial agreement.
Quandt asked why the Egyptians had agreed to a five-year period
if they wish everything to be settled at the outset. Time is required to
settle some of the difficult problems. El-Baz responded that the Egyp-
tians accepted the five-year period at the United States’ urging. The
Egyptian concept is two-fold: (a) a transitional period in which the Pal-
estinians are conceded the right to self-determination, even though
Egypt recognizes it is difficult to bring this about; (b) agreement to the
phasing out of “certain things.” While the Israelis are withdrawing,
Egypt will propose introducing security, the determination of belliger-
ency and peace. The transfer of authority in the West Bank/Gaza can
take place in steps. Egypt does not accept the transitional period as a
way of deferring fundamental issues. Egypt is willing to do all it can to
press the Palestinians to link with Jordan and to discuss borders, secu-
rity, etc., with a view to deciding these matters. Ghorbal noted that any
solution must assume that sovereignty rests with the people. The Is-
raelis admit self-rule should be the right of the people, hence this con-
cept fits in. The Israelis ought to be satisfied that the Arabs, with the
help of the United States, will during the transition period work to have
the Palestinians agree to a link with Jordan. They will also agree to nor-
