Bulgaria 283 the Straits, they would probably, in my judgment, perform tolerably well—especially with Soviet help—in a fairly quick, sustained effort. But there are long histories of hatred with their Balkan neighbors, and if the Bulgarians were fighting Yugoslavs, or Greeks, or Turks, or Romanians, on the other fellow’s soil, I would expect their opponents to outfight them man for man. I would have doubts about the reliability of the Bulgarian armed forces in major tasks that took very long and that went very far beyond their own frontiers. But if the Soviets assigned them limited objectives, to be accomplished with decent equipment over a short time span, I suspect they would do rather well. (This is the opinion, of course, of a diplomat and not a military expert.) A footnote to this is that I suspect there are strains over military expenses, both within Bulgaria and with the USSR. I believe Zhivkov is sincere, at least in part, in his constant speaking about the crying need for reducing arms, and one element of this, I think, is the burden that arms expenditures are on a small economy like Bulgaria’s. 15. Seventh, are there any variations possible in Bulgaria’s foreign policy? 16. Not many, not soon. The conventional wisdom is that while Sofia may complain about not getting enough Russian oil at the right price, or about having to increase military expenditures, it is perfectly happy to follow the Soviet lead in foreign policy in toto. (I carry in my billfold, as constant reminder of where we stand in this respect, Foreign Minister Mladenov’s statement of last January in Moscow that Bulgarian and Soviet policy was identical “even to the nuances.”) Conventional wisdom is not far from right, I fear, although it stands to reason that the Bulgarians differ from the Russians sometimes on foreign policy issues, especially those that affect Bulgarian interests, and I assume that behind the scenes they are at least occasionally giving the Soviets their views. I can give some examples of hypothetical areas of divergence, but I cannot cite a single solid example of a difference on the record between Sofia and Moscow, in foreign policy. (But least the reader infer too much from that statement, let him try to think of open foreign policy—repeat, foreign policy—differences between Moscow and Budapest or Warsaw, not to mention Prague or East Berlin.) I assume that Afghanistan has caused the Bulgarians a good deal of discomfort, although their behavior has been loyal. They follow the Soviet line towards the Italian and Spanish Communist Parties, but I wonder if at times they would rather not have to do so. Most importantly, Bulgarian aims in the Balkans do not always coincide with Soviet aims, and we have evidence that the Bulgarians would like to cooperate more in Balkan multilateral endeavors than the Soviets have so far allowed. As for Yugoslavia, while outsiders often assume that Sofia is merely Moscow’s catspaw, I think the Bulgarians have
