March–August 1953 C. The major and perhaps insurmountable obstacle to winning them over is their refusal to be associated in any way with a plot involving the British. No mention of TPAJAX has ever been made or inferred but recent developments show the Qashqais suspect U.S. implication in what they believe is a British sponsored plot to oust Mossadeq. III. Qashqai/Amini Position as Stated by Khosrow Qashqai—27 July A. Khosrow Qashqai is suspicious of possible Anglo-American cooperation in plan to oust Mossadeq. B. Qashqai/Amini clique fully agreed to “take orders from U.S. in any American backed plan”2 but would “fight to finish” any plot in which British or British agents involved. C. Qashqais and Aminis willing to produce blueprint for action and discuss with KUBARK. Their cost estimates are high ($5,000,000 plus $250,000,000 economic aid by loan or grant upon completion of successful action). IV. Station/Roosevelt Estimate of Qashqai/Amini Position and Proposal A. Genuineness: Offer made with Qashqais retaining in their own mind initiative to follow through if we agree—or later betray if it to their advantage. B. Validity their claims 1. Political support based on their alliance Mossadeq and would materially be reduced if they broke with him. Major political asset their current freedom from British taint. 2. Military support largely valid, although some exaggeration should be anticipated. 3. Tribes. Probably valid. C. Firmness of Position per III above 1. Threats. Threats to oppose British or British/American plot probably real and they could cause extremely serious trouble. Qashqai decision would await last moment and be determined by Qashqai best interest as latter sees it. 2. Budget. Figures given not necessarily firm (and probably based on ignorance) but we could expect price tag for Qashqai/Amini affiliation to be higher than with TPAJAX. V. Roosevelt/Station Recommendation to Solve Qashqai/Amini Problem Proceed with TPAJAX and attempt to enlist under most favorable circumstances cooperation of certain elements of Qashqais/Aminis. If 2 Omitted here is a footnote in the original that contains detailed operational material.
