1955  285
Enclosure
Letter from Wang to Johnson2
Geneva, September 16, 1955
Mr. U. Alexis Johnson:
At our September 14 meeting I informed you that the Chinese Gov­
ernment had published the full text of our Agreed Announcement at 
the agreed time. I also proposed that the United States Government 
should formally entrust the United Kingdom Government on the one 
hand and the Chinese Government should formally entrust the Indian 
Government on the other so as to complete the procedures of entrust­
ing the third powers. Then the Chinese Government should notify 
the United Kingdom Government and the United States Government 
should notify the Indian Government respectively extending their 
agreement to the respective third powers being entrusted to assume the 
functions stipulated in the Agreed Announcement of the Ambassadors 
of China and the United States.
I am hereby instructed to inform you that after the United States 
Government has formally entrusted the United Kingdom Government 
the Chinese Government will notify the United Kingdom Government 
of its agreement to the latter’s being entrusted by the United States 
Government to offer the Americans who desire to return the various 
assistance specified in our Agreed Announcement.
At the September 14 meeting you advised me that the United 
States Embassy in New Delhi had informed the Indian Ministry of 
External Affairs on September 11 and formally invited it to assume 
the functions stipulated in the Announcement. This notification of the 
United States Government can only be interpreted in the following 
manner: The United States Government is aware that the Chinese 
Government has previously indicated its readiness to the Indian Gov­
ernment to entrust India to extend assistance in the matter concerning 
the return of Chinese nationals residing in the United States. During 
these talks I again indicated to you on many occasions that the Chi­
nese Government would entrust the Indian Government to extend 
assistance to Chinese nationals residing in the United States who 
desire to return. Hence, the notification of the United States Govern­
ment to the Indian Government means the former’s agreement to the 
Indian Government being entrusted by the Chinese Government and 
2 Confidential. The letter is marked “Translation.”
