First Responses 39 [less than 1 line not declassified] the possibility of serious psychological trauma for the hostages. The cable from Geneva2 reflects some of the same concern. Under the circumstances, we should have in mind a contingency plan to ensure the hostages receive prompt medical and psychiatric support on their release. 2 Not further identified. 17. Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, November 9, 1979 SUBJECT The Soviet Role in the Crisis in Iran The SCC discussions to date have conspicuously ignored the Soviet variables in the power equation in Iran. I am sure they are clear in your mind but as a reminder I enumerate the following points: First, the Soviet strategy in the Persian Gulf region for several years has been aimed at demobilization. The seizure of power in Ethiopia and later in Afghanistan2 showed a Soviet willingness to set in motion upheavals in Iran, Iraq, and the Arabian Peninsula. Clearly the Soviet decision on this strategy was based on the assumption that they could ride the upheavals and benefit. Second, the Tudeh cadres and other pro-Soviet groups have proved relatively weak as an objective basis for Soviet influence within Iran. The obvious tactic for them, therefore, is to exacerbate tension and 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 29, Iran 11/1/79–11/14/79. Secret; Outside the System. Sent for information. A stamped notation in the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum reads: “ZB has seen.” 2 On February 11, 1977, Mengistu Haile Mariam became head of state in Ethiopia. He accepted aid from the USSR, subsequently closing the U.S. military mission in April 1977. On April 28, 1978, the Marxist People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan assassinated Afghan President Mohammad Daoud Khan. He was succeeded by Nur Mohammad Taraki who implemented Marxist-Leninist policies in Afghanistan.
