1168  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
ICBMs, any ICBM base for rail-mobile launchers of ICBMs, and any 
deployment area.
(d) Each Party shall locate training facilities for ICBMs no less than 
100 kilometers from any test range.
(e) Each Party shall locate storage areas for heavy bomber nuclear 
armaments no less than 100 kilometers from any air base for heavy 
bombers equipped for nonnuclear armaments and any training facil-
ity for heavy bombers. Each Party shall locate storage areas for long-
range nuclear ALCMs no less than 100 kilometers from any air base 
for heavy bombers equipped for nuclear armaments other than long-
range nuclear ALCMs, any air base for heavy bombers equipped for 
non-­nuclear armaments, and any training facility for heavy bombers.
12. Each Party shall limit the duration of each transit to no more 
than 30 days.
ARTICLE V
1. Except as prohibited by the provisions of this Treaty, modern-
ization and replacement of strategic offensive arms may be carried out.
2. Each Party undertakes not to:
(a) produce, flight-test, or deploy heavy ICBMs of a new type, or 
increase the launch weight or throw-weight of heavy ICBMs of an exist-
ing type;
(b) produce, flight-test, or deploy heavy SLBMs;
(c) produce, test, or deploy mobile launchers of heavy ICBMs;
(d) produce, test, or deploy additional silo launchers of heavy 
ICBMs, except for silo launchers of heavy ICBMs that replace silo 
launchers of heavy ICBMs that have been eliminated in accordance 
with Section II of the Conversion or Elimination Protocol, provided that 
the limits provided for in Article II of this Treaty are not exceeded;
(e) convert launchers that are not launchers of heavy ICBMs into 
launchers of heavy ICBMs;
(f) produce, test, or deploy launchers of heavy SLBMs;
(g) reduce the number of warheads attributed to a heavy ICBM of 
an existing type.
3. Each Party undertakes not to deploy ICBMs other than in silo 
launchers of ICBMs, on road-mobile launchers of ICBMs, or on rail-­
mobile launchers of ICBMs. Each Party undertakes not to produce, test, 
or deploy ICBM launchers other than silo launchers of ICBMs, road- 
mobile launchers of ICBMs, or rail-mobile launchers of ICBMs.
4. Each Party undertakes not to deploy on a mobile launcher of 
ICBMs an ICBM of a type that was not specified as a type of ICBM for 
mobile launchers of ICBMs in accordance with paragraph 2 of Section 
VII of the Protocol on Notifications Relating to this Treaty, hereinafter 
referred to as the Notification Protocol, unless it is an ICBM to which no
