Romania
567
incentives the U.S. could offer Romania in seeking improved human
rights performance was also raised, but without conclusive answers.
Multilateral issues. Andrews commented that given Ceausescu’s
interest in international issues, at least one perhaps one-and-a-half of
the two meetings between the two Presidents would be devoted to
such topics as international security issues including SALT, East-West
relations, the Middle East, nonproliferation, and the new international
economic order. The upcoming UN Special Session on Disarmament
(SSOD) was identified as a particularly appropriate topic that the Presi-
dent might raise. President Ceausescu might also be expected to express
an interest in MBFR.
4. Trade agreement renewal/MFN waiver. Andrews said these
issues will be major focus of Romanian concern before and during
visit. There was general agreement that the GOR should be disabused
now of any lingering expectation that a formula for multi-year MFN
can be found in time for the visit (or, for that matter, this year). Reference
was made to Senator Stevenson’s talk with Ceausescu and his blunt
linkage of any revision of Title IV of the Trade Act with progress in
U.S.-Soviet relations.3 Despite such evidence that the GOR at highest
levels should by now have understood the US difficulty with revising
Title IV. It was agreed that Pungan’s VIP visit will provide another
useful opportunity to pour cold water on any Romanian hopes to use
the Ceausescu visit as a vehicle to pry out multi-year MFN. Andrews
also urged all present to make sure that, in conversations with the
Romanian Embassy, they or their principals remain very firm on this
issue. There will also be some GOR targets in economic area (such as
creation of bilateral cooperation projects) for which Romanians will
push, but in which USG cannot play a major role. We will have to
repeat this message at a high level. It was also recognized that since
we have gone about as far as we can in the economic/commercial area
(export controls, MFN, credits, GSP, government support for coopera-
tive ventures), we can expect major problems in fending off the inevita-
ble Romanian requests for much more.
5. On Decree 223, it was suggested that if the renewed assurances
of Romanian action do not translate into settlement offers in a reason-
3 Senator Adlai Stevenson met with President Ceausescu at Ceausescu’s mountain
retreat in Predeal on January 10. In telegram 302 from Bucharest, January 17, the Embassy
reported Stevenson’s comment to Ceausescu that the Jackson-Vanik amendment to the
Trade Act was a consequence of U.S.-Soviet relations. The Senator “indicated that relation-
ship of Eastern European countries with Soviet Union continued to appear to be impedi-
ment to the U.S. desire to pursue kind of natural relationships we would like to have
with other Eastern European countries.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D780024–0722)
