702 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 204. Memorandum of Conversation1 Jerusalem, March 11, 1979, 11:30 a.m.–1:30 p.m.; 3:08–3:35 p.m.; 5–5:30 p.m. SUBJECT President’s Meeting with Prime Minister Begin PARTICIPANTS President Jimmy Carter Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State Harold Brown, Secretary of Defense Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Alfred Atherton, Ambassador-at-Large Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Samuel W. Lewis, U.S. Ambassador to Israel Hamilton Jordan, Assistant to the President Jerry Rafshoon, Assistant to the President for Communications Jody Powell, Press Secretary to the President Ed Sanders, Senior Adviser to the President and the Secretary of State Richard Viets, Deputy Chief of Mission, U.S. Embassy, Israel Mr. William Quandt, NSC Staff Member Menachem Begin, Prime Minister Yigael Yadin, Deputy Prime Minister Moshe Dayan, Minister of Foreign Affairs Ezer Weizman, Minister of Defense Ariel Sharon, Minister of Agriculture Eliezer Shostak, Minister of Health Yitzak Zamir, Attorney General Ephraim Evron, Israeli Ambassador to U.S. Meir Rosenne, Legal Advisor, Minister of Foreign Affairs Office Harry Hurwitz, Prime Minister’s Information Officer Ayre Naor, Cabinet Secretary Yosef Burg, Minister of Interior Dan Pattir, Press Spokesman Yehuda Avner, Special Assistant to the Prime Minister Eliyahu Ben-Elissar, Chef de Cabinet, Prime Minister’s Office General Ephraim Poran, Military Secretary to the Prime Minister Prime Minister Begin: I welcome you to the Cabinet Room. It is a great honor to have you visit this room. We have taken many democratic decisions here. It is the custom that the host preside, but since I 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 16, Egypt-Israel Negotiations: 3/1–11/79. Secret. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room. Carter’s handwritten notes from this meeting, as well as a list of talking points, are in the Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 2, Israel, 3/79.
