3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 902 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI understood, should keep its hands off. The US side, for its part, replied that it had no intention to interfere, subsequently, the Soviet side had been surprised that the US, after the meeting, made press statements about having warned the USSR not to intervene. Such unilateral misleading statements served to aggravate the situation, misrepresenting the facts of what had transpired in the meeting, “turning matters on their head,” all in an attempt to make public opinion believe that the Soviets were at fault and had been warned. Why did the US behave this way, making the Soviets look bad? It was a petty method. No candidate for political office could get any use out of it and it was not a good basis for conducting foreign affairs because it undermined credibility and confidence in high level statements. 4. He went on at length to say that he had not believed when he talked with the Secretary that in a few days the Soviet position would be publicly distorted and presented in a wrong way. The USSR could and should present the US “a political bill for its recourse to such misrepresentation,” and this was why, after returning from New York, the Soviet side had decided to draw US attention to matter of intervention. As the Soviets analyze the situation, the US is itself interfering, but reproaching the USSR as if it were the guilty party. The USSR had a right to reply to this; had Washington lost its sense of reality? War and bloodshed could come out of the situation as it was developing and the Soviet side was free to express this opinion, which he specifically asked me to convey to Washington. Washington was adopting the principle that offense is the best defense, but it won’t work. The responsibility could not be shifted to the USSR. 5. Gromyko said he wished to draw serious attention to the concentration of a large US fleet in the Strait of Hormuz and the adjacent area. There was no reason, “not even a formal pretext,” for this, and the naval force was even increasing with reinforcements arriving from other areas. True, the US guns were silent and didn’t shoot, but the presence was political-military pressure and tantamount to “very rude interference.” 6. Gromyko said he wanted to speak of Iran: Iraq could be generally included in his meaning, but he was now speaking about Iran. The oil riches of Iran could not be construed as belonging to the US. Iran was not a “US oil tank.” It was the Iranian people’s oil, to dispose of as they chose, and “no capital in the world is entitled to give Iran a timetable for how much oil it is to provide in any month or year.” It was in the interest of detente and a better world situation generally to withdraw the US Navy from the Persian Gulf. He could include the Indian Ocean, too. But for the purpose at hand he was referring only to the Gulf and Hormuz.
