170 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III and (ii) be prepared to speak out publicly against egregiously inflationary price or wage actions. We have no objection to any of these recommendations, but would add the following: 1. Direct Contact with the Steel Companies. Charlie indicates that he has talked with the chief executives of several of the steel companies which have not yet raised their prices. You might make a private, unpublicized call to one or two of these executives to indicate your personal concern and strong hope that they will not follow the U.S. Steel–Bethlehem lead.10 2. CWPS Hearings. You could direct CWPS to not only undertake a study but conduct public hearings on the price increases. We believe that both Barry Bosworth and Charlie are concerned that this would be too confrontational and with little to gain. It is, nevertheless, a viable option you might use if you wish to take high visibility action.11 3. Link to Auto Manufacturers. We think that any Administration discussion with the automobile manufacturers should not be publicly linked to these steel price increases. The public might regard calling in the automobile companies as a rather strange and indirect response to price increases by steel companies. 4. Meet with Labor-Management Committee. If you want to make a strong personal response to the steel price increases, and if Charlie thinks it advisable, you could call a special meeting of the Labor- Management Committee and lay down in general terms the need for price restraint by business if we are ever to get inflation under control. You could make it clear that you expect business to raise prices less this year than last and that continued attempts to improve profit margins by raising prices more than costs (apparently the case for tin mill products) mean a never-ending cost-price spiral. Jody could brief the press afterward on this meeting. 5. Forestalling Future Steel Price Increases. If it appears that these price increases will stick, one of your principal economic advisers should quietly tell U.S. Steel and Bethlehem that we expect that this will be the last increase for some time to come (at least January 1, 1978) and that any further increases may well cause a major confrontation with the Administration. This could at least, in a non-public way, help to forestall further steel price increases for some time. 10 Carter wrote “no” in the margin adjacent to this recommendation. 11 Carter wrote “What are likely results?” in the margin adjacent to this recommendation.
