1955 351 compelling it to accept our interpretation of Paragraph 2 or as a pretext to delay going on to Item 2 of the Agenda. The Jen Min Jih Pao commentary suggests that something of this sort was in the minds of responsible persons in Peiping, for it alleges that the USIS interpretation “gives the impression that the U.S. Govern­ ment is unwilling to act according to the agreement by commissioning a third country [i.e., the U.K.] to assist, but would like to make China responsible for this matter”. The same commentary goes on to warn that “should the U.S. fail to commission the Government of the U.K., the execution of the agreement would be hampered”. It may be that had I been able on September 14 to inform Wang of our action regarding the U.K., the issue would never have attained the proportions that it did, for that would have removed from their minds the unfounded suspicion that we did not propose to act at all with respect to the U.K. Whatever may be the true reason for the Chinese acting the way they did, one thing is certain—­in accepting our compromise wording for Paragraph 2 of the Agreed Announcement Wang burned his fingers, and he will be much more cautious in the future. U. Alexis Johnson American Ambassador Enclosure2 “Invitation” to Third Country—Comparison of Successive Texts August 2 Wang proposed that China and U.S. each entrust third country of own choice to take charge of affairs of nationals of each country, first of all their return. August 11 Chinese draft—“The People’s Republic of China and the United States of America will each entrust the Republic of India and the United Kingdom respectively with the charge of the affairs of the return of civilians of the respective countries residing in the other.” August 16 U.S. draft—“The Embassy of the Republic of India in the United States will be authorized to assist the return to the China mainland of those Chinese nationals who desire to do so.”

(same wording, mutatis mutandis, in Chinese section) August 18 Chinese draft—“The People’s Republic of China agrees that the Office of the Charge d’Affaires of the United Kingdom in the People’s Republic of China will be 2 Confidential.
