462.00 R 296/893: Telegram
[Document 374]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
PARIS, January 29, 1925—1 p.m.
[Received 4:46 p.m.]
88. L–339 [from Logan]. Reference Department’s L–206, January 22.
1. Discussed exchange of letters [with] Gutt representing Theunis20 concerning article
4 finance agreement. Gutt suggests following changes in proposed letters.
2. Gutt letter to Logan: Omit following phrases in first paragraph “on account of the
indebtedness of the Belgian Government to the United States”. Change last sentence
same paragraph21 to read as follows: “I take pleasure to assure you that my
Government”, insert following phrase, “unless and until the transfer committee
authorizes the transfer into foreign currencies of the marks received”. Letter then
continues to its end as originally drafted by the Department.
Logan letter to Gutt: Change first and second paragraphs to read as follows “In reply to
your letter of blank regarding the payment to the United States of the sums received by
Belgium under article 4 of the agreement of January 14th, 1925, I am directed to
express my Government’s appreciation of your assurances given with respect to the
intention of the Belgian Government to make these payments available to the
Government of the United States in Belgian francs or currencies freely convertible into
dollars”. Letter then continues to end as drafted by the Department.
3. Gutt frankly explained that the exchange of letters without the modification
suggested somewhat dangerous from an internal Belgian political point of view, that as
a matter of fact the distinct reference in the proposed exchange of letters to article 4 of
the finance agreement of January 14th in itself constituted a practical admission that
our Government was in no way committed to last paragraph of article 232 of the Treaty
of Versailles and the connected agreement signed by Wilson, Lloyd George and
Clemenceau22 (which Congress never accepted), [that] we therefore had what we
wanted with the additional advantage that such an exchange of letters with the
modifications he proposed would not cause internal Belgian public clamor concerning
the foregoing point.
Confidentially hope Department will cable its approval of these proposed changes in
the text thus permitting the immediate exchange of these two letters.
