398
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
151.
Memorandum From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan)
to President Carter1
Washington, January 15, 1980
RE
SITUATION WITH THE HOSTAGES
I didn’t really state to you in a completely frank way either my
own assessment of the situation as relates to Panamanian involvement
in the hostage negotiations or all of the things that were said to me.2
I understated what was said to me because I questioned whether it
was true and it sounded too self-serving.
Let me give it to you straight. Ghotbzedeh made no bones about
the fact that he wanted to go to Panama to “act out the extradition
charade” as soon as possible. He said that he had two specific motives:
to obtain some good publicity for himself before the national elections
and also to meet with me (secretly of course) on the subject of the
hostages.
I discounted in my own thinking and in the report that I sent you
a lot of what was said to me about both my own role in this matter
and the significance of the contact between the Panamanians and the
Foreign Minister. I attributed a lot of this to Ghotbzedeh’s despair that
his own campaign is not going well and he is looking for some way
to dominate the news and get favorable attention this last week before
his national election. And, of course, we don’t know if this talk of going
to Panama and meeting secretly with me is something that he wants/
hopes to do unilaterally or something about which Khomeini has gen-
eral knowledge. Also, when told about all of this and particularly
the “critical role” that the Panamanians described to me, I strongly
suspected that they were simply trying to flatter me.
So, my inclination to discount quite a bit all that I heard as relates
to my own role in this and Ghotbzedeh’s desire to meet with me
personally was offset by Hal Saunders’ attitude and by the memcon
of Richard Cottam’s conversation with the Foreign Minister3 in which
he confirmed that he had seen the Panamanians, that he thought that
they were an important channel and that we should send the “same
1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files,
Box 34, Iran 1/80. Eyes Only. Carter initialed “C” in the upper right corner of the
memorandum.
2 See Document 144.
3 Document 145.
