Chapter 2, January–June 1989  203
missile. Thus, it appears that a U.S. proposal could be developed that 
would accommodate planned U.S. programs and encourage modest 
deMIRVing of Soviet forces.
However, as in Alternative 1 above, the Soviets have several 
options to lower their ratio significantly. If, for example, the Soviets 
took advantage of the START submarine overhaul and ICBM launcher 
construction exclusions, they could lower their ratio to about 3.6–3.8 
with only minor force adjustments.
The U.S. ratio also depends significantly on specific force assump-
tions, ranging from about 3.6, if Trident is curtailed at 19 ships and 750 
SICBM/MM II, IV are deployed, to 4.8, if 23 Tridents and 450 single 
warhead ICBMs are deployed. If our plans change and 100 Peacekeeper 
are deployed, the ratio will rise to 4.2–5.0. U.S. and Soviet force options 
are discussed further in the annex.
In either of the foregoing alternatives the new limit would replace 
the U.S. proposed 3000–3300 sublimit on ICBM warheads. Some 
believe this sublimit would not likely constrain the Soviets and would 
be even less important in the context of a limit on MIRV warheads. 
Others believe that neither of these alternatives would substitute for 
the 3,000–3,300 limit, since single-­warhead ICBMs could be very effec-
tive in a first strike because of their great potential counterforce and 
EMP effects.
To provide a mechanism for gradual deMIRVing in the longer 
term, a provision could be included explicitly providing for periodic 
review of this limit by the sides to consider lowering it; this could be 
coupled with consideration of amendments to the 1600 SNDV limit.
Possible advantages of such a proposal are:
— It would encourage deMIRVing and, some believe, promote 
stability.
— By treating SLBMs and ICBMs equally it would remove the 
Soviet objection to our ICBM sublimit proposal and thus might prove 
negotiable.
— It would be attractive to the public since it places even tighter 
limits on MIRVed systems than did the Reagan Administration.
— By selecting suitable values for the new limits, the strategic 
modernization program could be protected.
— It offers a mechanism for future deMIRVing without the draw-
backs of agreeing to follow-­on negotiations.
Possible disadvantages of such a proposal include:
— By focusing only on fractionation, it ignores what some believe 
is a greater threat to stability from vulnerable, highly fractionated sys-
tems than from survivable highly fractionated systems.
— DeMIRVing beyond the initial limits will require radical and 
expensive alterations in U.S. plans, including additional single warhead
