Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX this session, Begin and Strauss met more formally with all members of their respective delegations in adjoining conference room for what was largely a ceremonial encounter. 3. Begin/Strauss meeting was continuation of their initial tete-atete on previous day.2 Main subjects covered were Israeli settlement activity in West Bank, increasing opposition to Israeli policies among certain segments of U.S. public opinion, impending meeting between Sadat and Begin in Alexandria on July 10, prospects for the impending round of autonomy talks at Alexandria on July 5–6, and the increasingly dangerous situation in Lebanon in the wake of the aerial dogfight between Israeli and Syrian planes on June 27.3 4. On settlements, Begin said that he knew with certainty that settlements are not a serious problem with Sadat, although he may raise it during our meeting. (In this connection, I heard from another source that Begin claims Sadat told him during their last meeting in Cairo that he understood Begin’s problems about settlements and only wished he would hurry and get things done as quickly as possible so as to get the issue out of the headlines.) Strauss restated the U.S. position on the settlements issue4 in response, stressing the damage that he believed it was doing to the peace process. 5. On the Alexandria meetings, Begin urged Strauss to do whatever is necessary to reach agreement on the agenda, stressing the need for a limited practical agenda which will permit the two parties to get down to concrete business. Strauss assured him that we had every interest in doing everything possible to get the talks moving on concrete issues, and that he would do his best. 6. Begin told Strauss that he anticipated Sadat would make another effort on the Jerusalem issue when they saw each other July 10. He anticipated that would be the major topic on Sadat’s mind, but he gave 2 A record of this meeting has not been found. Strauss arrived in Israel on July 1, following a brief stopover at the Cairo airport where he held a press conference. The Embassy conveyed a transcript of Strauss’s remarks in telegram 13322 from Cairo, July 1;
