880
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
this session, Begin and Strauss met more formally with all members of
their respective delegations in adjoining conference room for what was
largely a ceremonial encounter.
3. Begin/Strauss meeting was continuation of their initial tete-a-
tete on previous day.2 Main subjects covered were Israeli settlement ac-
tivity in West Bank, increasing opposition to Israeli policies among cer-
tain segments of U.S. public opinion, impending meeting between
Sadat and Begin in Alexandria on July 10, prospects for the impending
round of autonomy talks at Alexandria on July 5–6, and the increas-
ingly dangerous situation in Lebanon in the wake of the aerial dogfight
between Israeli and Syrian planes on June 27.3
4. On settlements, Begin said that he knew with certainty that set-
tlements are not a serious problem with Sadat, although he may raise it
during our meeting. (In this connection, I heard from another source
that Begin claims Sadat told him during their last meeting in Cairo that
he understood Begin’s problems about settlements and only wished he
would hurry and get things done as quickly as possible so as to get the
issue out of the headlines.) Strauss restated the U.S. position on the set-
tlements issue4 in response, stressing the damage that he believed it
was doing to the peace process.
5. On the Alexandria meetings, Begin urged Strauss to do what-
ever is necessary to reach agreement on the agenda, stressing the need
for a limited practical agenda which will permit the two parties to get
down to concrete business. Strauss assured him that we had every in-
terest in doing everything possible to get the talks moving on concrete
issues, and that he would do his best.
6. Begin told Strauss that he anticipated Sadat would make another
effort on the Jerusalem issue when they saw each other July 10. He an-
ticipated that would be the major topic on Sadat’s mind, but he gave
2 A record of this meeting has not been found. Strauss arrived in Israel on July 1, fol-
lowing a brief stopover at the Cairo airport where he held a press conference. The Em-
bassy conveyed a transcript of Strauss’s remarks in telegram 13322 from Cairo, July 1;
National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790298–0471.
3 See Document 267.
4 In a July 5 press conference, Strauss laid out his view of the Israeli settlements,
which Sick transmitted to Brzezinski in a July 6 memorandum. Strauss stated, “I happen
to think the settlements are illegal. The Israelis say they are legal. But I don’t think the
issue is whether the settlements are legal or illegal. I think that whether they are either
one of those, they have proved to be an obstacle to two things: 1) progress toward peace,
and, equally important almost, 2) Israel stating its case properly before the court of world
opinion.” Strauss continued: “Both of those things are vital to Israel’s continued growth
and viability and strength. If they’re getting something out of it on the security end, is it,
in the overall security and best interest of Israel, worth the price they’re having to pay? I
answer that in the negative. It’s not worth it.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 22, Israel: 3–12/79)
