Arms Control and Disarmament  1411
Attachment
Paper Prepared in the Office of Science and Technology
POLICY QUESTIONS RAISED BY DISCUSSION 
OF TEST CESSATION OR LIMITATION
In weighing the pros and cons of some form of test cessation 
announcement or agreement, it seems desirable first to examine certain 
questions of basic national policy. The decisions with respect to these 
matters of national policy may be conclusive in determining whether 
we depart from our present policy of testing, and if so in what way. 
Some of the policy questions involved are:
1. If the NSC policy on disarmament seems to be unachievable, 
is the U.S. prepared to seek some partial solution in an effort to ease 
world tensions?
a. Should the nuclear provisions of our present disarmament pol­
icy (test suspension and cut-­off of production of fissionable materials 
for weapons production) be made separable from the other elements of 
the disarmament package?
b. Should the suspension of nuclear testing remain linked, as far 
as the U.S. is concerned, to the cut-­off of weapon materials production?
c. Present policy states that the acceptability of any international 
system for the regulation of armaments depends primarily on the scope 
and effectiveness of the safeguards against violations and evasions. 
What degree of reliability of detection is required for a “safeguarded” 
system for the detection of nuclear tests?
d. What should U.S. policy be toward agreement on suspension 
vs. limitation of nuclear testing: (1) “complete suspension” of nuclear 
testing (although there would not be a good probability of identifying 
underground tests of less than 5 kilotons); (2) cessation of all testing 
except for devices of very few kilotons’ yield below the limit speci­
fied by the monitoring agreement, such tests to be conducted without 
radioactive fallout; (3) cessation of such nuclear testing that can be sat­
isfactorily monitored by the agreed system, contingent on progress for 
the cut-­off of production of fissionable materials for weapons; or (4) a 
restricted testing agreement limiting the amount of annual offsite fis­
sion fallout or banning offsite fallout.
2. Would a nuclear test cessation operate to the net disadvantage of 
the U.S. considering its military, political and economic implications? Is 
it to U.S. advantage to seek to hold at present levels the nuclear weap­
ons capabilities of the U.S. and the USSR; or should the U.S. strive to 
achieve every possible military advance and refinement in nuclear 
weapons while the USSR does the same?
3. Is the U.S. willing to accept political arrangements necessary to 
extend the nuclear test detection and identification system to Red China?
