Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX package which has been presented of about $3.3 Billion is a great deal higher than is really needed to carry out the essential elements of the peace process relative to the Egyptian agreement. He has suggested that the sum of approximately $1.5 Billion spread out over three to four years, would be sufficient to take care of the essential elements such as the construction of the two new airfields, the building of roads and infrastructures in the Negev, and additional electronic surveillance equipment. Little mention was made of the form of such financial assistance but I get the impression that long term, low interest loans would suffice.2 (As a personal observation from me, it is my understanding that whereas direct loans by the federal government would constitute expenditures under the budgetary process, loans from other sources with federal government guarantees might only cause a budgetary impact of the differential between total interest costs and the interest charged on such loans.) Weizman had expressed some concern as no contact had been made with him during these current negotiations by our Defense Department, but I understand that this evening he is meeting with some representatives from the Pentagon. Concerning the type of expression of financial support which Weizman thinks would be adequate for the purpose of getting the Israeli Cabinet to overcome a sufficient amount of its concern about this factor is a message which includes language such as: “the United States Government will consider”, or “the United States Government will look into”, or “the United States Government acknowledges this financial need”, along with a caveat such as “subject to the review by the United States of the actual needs, and subject, of course, to Congressional approval”. Along with such language, some indication of your understanding and general support for such financial assistance should be sufficient.3 Weizman also indicated that he as Defense Minister is prepared to reassess Israel’s military requirements and would expect to have significant reductions in the projected needs as presently presented. Charney came back this evening after having been with Weizman following Weizman’s meeting here at the White House. Weizman apparently is anxious to be here to meet with the Egyptian Vice President when he comes on Wednesday.4 Presumably Secretary Vance called Weizman and urged him again to go back to Jerusalem in time to attend 2 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “Give info to Harold.” 3 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “Info for Cy.” 4 For discussion of Weizman’s meeting with Mubarak, see Document 140.
