418
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
3. It is now estimated that communist forces will probably not gain
control of the Iranian government during 1953.3 Nevertheless, the Ira-
nian situation contains very great elements of instability. Any US
policy regarding Iran must accordingly take into account the danger
that the communists might be enabled to gain the ascendency as a re-
sult of such possible developments as a struggle for power within the
National Front, more effective communist infiltration of the gov-
ernment than now appears probable, government failure to maintain
the security forces and to take effective action against communist ac-
tivity, or a major crop failure. It is clear that the United Kingdom no
longer possesses the capability unilaterally to assure stability in the
area. If present trends continue unchecked, Iran could be effectively
lost to the free world before an actual Communist take-over of the Ira-
nian Government. Failure to arrest present trends in Iran involves a se-
rious risk to the national security of the United States.4
3 Paragraph 3 of the November 6 draft of NSC 136 reads: “It is now estimated that
communist forces will probably not gain control of the Iranian Government during 1953.
Nevertheless the Iranian situation contains very great elements of instability and there is
a continuing danger of serious communist infiltration of the National Front and the Gov-
ernment bureaucracy. It is clear that the United Kingdom no longer possesses the capa-
bility unilaterally to assure stability in the area. Therefore if present trends continue un-
checked, Iran could be effectively lost to the free world before an actual communist
take-over of the Iranian Government. Failure to arrest present trends in Iran involves a
serious risk to the national security of the United States.” (Ibid.)
4 See also NIE–75, “Probable Developments in Iran during 1953,” approved 6 No-
vember 1952. [Footnote is in the original. NIE–75 is Document 143.]
