United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  75
was to be substantially reduced by the curtailment of expenditures and 
the imposition of new taxes and other sources of revenue; commercial 
bank credit was to be limited and at the same time internal subsidies 
which had distorted the price structure were to be eliminated. As a 
consequence of these radical steps which were necessary to eliminate 
distortions in the economy, there was a sharp upward movement in 
prices during 1959 because of the depreciation of the exchange rate, the 
dropping of subsidy payments on basic articles of consumption, and 
the continued necessity to increase wage rates. As a result the cost of 
living increased by 75% during the first six months of 1959. However, 
once the initial adjustments in the price structure were made and the 
budgetary situation improved, there was a noticeable tendency toward 
price stability. In July and August 1959 the cost of living increased by 
3.5% per month and the October increase was only 6%. The wholesale 
price index began to decline in September. The government was also 
able to keep new wage increases to relatively moderate levels. With 
these a signs of stability, there was an inflow of private capital and 
the foreign reserves of the Central Bank doubled in the four months 
July—October. By the end of October 1959 exchange reserves were up 
to $344 million gross. During 1959 money supply increased at a lower 
rate than the previous year despite the increase in foreign reserves and 
the free rate of exchange fluctuated between 80/85 pesos per dollar. 
At the same time the Argentine government entered into large scale 
contracts with foreign petroleum companies for the production of oil in 
Argentina and it is envisaged that by 1961 Argentina will be about self-­
sufficient in that product, thereby saving almost $250 million of import 
requirements per year.
All indications are that per capita national income in 1959 will be 
somewhat less than 1958 but exceed the level of 1957. A large part of 
this decline probably results from losses of production through strikes 
against government efforts to maintain wage levels in face of rising 
prices, but these strikes have lately diminished in number and inten-
sity. The national budget of Argentina in 1959 had a deficit of about 
one half that of 1958; a large part of this reduction came from raising 
rates for public services, such as, railroad fares, post office services, tele-
phone rates, etc. While there is still a budgetary gap a strong effort will 
be made to obtain balance in 1960.
The stabilization program for 1960 has now been approved by the 
International Monetary Fund which on December 2, 1959 made avail-
able a standby of $100 million to Argentina. Since that country had only 
actually drawn about $40 million of the previous standby of $75 mil-
lion, in effect, this involved making available $65 million of new funds. 
Under the International Monetary Fund standby Argentina committed 
itself to balance the budget of the central government although it was
