Afghanistan 573 Gulbaddin is reportedly closely associated, is gaining many adherents in Kabul, even to the point that the Brotherhood is “almost openly” issuing membership cards to those who wish to join this anti-Communist, pro-Islamic movement. (N.B. It will be recalled that the Brotherhood was a favorite bête noire of the Taraki-Amin era when the DRA media referred to it as the Ikhwan-ush-shayateen—Brotherhood of the devils.) 4. Meanwhile, adherents of Karmal’s Parcham faction and the Taraki-Amin Khalqi factions continue to feud among themselves, according to reports from Afghan sources having contacts with both factions. A source with Parchamist connections says that a fierce debate between Parchamists and Khalqis took place this past week when the dominant Parcham faction reportedly bowed to pressure from many of its rank and file who demanded Vice President and Deputy Prime Minister Sarwari’s removal from the government. The Parcham leadership decided to send Sarwari off to genteel exile as an Ambassador (just as Taraki and Amin had done to several Parcham leaders, including Karmal, in the summer of 1978). The Khalqis, however, according to the source, resisted in having Sarwari (linked to the Taraki sub-faction of the Khalqis) removed from the regime’s leadership circles since that would reduce Khalqi representation there. The debate reportedly turned to shooting on Wednesday or Thursday, with Keshtmand and some others falling victims of gunshots. Source was uncertain that Defense Minister Rafie was among the other gunshot victims. (Kabul Radio announced that Keshtmand left for the USSR on Feb. 7 owing to illness). 5. (Comment: Whether or not the foregoing report is true in all of its essentials, we believe that serious intra-PDPA strife is not only going on, but that it is logical to expect that it would take place sooner or later. There are simply too many old scores that various Khalqis and Parchamists have to settle with one another—the Soviet role in pushing for a united front notwithstanding.) 6. A Parchamist informant has provided yet another indication of intra-PDPA differences. He claimed that the PDPA’s Central Committee has instructed that all party offices, down to the ward level, turn in their files on Parchamists. The files reportedly include each party member’s picture, description and other identifying data. The informant said that the Central Committee is compiling a consolidated list of all Parchamists, but is destroying their individual files. The Committee is not doing the same for Khalqi members’ files, the informant said. (Comment: If this report is true—and it has not been substantiated—it might suggest that the Parchamists are preparing to go underground, if necessary, and let the Khalqis bear the wrath of the Muslim rebels should the latter gain the upper hand. It should be noted, how-
