1378 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement I did not see it could do any harm and it might do good in indicating that U.N. interest in them still alive. Said I would inform Washington and Ambassador Lodge would be in further touch with him concerning matter. Gowen 812. Telegram 31 from Geneva1 Geneva, July 11, 1957, 3 p.m. 31. From Johnson. Two hour ten minute meeting this morning. Wang opened with generalized statement attacking “policy of hos­ tility” and “aggressive policy” aimed at overthrowing PRC set forth in Secretary’s San Francisco speech as well as referring stationing guided missiles on Taiwan and plane incident. No rpt no mention Korea. Policy set forth by Secretary was meeting increasing opposition abroad and in US as well as meeting with defeat as exemplified by recent actions other Western countries concerning embargo. “Even in Taiwan patriotic peo­ ple have risen in protests against this policy.” US proposal of renuncia­ tion of force was “deceptive and hypocritical excuse.” Then continued with statement on implementation referring previous inquiry on Dr. Lin and making statement Tseng Kuang-­chih. Situation with regard to Chinese in US continues to be unsatisfactory. I replied with long statement along lines paras one and two Deptel 36 as well as making strong counterattack on PRC record of hostility toward US, PRC attack on US in Korea, PRC attempts at sub­ version of and support of rebellion against Asian states friendly to US, etc. Made detailed reply on Dr. Lin pointing out that though she attempted take US funds in violation of US regulations she was per­ mitted to proceed. Also made detailed reply on Tseng using material Deptel 40 which much appreciated and most useful. Characterized our handling both Dr. Lin and Tseng as most considerate for which we should receive appreciation rather than complaint. Wished problem imprisoned Americans would be handled with same consideration. Solution problem of imprisoned Americans “would permit us direct 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/7–1157. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution.
