Arms Control and Disarmament 1327 313. Memorandum From Walmsley (IO) to Herter1 Washington, April 20, 1958 SUBJECT United States Position in the Security Council on the Soviet Complaint of April 18, 1958 Present instructions to Ambassador Lodge call for completion of consideration of the Soviet complaint in the Security Council as expe­ ditiously as possible. As yet it is unclear whether the USSR intends to submit a resolution. If not, we continue to believe expeditious disposi­ tion of the Soviet item, without any resolution, is the preferable course of action. Submission of a resolution, in the absence of a Soviet resolu­ tion, does prolong Council action in circumstances where not too much political mileage will be gained. Moreover, our submission of a resolution has certain disadvan­ tages: (a) there is a strong risk that the USSR will seek Council endorse­ ment of a summit meeting to deal with this and other outstanding issues among the Great Powers (although the USSR may do this in any event); (b) introduction of a resolution dealing with procedures to cover surprise attack or calling for a meeting of the Disarmament Commis­ sion risks opening up the overall disarmament problem, thereby pro­ viding an opportunity for the USSR to introduce a resolution calling for an independent test ban, a move that would embarrass us and our friends; (c) even with the Security Council weighted in our favor so that we can prevent adoption of a test ban resolution, Council failure to act on this issue might precipitate a move for a special Assembly session. In particular, the United States would have to oppose a Soviet proposal endorsing the unconditional convening of a summit meeting. If the USSR submits a resolution, there are three alternatives open to us: (a) to reject outright any Soviet resolution submitted; (b) to amend any Soviet resolution; (c) to press for a resolution of our own. Whether outright rejection of the Soviet proposal is a desired course of action depends specifically upon its content. If, for example, the Soviet text is a clumsy attempt to condemn the United States, the Council members would reject it. However, if the resolution is of a more anodyne character, such as a bland endorsement of the need for peaceful and neighborly relations among states, the Council members might be reluctant to reject it outright. The possibility of amending any Soviet resolution depends upon its character. Even if amended and the USSR still votes for it, it will remain as a Soviet initiative, for which the USSR will claim future credit. 1 Source: U.S. position on possible Soviet moves in the Security Council on “fail safe” procedures; includes draft Security Council resolutions. Confidential. 5 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 330/4–2058.
