Covert and Overt Operations Muskie insisted that he can reduce the ambiguity for Gromyko in his oral statement, but he does not accept this non-paper because of its explicit promise of a military reaction. Christopher called it “dangerous.” Muskie explained that he would make the following points to Gromyko orally: —We are extremely troubled by the military activities of the Soviet Union on Iran’s borders. —This region is vital to us. —Gromyko should understand the dangerous consequences that could follow from Soviet military activities. (TS/S) Muskie again insisted that we do not have a real military capability, and Christopher added that we must preserve the President’s option to judge what is in the United States interest at the time of such an intervention if it occurs in the future. (TS/S) Muskie offered the political judgment that the Congress would ask whether or not a nuclear war would be worth it for 11 percent of our Brown asked what would happen if the Soviets invade Iran and we do nothing. Do we really believe that our losses would be only 11 percent of our oil supply? (TS/S) Muskie retorted that if it means losing Europe, the American people might even accept that loss rather than risk nuclear war. (TS/S) Harold Brown countered, but what about a Soviet attack on Europe, would we accept the loss or attempt to defend it? (TS/S) Muskie insisted that NATO is different; we have forces there. If we cannot defend Europe, he added, we ought to ask what the Defense Department is all about. (TS/S) Dr. Brzezinski asked Muskie if he accepts the proposition that the loss of the Persian Gulf would lead to the loss of Europe. (TS/S) Muskie agreed that it would. (TS/S) Dr. Brzezinski then asked what the Soviets will see as their options in such a case if the U.S. leaves some ambiguity about whether it would respond militarily. (TS/S) Muskie insisted that he could remove all the ambiguity in his oral statements to Gromyko without the explicit text in the non-paper, in particular by telling Gromyko that there is a “high risk” of a military confrontation. (TS/S) Dr. Brzezinski pointed out that we have given these kinds of warnings to the Soviets before but have failed to act when the Soviets ignored Muskie admitted that he did not know the record. (TS/S) Dr. Brzezinski said that Gromyko has heard all this talk before about Afghanistan—several weeks in advance of the invasion—but
