National Security Policy 199 Memorandum From Green (FE) to Robertson (FE)1 Washington, May 9, 1958 SUBJECT Basic National Security Policy Rear Admiral Stroh has just brought over to you for comment a copy of a paper (at Tab A) which Admiral Burke proposes to read at a meeting of the JCS with Secretary McElroy next Tuesday (May 13). According to Admiral Stroh, Admiral Burke has already spoken to you about this paper. The background, I understand, is as follows: General Cutler has recommended fairly extensive rewording of paragraphs 13 and 14 of the new Basic National Security Policy paper (NSC 5810). The general effect of Cutler’s proposed revisions would be (a) to include Europe and Turkey within the area where potential limited wars might be fought, (b) to require the use of “precision” weapons and something less than maximum nuclear countermeasures in the event of local war, and (c) to recognize that in certain local war situations it might be in our national interests if we could restore the status quo ante rather than try to “defeat” the enemy and occupy his terrain. The JSC are split over the Cutler reformulation of paragraphs 13 and 14. The Air Force opposes, whereas the Army, Navy and Marine Corps favor the Cutler changes. Admiral Burke’s paper provides effec­ tive and logical arguments for the majority JCS view. I believe you will agree with the point of view presented in Admiral Burke’s paper, for he argues for the retention of a diversified arsenal of weapons systems, both conventional and nuclear, and for a capability to cope with small brushfire wars quickly and in a manner least likely to cause a spread of the war. The nucleus of his argumentation will be found on pages 6–8 of his paper at Tab A. It is therefore recommended that you telephone Admiral Burke to say that you have read his paper with great interest and appreciation; that you thoroughly agree with the logic of his case; that you could supply any number of political arguments in support of what he has so effectively analyzed from a military viewpoint; and that you are pass­ ing his paper on personally to Mr. Robert Murphy (as Admiral Burke requests).
