486
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
202.
Memorandum From Secretary of Energy Schlesinger to
President Carter1
Washington, May 30, 1978
SUBJECT
CONTINUED DISCUSSION OF A ZERO-YIELD CTB
Let me continue our discussion, started on the trip from Knox-
ville,2 regarding permitted experiments under the CTB by pursuing the
points developed below.
1. Over many years the underlying thrust in weapons design has
been to compensate for volumetric constraints and throw-weight limi-
tations in the U.S. strategic program by developing highly compact,
highly sophisticated weapons. Such high sophistication, as in other
cases, results in some degree of technical risk. [7 lines not declassified]
2. Why would previously tested and certified weapons need to be re-
tested? In the continued non-nuclear testing of weapons components, it
turns out with some regularity that individual components fail or de-
grade. Even acceptable components may become unavailable as manu-
facturers shift product lines or go out of business. Materials are altered
slightly or may (as with beryllium) be subject to more stringent regula-
tion. The consequence is that new components or different materials
have to be integrated into previously deployed weapons designs. De-
veloping weapons remains to a considerable extent an art rather than a
science. Weapons designs which seem appropriate, based on computer
models, fail to work as predicted when actually tested.
[1 paragraph (16 lines) not declassified]
3. Readiness of material and men is of paramount concern to the
military services. For this reason everything from radars to engines to
missiles are regularly exercised to demonstrate that they will remain
operationally ready. For there to be doubt about nuclear weapons reli-
ability is vastly distressing to the Services. The notion that nuclear
weapons might degrade over the years, and have attached to them
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 6, Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB), 1–12/78. Secret; Restricted Data. In the upper
right-hand corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote “Zbig—You & Jim set up a briefing
with a lab director & me. a) I don’t know how device works & b) what Soviet position is
on this issue. J.”
2 No record of this conversation has been found. According to the President’s Daily
Diary, Carter was in Tennessee on May 22 to speak to the Tennessee Valley Authority
and to address a group of scientists at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. (Carter Li-
brary, Presidential Materials)
