Guatemala  683
apparently either sent by President or wishing have discussions as 
excuse go back and carry some word to him.
New Cabinet for March 1 rumored past few days. Also Roberto 
Alejos, Cabinet Coordinator, informed member staff he felt he should 
leave March 1. Yesterday British Minister2 informed me confidentially 
President’s son-­in-­law, Ian Munn, will probably be going Europe soon 
probably to stay. Yesterday President’s private secretary,3 talked with 
me suggesting need for pretty thorough house-­cleaning in govern-
ment. And hoping I could tell President. I had talked with Minister 
Public Health4 over weekend whom I supported in suggestion for new 
Cabinet and to whom I also suggested idea of outstanding incorruptible 
person as Cabinet Coordinator. How much is chicken and how much 
egg is unimportant, but buildup of pressures has caused very consider-
able nervousness with President and within his immediate family and 
brought about decision make Cabinet changes.
Today President called me to his office and talked at great length. 
In brief he said Guatemala has not been ready for his kind of dem-
ocratic government, he being attacked on all sides, mostly unjustly, 
and feels he may have crack down in dictatorial manner. Said he had 
decided accept resignation of Cabinet but would reappoint members 
recently joined. He will try have fairly broad Cabinet. Said Coordinator 
of Cabinet had come in unjustly for attacks and he had decided let him 
go although decision not yet made known. He then stopped.
I congratulated him on Cabinet decision and said with respect 
Alejos that one had to recall truth in old saying that one might as well 
hang dog as give him bad name. I said this respect I wished be very 
personal and frank with President and point out there was another 
person who had sufficiently bad name that he might as well be hung. 
President apparently was waiting for this one and asked me directly 
whom I meant. I replied [text not declassified]. I expanded on general 
unrest in area citing exalted spirits of opposition and mentioned there 
were number of plots being talked about. These plots I opined did not 
individually have much chance success but should groups ever get 
together, might prove serious. They were caused I though by deteri-
orating economic conditions and also by lack of calm and confidence 
on part of public. I said it was most important for President under-
take course of action to restore confidence and that business generally, 
including foreign investors, needed reassurances. Such action as he 
took with respect Alejos could probably be helpful in this regard even 
though Alejos might have operated with purist motives.
2 Thomas Wikeley.
3 Carlos González Segui.
4 Mariano López Herrarte.
