502
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
a. Following presentation of the package deal proposals on 15 Jan-
uary, Mossadeq raised a host of major and minor objections, finally
urging that impartial adjudication of claims be dropped in favor of a di-
rectly negotiated lump sum settlement, thus protecting Iran against
being saddled with an “unending burden.” After much consultation
between the US and UK, a new and “final” set of proposals was pre-
pared. These included concessions to Mossadeq on many minor points
and provided an alternate mechanism for limiting Iranian payments to
20 years, but they preserved the concept of impartial adjudication and
terms of reference which enabled AIOC to claim future profits. Hen-
derson presented these proposals on 20 February, just after the political
crisis started.
b. Mossadeq appears to be on the verge of rejecting these pro-
posals. He immediately pointed to the compensation terms of reference
as grounds for rejection and attempted to have them drastically
changed. Meanwhile he has been attempting to find out from the UK,
through the Swiss Legation, the amount of AIOC’s claims. On 9 March
he told Henderson that the oil talks should be abandoned3 but phoned
later to say that he had spoken prematurely and would consult the cab-
inet before making a final decision. There the matter rests.
c. Mossadeq’s recent talks with Henderson have involved some re-
criminations against the US. Last week the Mossadeq faction was
openly charging Henderson with meddling in Iranian affairs for urging
the Shah not to leave the country, though Mossadeq finally consented
to accept Henderson’s protestations of good faith. Apparently in re-
sponse to Soviet pressure, Mossadeq has called for withdrawal of TCI
personnel from the Caspian area. In discussing the oil question, he has
repeatedly asserted that the US would buy oil from Iran even without a
compensation agreement if it really had Iran’s best interests at heart
and has reiterated his old contention that the US was bound to provide
financial aid to Iran to prevent it from going Communist.
5. Mossadeq faces a difficult decision. His instincts tell him to reject
the present oil proposals. Yet rejection of the oil proposals will subject
Iran to a further period of economic uncertainty and increase general
pessimism and criticism of his leadership in Iran. He is probably also
angry with the US for its role in the oil talks and its support of the Shah.
Yet open defiance of the US would deprive Iran of an important coun-
terweight against Soviet pressure and a potential source of financial
help. In the end, he will probably reject the oil proposals but stop short
of a direct rebuff to the US, hoping that a successful oil formula may
3 An apparent reference to a March 9 conversation Henderson had with Mosadeq
and reported on in telegram 3605, March 9. See footnote 3, Document 176.
