140 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Egyptian Side: Mohamed Ibrahim Kamel, Minister of Foreign Affairs Ambassador Ahmed Maher el-Sayed, Director of the Cabinet of the Foreign Minister Ambassador Nabil el-Araby, Director of Legal Department, Foreign Ministry Dr. Osama el-Baz, Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs Dr. Boutros Boutros Ghali, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Dr. Ashraf Ghorbal, Ambassador of Egypt to the US Mr. Ahmed Abou el-Gheite, Office of the Foreign Minister Minister Abdul Rauf el-Reedy, Director of Policy Planning, Foreign Ministry Summary: Lengthy discussion of preference for compulsory ICJ jurisdiction and concern over (a) sovereignty issue in West Bank/Gaza, (b) Israeli settlements, (c) the return of Palestinian displaced persons and refugees, and (d) the future of Jerusalem. The Secretary said that Presidents Carter and Sadat would meet at 1600.3 They will discuss generally the nature of the US suggestions. We had not yet begun to write our suggestions, but will begin doing so tomorrow. We hope to get a draft4 to the Egyptian side tomorrow afternoon or Sunday. Vice President Mondale will be returning tomorrow, and his input will also be needed. The Secretary thought that our ideas will be acceptable to both President Sadat and President Carter. They will outline a general framework and will draw heavily on the Egyptian document. Kamel opined that the Egyptian proposal is in many parts consistent with United States positions. The Egyptians believe that their proposal should be accepted. He had told Sadat that the American and Egyptian Delegations would meet today. Sadat had approved such a meeting with all the Egyptian Delegation present. He then asked if we wanted any clarification on the Egyptian paper. Compulsory ICJ Jurisdiction: He asked where the concept of ICJ compulsory jurisdiction had come from. Are there any precedents for this? El-Baz responded that the concept had been taken from the ICJ yearbook for 1975–76. In that volume, he noted, there are recorded at least 100 agreements on compulsory ICJ jurisdiction. The Secretary asked if any peace treaties are included. El-Baz said no, but referred to a Chilean/Argentinian copyright convention, a UK/Ghanian loan agreement, and a number of other agreements, both bilateral and multilateral. El-Baz also noted that the Israelis had on October 3, 1956, accepted the concept of compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, admittedly with some reservations. Their declaration was not as exclusive as the Connally Amend- 3 See footnote 23, Document 28. 4 In his account of the summit, Quandt noted that Saunders began work on the first of twenty-three drafts of the U.S. proposal late in the evening of September 8. (Quandt, Camp David, p. 226) This first draft is printed as Document 40.
