Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
329
this single sentence, from which so much has flowed, the President was
expressing an old and sometimes ignored truth with new vigor.
Our strength as a nation and our magnetism to the world at large
are predicated on our commitment to human rights. It is only proper
that the human rights considerations so important to our national life
be reflected in our international life as well. This means they must be
fully integrated into our diplomacy.
The pursuit of this cause is not an ideological luxury cruise with no
practical port of call. Our idealism and our self-interest coincide. Wid-
ening the circle of countries which share our human rights values is at
the very core of our security interests. Such nations make strong allies.
Their commitment to human rights gives them an inner strength and
stability which causes them to stand steadfastly with us on the most
difficult issues of our time.
In this first year, I have been impressed by what a subtle, creative,
and flexible process diplomacy can be in advancing the cause of human
rights. Diplomacy is not just words—though words can be highly effec-
tive. It is also an impressive variety of intangible symbols and gestures,
as well as tangible measures.
Diplomacy can be a rich mix, indeed. In the case of our human
rights objectives, we have evolved a mix that is proving effective.
Capsule View of the Diplomacy
Frank Discussion. The primary ingredient of human rights diplo-
macy has a seeming simplicity: We frankly discuss human rights in our
consultations with foreign diplomats and leaders. An obvious tech-
nique, yes. Just words, yes. But I must tell you that many of us have
been amazed at its effectiveness.
A career Foreign Service Officer told me recently that until last Jan-
uary it would have been unusual for our ambassador to raise with the
leader of another country, in face-to-face conversation, the fate of polit-
ical prisoners. Our diplomats tended to shy away from direct high-
level dialogue on such sensitive human rights issues.
That has changed. Time after time in the past year we have had
such conversations. And very often these very frank discussions have
led to beneficial results. Sovereign governments have reexamined con-
ditions in their capitals and provinces, and releases of prisoners and
other positive actions have followed.
When we raise human rights with another government, we take an
affirmative stance. We explain that our people, our Congress, and our
government are deeply troubled by the human rights abuses we be-
lieve to be occurring. And we ask for the other government’s assess-
ment of the situation and the prospects for improvement. Sometimes, it
is true, the response is truculent and defensive. Sometimes, we are
