1000
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the only source of substantial credit assistance. In view of present polit-
ical circumstances and Egypt’s economic situation, the US is likely to
remain in this position for a while to come.
Our decisions on the scope of a longer term arms supply relation-
ship thus have significant political content. This is true not only of the
size of the program, but also its pace. The deliveries in the current
“three-year” program are front-loaded. Therefore, if we simply phase
in a five-year program after “the three-year program,” we will have a
severe interim “delivery gap” of 2–3 years which will put a serious
strain on our overall relationship.
The PRC recommended a multi-year security assistance program
for Egypt, involving $350 million in FMS credits in FY 1981 and $800
million annually for the five years thereafter, FY 1982–86, borrowing
from the unspent portion of the $1.5 billion peace package12 to assist
earlier starts of selected new programs in order to minimize the gap in
deliveries of equipment, and relying on future appropriations to ensure
full funding of approved programs. The PRC also recommended that
we agree to sell F–16 aircraft and M60A3 tanks to Egypt, as well as a
few more F–4Es (i.e., about 15) if necessary.
There are several issues that require your decision:
—The multi-year nature of the US commitment;
—Annual funding levels;
—Whether to begin additional funding in FY 1981;
—Use of “cash-flow” financing;
—Sale of F–16 aircraft and M60 tanks.
The Nature of the US Commitment
With the Peace Treaty, the $1.5 billion FMS program, and your de-
cision to enter into joint planning, we are already well on the road
toward a long term security assistance relationship with Egypt. To
move the planning process beyond this point, we need to indicate to
Egypt what level of credits we might provide in future years.
Given extensive and pressing Egyptian modernization needs, and
the high costs of the programs involved (e.g., 80 F–16s for $1.8 billion or
900 M60s for $1.2 billion), we would not be able to fully fund the most
important programs with a single year’s credits, nor delay the start of
programs till the requisite credits had been accumulated. This means
we must start selected major programs with available credits, e.g.,
drawing upon the unspent portion of the $1.5 billion program, taking
the risk that Congress will appropriate in subsequent years the credits
necessary to continue those programs (this is called the “cash-flow” ap-
12 See Document 212.
