Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI environmental concerns, and other factors, it is assumed unlikely that the US would embark on a large-scale PNE program after entering into a weapons test ban. However, it is possible that the US would pursue a limited PNE program, possibly within the confines of the Nevada Test Site. The Soviet PNE program is very broad in scope and includes water resource development, oil and gas stimulation, mining, storage and disposal of wastes, storage of petroleum and other hydrocarbons, and extinguishing gas well fires. The Soviets claim to have reduced the last two applications to practice, but most of their PNEs have been experimental in nature. The best known Soviet PNE project is their plan to build a canal to reverse the head waters of the Pechora River to flow into the Kama, Volga, and then the Caspian Sea. This is a major project which at one time was described as requiring as many as 250 nuclear explosives fired in salvos of up to 20 explosives at a time. The Soviets conducted one PNE salvo along the canal route in 1971 and have had a second apparently ready for firing for more than a year. There is some uncertainty as to whether the Soviets will proceed with this project, and substantial engineering and feasibility questions probably remain. However, at least five other PNE tests (for other applications) are known to be in preparation and the Soviets seem determined at present to continue their overall program. However, it is difficult to assess how strongly the Soviets would resist a US proposal to ban PNEs in the context of a CTB other wise acceptable to them, particularly if the PNE ban were only for a limited number of years. B. National Security Implications of PNEs under a CTB There is international agreement that the technology required for PNEs is indistinguishable from that required for nuclear weapons tests, and that any country engaged in PNE device development or testing inevitably receives weapons-related benefits. This agreement is reflected in the NPT, and one of the key objectives of our nonproliferation policy has been to deter non-nuclear weapon states from indigenous development of PNE technology. Because of the indistinguishability of PNE technology and weapons technology, our lack of interest in PNE applications, and because of nuclear weapon proliferation considerations, there is complete agreement among the participants in this study that a CTB banning all nuclear explosions is more desirable from the US national security standpoint than a ban which accommodates PNEs. In the context of a ban of all nuclear explosions, including PNEs, the capability to verify whether a nuclear explosion has taken place is the same for both a PNE and a nuclear weapon detonation. If peaceful nuclear explosions are allowed to continue in some form in the context of a comprehensive test ban, an opportunity for
