1076  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
radio have already branded as reconnaissance activity the launching 
of various US weather and communications satellites. Clearly, the 
Soviets prize secrecy as a strategic asset, and want to prevent the US 
from observing key military and military-­industrial installations and 
preparations. Beyond this, they would regard any publicly avowed US 
reconnaissance activity as a challenge to their prestige.
4. Notwithstanding these considerations, the Soviet leaders may 
not choose to react immediately to a US reconnaissance program. The 
Soviets have made no formal protest about the Tiros weather pho­
tographic satellites. They are unlikely to believe that reconnaissance 
satellites offer much threat to their secrecy for the next year or so, but 
during the period of developmental testing of the Samos they will 
have to weigh the consequences of permitting the establishment of 
a precedent for unchallenged reconnaissance. Moreover, as capabili­
ties of US reconnaissance vehicles grow they will have to review their 
policy.
5. At present and for some time to come, the Soviets are likely to 
have only a marginal capability under most favorable conditions for 
interference with US satellites. Even detection and tracking in the 
early orbits of any satellite will be difficult. It might take two weeks 
to discover an unannounced vehicle designed to minimize detection, 
after which the track could probably be determined in a few days. It 
will also be quite difficult to identify the function of a new satellite. 
During the period of US test operations, roughly 1960 through 1962, 
the Soviets will probably seek to devise and perfect measures for rap­
idly detecting, identifying, and tracking satellite vehicles and means 
for jamming or otherwise disrupting the transmission of data from 
them. They will probably avoid premature disclosure of methods for 
which the US could develop countermeasures, but they will prepare 
for later actions to destroy or to neutralize operational US reconnais­
sance satellites. In the course of its program to develop an antimissile 
missile system, the USSR could obtain a limited capability to destroy 
such vehicles after they have made a number of orbits. This capability 
might be theoretically achievable about in the period 1963–1966, soon 
after the presently programmed introduction of a US reconnaissance 
satellite system. However, the capability for a system for destruction of 
satellites on their first orbit does not appear achievable until the latter 
part of the decade.
6. Since the technical-­military possibilities for destroying the 
vehicle or neutralizing its transmission will be limited for some time, 
the Soviets will probably conclude that only two courses are open 
to them in the next few years: (a) a campaign of pressure to gener­
ate political support in the world, particularly through stimulating
