Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
779
from those who prosper as oil prices climb. Private capital flows also
will continue to play a critical role. We look forward to the Develop-
ment Committee’s report on proposals for increasing nonconcessional
flows to developing countries.
We are committed to the stimulation of energy production world-
wide and to the increased use of renewable fuels. The United States
strongly supports an expansion of World Bank energy programs, to
permit Bank participation in multinational risk-sharing ventures to dis-
cover and develop new energy sources. Here, too, as we agreed at the
Venice summit, we are open to new institutional and financial arrange-
ments. We will participate positively in the U.N. Conference on New
and Renewable Energy Sources.7 We urge the U.N. Secretariat and
member nations to make every effort to insure its success.
Coal is an attractive alternative to high-priced oil. We will expand
our capacity to produce and ship coal, and we are ready to help devel-
oping countries establish coal-burning facilities and increase their use
of coal.
We support discussions between oil-exporting and oil-importing
nations on ways to insure orderly market conditions and on further
assistance for non-oil developing countries.
Requests for population program assistance have outpaced the in-
ternational community’s ability to respond. We are ready to join an in-
ternational commitment to double, in this decade, the availability and
use of family-planning and related health services.
On trade, my country would support a pledge by all countries to
restrain protectionism and case adjustment. Such a commitment would
provide more assured market access to developing countries. Also, be-
yond the sharp reductions in tariffs already agreed, we are prepared to
increase the benefits of our generalized system of preferences for
poorer developing countries.
These proposals reflect the positive approach we believe our
common problems demand and this special session deserves.
Let me conclude with this observation. I am persuaded, to the
depth of my being, that the challenges ahead are not beyond us. The
“Global 2000” report has been described as a reconnaissance of the fu-
ture. It describes the possibility. I believe it will not be the reality. The
vision we share is a vision of opportunity and of peace. It is within our
capacity to alter the future to fit that vision. The resources do exist. The
solutions can be found. Together we can summon the will. Knowing
what is at stake, we must not fail.
7 The conference took place in Nairobi August 10–21, 1981.
