Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
421
The face of Asia has changed, and the U.S. role must change as
well. Since the outset of the Carter Administration, we have tried to
shape U.S. policies to accommodate these new perspectives. U.S. pol-
icies and actions seek to maintain the current equilibrium and not allow
any single power to achieve a preponderance of influence or military
superiority in the region. A new role has been defined—one that does
not return us to the inappropriate level of earlier involvement in the in-
ternal affairs of the region and yet does not constitute a confusing and
destabilizing “abandonment” of Asia.
As we began this process and some adjustments took place, some
on both sides of the Pacific mistook them to mean a lessening of Amer-
ican concern about Asia or a reduced U.S. priority for the region as a
whole. Others concluded from the collapse of Saigon, the closing of
U.S. bases in Thailand, and our decision to reduce our military pres-
ence in Korea, that the United States was abandoning its strategic and
security role in the region.
These new myths about U.S. attitudes toward Asia do not square
with the reality of our foreign policy and the four basic elements of the
Administration’s Asian and Pacific policy.
U.S. Military Presence
The first essential element is that we are committed to keeping a
strong, flexible military presence in the region to help maintain the
present balance of power. To emphasize this point, the President sent
Vice President Mondale and National Security adviser Brzezinski on
special missions to Asia. The Vice President visited the Philippines,
Thailand, Indonesia, Australia, and New Zealand [April–May], while
Dr. Brzezinski went to Korea and Japan after the People’s Republic of
China [May–June].3
At every stop, they indicated publicly and privately our firm re-
solve to continue to play a major role in the region; and with every ally
they reaffirmed the American treaty commitments to that country.
Consider also the following.
• Except for our planned ground troop withdrawals from Korea,
we will maintain our current level of military and naval forces in the
Pacific. In addition, we will actually increase the number of tactical air-
craft in Korea by 20% this year and strengthen other forces by the intro-
duction of several advanced weapons systems within the next few
years. This will include Trident nuclear missiles for our submarine
fleet, cruise missiles for our B–52’s, the airborne warning and control
3 For text of Vice President Mondale’s address at the East-West Center in Honolulu
on May 10, 1978, following his trip, see BULLETIN of July 1978, p. 22. [Footnote in the
original.]
