1036
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—a proposal by the US to explore the desirability of increased in-
ternational support for regional energy research and training centers
modeled after the successful international agricultural centers;
—heightened attention to US support for the concept of primary
health care delivery systems;
—stepped up programs in immunization and research on tropical
diseases;
—increased support for research on new food crops and post har-
vest loss problems;
—a greater US stress on assisting LDCs to design public policies
which promote food production and distribution, and better land
management.
We have asked for preparation of final detailed staffing papers on
these generally agreed initiatives within two weeks.
We have not yet reached agreement on whether the USG will be in
a position before UNCTAD V to indicate general support for further
liberalization for the Compensatory Finance Facility of the IMF, in-
creased public financing for LDC energy development, particularly for
unconventional renewable sources, or on whether to make a specific
public commitment of $2.5 billion over the 1980’s to support the UN
Water Decade. We are also still grappling with what positive action we
could take to improve the functioning of existing mechanisms (mainly
the IMF and IBRD) with respect to how they deal with developing
countries having both short term financial and longer term structural
economic problems.
We have asked that additional papers on these latter issues also be
prepared within the next two weeks, and we will consult with Henry
Owen on how these matters might finally be decided. After talking
with Owen, we may request a few minutes with you to discuss this.
Overall, we are making steady progress. The OMB representative
commented that this effort by State to put together an overall strategy
for North-South would be very useful from their perspective. He urged
us to continue the exercise, and to integrate it into next year’s overall
budget cycle. The major problem we still face is a lack of concrete initia-
tives addressing international institutional reform, particularly re-
garding the complex of issues involving debt, balance of payments fi-
nancing and structural economic problems, which will be a key issue at
UNCTAD V. We believe there is a legitimate problem in this area; we
will continue to work with Treasury on this issue.
