748
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
cases.4 As part of our continuing human rights dialogue with Romania,
we will follow up with the Romanians to ensure that they do not
interpret a favorable vote in the IBRD as approval of their human rights
practices. However, in view of these recent demarches and the current
situation in Eastern Europe, we do not believe that a positive vote in
the IBRD should be conditioned upon another human rights demarche
at the Foreign Minister level. At a time when the Romanian Foreign
Minister Andrei is providing us with important and sensitive insights
into Soviet intentions regarding Poland, we believe that asking Ambas-
sador Aggrey to step up the human rights dialogue with him would
be a mistake.
Therefore, EUR, EB, and S/P recommend that the U.S. Executive
Director be instructed to vote in favor of the loan for Romania.
L Comments
There are serious human rights violations in Romania. Nonetheless,
it is possible to maintain that Romania is not engaged in a consistent
pattern of gross violations of internationally-recognized human rights.
Such a conclusion would have to rely heavily on the small signs of
improvement, the inconsistency in GOR human rights performance,
and the GOR’s efforts within Romania and within the Soviet bloc to
increase respect for human rights. The credibility of this position
depends in large part on the Department’s assessment of whether
U.S. attempts to persuade Romania to do better and to resist return to
past patterns of violations are having effect.
Recommendation
That you approve:
—Option One, an abstention on the loan. (HA favors)
4 On October 24, Aggrey reported in telegram 8780 from Bucharest that he had
delivered a démarche on human rights to Bogdan on five human rights cases. (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800509–0875) On November 6, during
Bridges’s visit to Bucharest, the démarche was once again brought to the attention of
Bogdan. In telegram 9189 from Bucharest, November 8, the Embassy reported Bogdan’s
conversation with Aggrey and Bridges. Concerning human rights, Bogdan responded
that the two countries should seek to minimize differences and reach practicable solutions
to individual cases. Stressing that the issues were in no way related, but that “solving
it would help,” Bogdan also commented on the ongoing demonstrations in front of
Romania’s UN Mission in New York and its Embassy in Washington. (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, [no film number]) Aggrey again asked Bogdan about
a response to the démarche on December 12. In telegram 10166 from Bucharest, December
12, Aggrey reported that Bogdan “revealed, confidentially, one of the problems had
been the hostile demonstrations at the Romanian UN Mission and a view among some
authorities in Bucharest that the protection was not what it might have been.” Bogdan
noted the demonstrations had been moved, “and with that in mind” he promised “to
look into the matter once more” but requested that the U.S. Government “continue to
monitor the demonstrations.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D800591–1193)
