3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1979
715
will prove to be well-founded. There are evident risks of a reaction, es-
pecially from the Islamic countries, and especially if this move is per-
ceived to be only to install a regime which will more effectively put
down the Muslim insurgency by force of arms.
9. I assume Washington is carefully sorting out the ramifications of
the Soviet move in terms of U.S. interests. My own view is that it marks
a watershed in Soviet policy on the use of military force outside its
borders and constitutes an unacceptable extension of the Brezhnev doc-
trine. I trust you will be assessing the best way to bring pressure to bear
on the Soviets and to make the political cost to them so high that they
will find a way to withdraw their troops. Even so, a dangerous prece-
dent will have been established, but if the price has been sufficiently
painful for them they may think again before undertaking another such
adventure.2
Watson
2 As a result of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the ratification of SALT II was
further delayed. While the SALT II Treaty remained on the Senate calendar in 1980, it was
not ratified. See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXIII, SALT II, 1972–1980, Docu-
ment 245.
248.
Editorial Note
On December 30, 1979, Acting Secretary of State Warren Christo-
pher approved a telegram to Moscow, the contents of which contained
President Jimmy Carter’s December 29 hotline message to Soviet Gen-
eral Secretary Leonid Brezhnev regarding the Soviet invasion of Af-
ghanistan. Also included in Christopher’s telegram to Moscow was
Brezhnev’s response to Carter of the same date.
Christopher wrote, “Following is text of President Carter’s mes-
sage of December 29 to Brezhnev (there may have been minor changes
in final version, as transmitted, but this text is virtually authentic):
“Begin text:
“Dear President Brezhnev:
“I want to insure that you have fully weighed the ramifications of
the Soviet actions in Afghanistan, which we regard as a clear threat to
the peace. You should understand that these actions could mark a
fundamental and long-lasting turning point in our relations. Taken
without any previous discussions with us, they constitute in our view a
