Resolution X as passed by the Commission declares that consular fees are to be considered as compensation for services rendered and not as an additional tax, and includes a recommendation for the reduction of consular fees to the lowest point compatible with the necessities of each country. While the United States would like to see this resolution strengthened into a specific declaration against the practice of the collection of consular invoice fees on the basis of a percentage of the value of the shipments, in view of the fact that two-thirds of the American Republics actually collect consular invoice fees on a percentage basis, the probability is apparent that the Conference would not in any case approve without considerable discussion any resolution looking to the abolishment of this practice. The United States is disposed to accept the resolution as presented by the Commission provided no satisfactory opportunity arises for its amendment without endangering the success of the Commission’s work as an entirety. If an opportune occasion should arise, however, you may place the United States Government on record as being opposed to the system. A reservation should be entered against that part of Resolution VI (c) which calls for the use of the metric system of weights and measures in consular invoices and makes all other systems subordinate thereto.” Topic 2. Conference of chambers of commerce, and as a part of its program, organization of an inter-American chamber of commerce. The Department feels that any movement which will tend to draw commercial organizations together for the consideration and solution of international trade problems, and which will afford another opportunity of contact between the United States and the Latin American countries, should be encouraged. The United States is already a member of the International Chamber of Commerce whose permanent headquarters are in Paris, and maintains a national committee with an office in the Chamber of Commerce of the United States at Washington. Important commercial organizations in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, the Dominican Republic and Guatemala hold membership in this international chamber, so the Sixth Pan American Conference might give thought to the existing International Chamber of Commerce in considering this matter.
