1466  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
relations between our two countries. In view of the fact that an American 
court has requested the Chinese Ministry of Justice for judicial assist­
ance in connection with the Powell case, he now proposed on behalf 
of his government that our two countries conclude an agreement to 
render each other judicial assistance. On September 3, 1957 the United 
States District Court of Northern California corresponded directly with 
the Ministry of Justice of his country and put forth a request for judicial 
assistance for Mr. and Mrs. Powell and Mr. Schumann, all American 
citizens and editors of the “China Monthly Review”. The Chinese 
authorities are willing to meet the request of the U.S. Court. However, 
in accordance with international practice, only after the two countries 
have reached agreement on judicial assistance, can assistance be ren­
dered in specific cases in accordance with the provisions of the agree­
ment. As a matter of fact the U.S. Government has concluded bilateral 
or multilateral agreements on judicial assistance with other countries. 
It can readily be seen that the procedure referred to above by the U.S. 
District Court is not in keeping with proper procedure. For this rea­
son the Chinese Ministry of Justice was obliged to return the origi­
nal request on October 30 of this year. Nevertheless, in its message of 
reply the Ministry of Justice specifically stated that if the Chinese and 
American governments reached agreement for judicial assistance the 
request in the Powell case would be eligible for consideration. Since 
the Chinese Ministry of Justice stated the aforesaid position, no step 
has so far been taken by the American authorities to promote a judicial 
agreement between our two countries. Yet on November 2 of this year 
the American State Department issued a passport valid for travel to 
China to Mr. Wirin, Powells’ defense attorney, for the purpose of taking 
testimony. It is evident that in the absence of a judicial agreement, it 
would be impossible for Mr. Wirin to accomplish the purpose of taking 
testimony.
5. Wang continued. In order to resolve the question of judicial 
assistance in the case of the Powells as well as other cases which may 
be raised in either country in the future, he proposed that both sides 
make the following agreed announcement so that cases can be taken 
up speedily. It is hoped that I and my government would give careful 
consideration to this proposal.
6. Wang then handed me the following text:
“Agreed Announcement of the Ambassadors of the People’s 
Republic of China and the United States of America Concerning 
Negotiations on Judicial Assistance. Ambassador Wang Ping-nan, 
on behalf of the Government of the People’s Republic of China, and 
Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson, on behalf of the Government of the 
United States of America, agree to announce:
In order to give each other judicial assistance on the basis of equal­
ity and reciprocity, the Government of the People’s Republic of China
