International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
355
A draft statement on exports is attached at Tab D.12 You should
know that this step may further dim prospects that Congress will ac-
cept the phased elimination of DISC proposed in our tax reform bill.13
However, the urgent need to address the trade deficit requires that we
at least attempt to develop a coherent policy toward exports.
Treasury believes the statement on exports, to be credible in the
dollar markets, should be made only in the context of a strong state-
ment on limiting oil imports.
Decision
Agree to task force and export statement (all agencies recommend)14
Disagree
12 Tab D, attached but not printed, is an undated paper stamped “Draft,” entitled
“Proposed Statement by President Carter on the Need for a National Export Policy.”
13 For the text of Carter’s January 20 message to Congress proposing a series of tax
reduction and reform measures, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States:
Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book I, pp. 158–184.
14 Carter indicated his approval of this option. On April 11, Carter announced his
anti-inflation policy before the American Society of Newspaper Editors in Washington.
Among the measures he proposed was the creation of a task force on export promotion,
which would be led by the Secretary of Commerce. For the text of Carter’s remarks, see
ibid., pp. 721–727.
120.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, March 21, 1978
SUBJECT
Prime Minister Callaghan’s Forthcoming Visit
I have just seen Prime Minister Callaghan’s March 16 letter to you
and his accompanying proposal for a five-part “package” agreement
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 76, United Kingdom: 1–3/78. Secret. Sent to Blumenthal for his signature under
cover of a March 20 memorandum from Bergsten, who noted that the memorandum had
been prepared at Blumenthal’s request. Bergsten also noted Solomon’s concurrence in the
memorandum, as well as Cooper’s and Owen’s support for the Treasury Department po-
sition. Bergsten observed that “Cooper is not as worried as I about the implications of the
Callaghan proposals and thus is more inclined toward a stance of ‘listen and defer judg-
ment.’” (National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for In-
ternational Affairs C. Fred Bergsten, 1977–1979, Box 2, Political)
