270  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
CH–25.	
Memorandum from the Director of the Office of West 
Coast Affairs (Coerr) to the Assistant Secretary of State 
for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
 
Washington, November 18, 1959.
SUBJECT
Alessandri Administration Celebrates First Anniversary
According to Embassy Santiago, probably the single greatest accom-
plishment of Alessandri during his first year has been the reestablishment of 
public confidence in the dignity, seriousness of purpose and honesty of the 
Government. This confidence is not only felt in business circles, but even 
by the average man on the street, even though he may not have voted 
for Alessandri. The greatest failure of the Administration has been its inabil-
ity to control the continuing upward surge in the cost of living.
Alessandri’s first year has been devoted in large part to bringing order 
to the chaotic financial situation which he inherited from President Carlos 
IBAÑEZ, and in laying the basis for reorganizing the haphazard struc-
ture of the government and planning the specific programs to be carried 
into effect during the second year of his Administration. The Government 
has shown itself friendly to, and desirous of cooperating with, the United 
States both in international affairs, and in matters concerning Chile’s inter-
nal economy. If President Alessandri can bring Chile’s inflation under control, 
he gives promise of providing the nation with one of the most effective govern-
ments it has seen in decades. Most of the basic changes envisaged by the 
Government are being effected under the special powers law which gives 
the President power to act without Congressional approval.
So far, major Government efforts have been concentrated in the eco-
nomic field. The Government has sought to: 1) bring order to the public 
finances (it has set up a revised, single budget system, refinanced the 
public debt, and claims to have presented the country with a budget for 
1960 which for the first time in many years will be balanced); 2) stim-
ulate production (by setting a more realistic exchange rate; lowering 
import deposits for essential machinery and goods; obtaining foreign 
loans some of which have been made available to private businesses for 
purchase of machinery and other essential imports; and reinvigorating 
the Development Corporation (CORFO), giving it the task of directing 
the country’s overall economic plan); 3) initiate more effective controls 
over the banking and credit system (limited expansion of the means 
of payment and instituted stricter controls over banking rediscounts); 
1 Source: Department of State, ARA/WST Files, Lot 62 D 31, “Economic, General.” 
Confidential. Drafted by Phillips; initalled by Coerr. The following notation by Rubottom 
appears on the source text: “Thanks.”
