384
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
109.
Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher) to the Assistant Secretary of State for African
Affairs (Moose), the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Todman), the Assistant Secretary of
State for East Asian Affairs (Holbrooke), the Assistant
Secretary of State for European Affairs (Vest), and the Acting
Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South
Asian Affairs (Sober)1
Washington, January 26, 1978
SUBJECT
Advance Notification of Human Rights Reports
As I mentioned this morning, each regional bureau will be respon-
sible for providing to the governments concerned advance copies of the
human rights reports to be submitted to the Congress. At your discre-
tion, this can be done in Washington, in capitals, or both. When the ad-
vance copies are handed over, I suggest that the presentation be made
using the following points as a framework. The points should be
adapted to the circumstances of particular countries:
—The effect of new legislation which became law last year is to re-
quire the Secretary of State to submit a “full and complete” report on
the status of internationally-recognized human rights in each country
which receives either development assistance or security assistance
from the United States. (It may be useful to provide the text of the Con-
gressional provision.)2
—We brought this legal requirement to the attention of your gov-
ernment last November.
—[For countries receiving development assistance] At that time,
we provided you [your authorities] with the text of the new legislation.
—109 human rights reports will be submitted to the Congress on
or about January 31. We are providing you with an advance copy of the
report prepared on [country].
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of
Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 15, Human Rights—Country Evalu-
ation Papers. No classification marking. All brackets are in the original. Copies were sent
to Derian and Lake. Lamb sent a copy of the memorandum to Shurtleff, Lister, Martins,
Fuerth, and Palmer, copying Schneider, Walker, and Oxman, under a January 27 cov-
ering memorandum with the following comment: “In connection with the attached mem-
orandum from the Deputy Secretary to the regional bureaus, please be sure that any gen-
eral instruction to the field incorporating the suggested presentation framework is
discussed with HA and S/P prior to transmission.” (Ibid.) Another copy of Christopher’s
memorandum is in the National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records
of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D133, Box 8, Memoranda from WC to Bu-
reaus—1978.
2 See Document 91.
