3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
103
would the US Government agree that no foreign troops should be
based in Cyprus, that the Greek and Turkish Cypriots live in peace, that
they maintain order with their own small forces, or was its position that
foreign troops should be retained there indefinitely.
The Secretary said that the first was our view. However, the ques-
tion of British bases on Cyprus would have to be worked out between
Britain and Cyprus.
Gromyko said that that was another question. He had asked
whether the US believed that ultimately there should be no foreign
troops in Cyprus.
The Secretary said he clearly agreed that there should be no Greek
or Turkish forces in Cyprus. That had been our position from the
beginning.
Gromyko said that this response drew our positions closer together.
By way of information, he told the Secretary that recently Foreign Min-
ister Caglayangil of Turkey had visited Moscow. He had touched on
the Cyprus question. Gromyko did not know where he had obtained
that information, but on the territorial question he had said that in gen-
eral Greek Cypriots—Archbishop Makarios—were closer to accepting
the idea of 30%–31% of territory for the Turks. If that was really so, the
Turkish Foreign Minister had said, then the Greek and Turkish posi-
tions on the territorial question were not all that far apart. Gromyko
was saying this to the Secretary for the sake of information, but could
not go into further detail, since this was not a subject for discussion be-
tween Turkey and the Soviet Union. He felt it would not be out of place
if our two countries could assist and advise the two communities, al-
though it would be they who would have to arrive at a final settlement.
The Secretary said it was his understanding that the Turkish Cyp-
riots’ position was that they wanted to get 30%–31% of the territory,
while the Greeks were prepared to give something closer to 20%. He
would predict that they would finally compromise on 26%–27%.
Gromyko said that had also been his impression after his talk with
the Turkish Foreign Minister. He had suspected that 30%–31% was
more wishful thinking than reality.
To finish up with the Cyprus question, Gromyko said the Soviet
Union would hope that the question would be settled and would no
longer be a problem. He felt that, in general, the Turks were inclined to
take the road toward solution. He believed that if both sides were flex-
ible, we could be optimistic about the future. However, no one should
interfere with them, although the US and the Soviet Union should as-
sist and prevent any outside interference. As for military bases, and for-
eign troops, ultimately these should leave.
