2 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement unnecessary differences with anyone if these differences can be hon­ orably resolved. (9) Direct talks have been preferred to carrying on discussions through intermediaries. The reason is that there is more apt to be misunderstand­ ing when matters are dealt with through intermediaries; therefore, we believe direct dealings should, in the first instance at least, be tried. (10) The first agreed purpose of the meeting is already the subject of bilateral talks, i.e., “settling the matter of repatriation of civilians who desire to return to their respective countries”. You will seek immediate authori­ zation to U.S. civilians to return to the U.S. You may point out that so long as American civilians are held under restraint on the mainland of China, there is bound to be ill feeling in the U.S. We are not, however, willing to promise political concessions to obtain their release. Only voluntary action by the CPR would really serve to remove the widespread resentment now felt in the U.S. because of the mistreatment by the CPR of U.S. citizens. (11) You are authorized formally to assure the CPR representative that the U.S. does not impose restraints upon Chinese civilians who desire to return to the Mainland. The U.S. is prepared to authorize some mutually agreeable government through its embassy in the U.S. to assist Chinese students who desire to return to the China mainland and to be a medium for the transmission of funds required for this purpose. (12) One of the “other practical matters now at issue between both sides” is the prisoners of war who were under the UN Command in Korea, and as to whom an initiative has been taken by the United Nations. The U.S. wishes to reinforce that initiative and you should raise this mat­ ter concurrently with the matter of the U.S. civilians. The considerations above (paragraph 10) alluded to in reference to U.S. civilians apply with equal or greater force with respect to the U.S. military, who are deemed covered by the Korean Armistice agreement. (13) You may, if and as you deem appropriate, mention that if U.S. nationals, civilian and POW’s, now held within China, are released that might facilitate the U.S. voluntarily adopting a less restrictive policy as to U.S. citizens going to the China mainland. (14) As another of the “practical matters” which you should take up at a later stage of the discussions is the matter of assuring instructions which will prevent a repetition of such incidents as the shooting down of the Cathay Pacific airliner with death and injury to U.S. citizens. (15) You will also, at whatever times you deem appropriate, emphasize the deep concern of the U.S. in getting assurance that the CPR is prepared to renounce force to achieve its ambitions. If the CPR representative contends that the use of force in the For­ mosa area is justifiable because this involves a domestic matter, i.e., the unification of China, you may point out that the fact of a divided China is not basically different from the fact of a divided Korea, Germany, and
