116
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
36.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 31, 1980
SUBJECT
U.S. Relations with Eastern Europe in 1980
The attached paper on U.S. policy toward Eastern Europe in the
year ahead was reviewed by the Interagency Group on Europe on
January 24. The NSC, Treasury, Commerce, Agriculture, ICA, Defense,
CIA, USTR and the Export-Import Bank participated in this review.
We have also consulted in a preliminary fashion with our allies at
NATO and in Eastern European capitals concerning their future policies
toward Eastern Europe.
At the Interagency Group meeting, there was general agreement
on the analysis contained in the paper and the central policy recommen-
dation—that we continue an activist policy in Eastern Europe designed
to preserve the gains we have made in the last three years and to
promote the goals of PD 21—domestic liberalization and/or foreign
policy independence. It was generally agreed that we would have to
adjust our specific actions and initiatives to take account of the reactions
of individual Eastern European countries to the situations in Afghani-
stan and Iran.
Since the Interagency Group meeting, the Soviets have evidently
increased pressures on Eastern European countries to follow Moscow’s
foreign policy lead. The Czechoslovaks postponed a planned Genscher
visit referring to the “complicated international situation.”2 After hear-
ing several times from the Hungarians that they wanted a visit to the
U.S. by Parliamentary President Apro to go ahead despite U.S.-Soviet
tensions, the Hungarians notified us on January 30 that the visit would
have to be postponed because of “pressing parliamentary business at
home.3 In both these cases, the Soviets appear to be acting to reign in
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 22, Europe: 1/79–1/81. Secret.
2 In telegram 309 from Prague, January 24, the Embassy reported that the Czechoslo-
vak Government had postponed the Genscher visit. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D800041–1098)
3 In telegram 461 from Budapest, January 30, the Embassy reported that Antal Apro
was postponing his visit to the United States for “unforeseen domestic political duties.”
Noting that the Foreign Ministry and Parliament were given only short notice of the
cancellation, the Embassy concluded: “We can only assume with a high degree of certainty
that Hungary only reluctantly postponed the visit” and that “the Russian lid on Eastern
Europe is being screwed tighter.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D800053–0746)
