3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 June–December 1977 187 45. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, August 29, 1977 PARTICIPANTS US USSR The Secretary Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin Marshall D. Shulman, S/MS Paul C. Warnke, ACDA 1. Middle East. Dobrynin opened by conveying Gromyko’s thanks for the comprehensive briefing on the Secretary’s Middle East trip received on August 18.2 Gromyko will be ready by the Vienna meeting3 to convey his consideration of related questions. Among other things, he will discuss the possibility of preparing, perhaps by the time of the Washington meeting, a joint US-Soviet co-chairmen’s statement about some basic principles of a settlement, including the rights of Palestinian self-determination and statehood, as well as the order and time for the resumption of a Middle East conference. The Secretary gave his reply later in the conversation, saying that he would be glad to have Gromyko bring with him or to send ahead his thoughts about a statement of principles. The Secretary expressed the feeling that it should be possible, before Gromyko left Washington, to settle on a date or at least a month for the Geneva meeting, and said he thought December would be a realistic possibility. Dobrynin asked about the situation in southern Lebanon, and expressed concern lest the Israelis take military action. The Secretary replied that we had gone over this issue with the Israelis, and had received commitments that they would not take military action. The Secretary then reviewed the main elements of the most recent plan proposed by Boutros, the Foreign Minister of Lebanon. In addition to the Shtaura agreement,4 it would include the following steps: (1) remove the Palestinian fighters to camps at Tyre; (2) allow some armed Palestinians in the Arqub area and in the vicinity of Bint Jubayl (3) deploy 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109, Box 3, Dobrynin–Vance, 8/29/77. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Shulman on August 29. 2 See Document 43. 3 Vance and Gromyko were scheduled to meet in Vienna during the first week of September to discuss SALT. The meeting was cancelled, and SALT discussions between the two resumed when Gromyko traveled to the United States in late September. (Bernard Gwertzman, “This Week’s Meeting is Canceled, and the Old Pact May be Extended: SALT Just Isn’t Going Anywhere,” The New York Times, September 4, 1977, p. 110) 4 For information on the Shtaura Agreement see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January 1977–August 1978, footnote 2, Document 76.
