Non-Proliferation
911
357.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, September 16, 1977
PARTICIPANTS
US
FRANCE
The Secretary
Louis de Guiringaud
Under Secretary Philip Habib
Foreign Minister
Ambassador Arthur A. Hartman
Francois de Laboulaye
Assistant Secretary George S. Vest
Political Director
James F. Dobbins, EUR/WE
(Notetaker)
Pakistan and Non-Proliferation
De Guiringaud related that, in a meeting on September 8 with Pak-
istani Foreign Minister Aga Shahi, he had told Aga Shahi that France
had a contract to furnish Pakistan with a plant which was capable of re-
processing used nuclear fuel in a manner that would enable it to be
used again to fuel reactors. He had then proposed to have plans for this
plant restructured, along the lines de Guiringaud had earlier discussed
with Ambassador Hartman. De Guiringaud told Aga Shahi that the
French government would, in due course, open conversations with
Pakistan to rewrite certain parts of the agreement.
Aga Shahi had been very surprised, de Guiringaud said. De Guir-
ingaud had been forced to endure an hour-long series of complaints
about discrimination against Pakistan, vis-a-vis India, in the nuclear
field. Aga Shahi had talked about the Canadian and US assistance to
India in the nuclear field, including assistance on breeder technology.
He claimed that India had been able to become a nuclear power as a re-
sult of such assistance. He had insisted that Pakistan must receive treat-
ment comparable to that given India. Something must be done for Pak-
istan or assistance to India must be cut back.
De Guiringaud said that he had, as a result of this conversation,
initiated a study of France’s nuclear relationship with India. The Secre-
tary said that he would have a paper prepared for de Guiringaud out-
lining the current state of the US nuclear relationship with India. He
said that the United States had agreed to provide a certain amount of
fuel for the Tarapur reactor. The United States had also talked to India
about the need to accept full-scope safeguards. The Indians had agreed
to consider this seriously. Habib added that there had been some gen-
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secre-
tary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 10, NODIS Memcons, 1977. Secret; Nodis. Ap-
proved by David Anderson (S/S) on October 11. The meeting took place in Vance’s
office.
