Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1107
cast doubt on the validity of the Treaty and lead to other reservations,
and because it would seriously jeopardize U.S. ratification of Protocol I
of the Treaty. He urged that the Mexicans continue to press the Soviets
not to reiterate their statement. Mr. Pastor added that if the Soviet state-
ment were repeated, a statement from Mexico supporting the U.S. posi-
tion on nuclear transit might be necessary to ensure U.S. Senate ratifica-
tion of Protocol I of the Treaty.
6. Gonzalez Galvez said Mexico strongly preferred not to have to
make a statement re nuclear transit. He noted that his government has
already declared that it would not permit nuclear transit on its territory
and said that Panama had taken a similar position in a declaration
made in 1968. We pointed out that notwithstanding any earlier Pana-
manian statement, the New Panama Canal treaties quite clearly do not
prohibit nuclear transit, and that the new treaties superceded the 1968
Panama statement. GG accepted that point. He added that he had
spoken to the Cubans on Tlatelolco.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Treaty of Tlatelolco.]
445.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Federal Republic of Germany1
Washington, November 22, 1978, 0252Z
295257. Subject: Supply of Heavy Water to Argentina. Ref: (A)
Bonn 21089,2 (B) State 285333.3
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, D780480–1105. Se-
cret; Exdis. Sent for information to Brasilia, Buenos Aires, and Ottawa. Drafted by John
Bligh (EUR/CE); cleared by Susan Klingaman (EUR/CE), Richard Barkley (EUR/CE),
James Thyden (S/S–O), and Vest; and approved by William Woesner (EUR/CE).
2 Telegram 21089 from Bonn, November 15, reported that the West German Foreign
Ministry said that its government “has difficulties with supplying heavy water tech-
nology to Argentina and has told the Argentines so. Basic FRG policy is to refuse to pro-
vide sensitive technology to a nation which is attempting or intending to acquire sensi-
tive nuclear technologies for the full fuel cycle.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy Files, D780471–0410)
3 Telegram 285333 to Bonn, November 9, informed the Embassy that in recent dis-
cussions with Argentina on nuclear cooperation, the United States “reiterated that (1) it
expected Argentina to complete its ratification of the Treaty of Tlatelolco; (2) agreement
to NPT-type full-scope safeguards would greatly facilitate expanded cooperation with
the US (e.g., assistance with Argentine export of research reactors); and, (3) heavy water
technology supply would be contingent upon indefinite deferral of its reprocessing
plans. In this context, Dr. Jorge Coll, Secretary-General of CNEA, stated that deferral of
reprocessing was linked to Brazil’s program because of Argentina’s concern about re-
gional stability, and that US policy on the non-supply of heavy water production tech-
nology was driving Argentina toward doing business with the FRG.” (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, D780464–0048)
