Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
565
one new ICBM will be permitted to each side. The number of warheads
on a single missile would be limited. And there would be restraint on
increasing the size of land-based missiles.
What would be the major effect of this agreement on our security?
Instead of an estimated 3,000 Soviet strategic weapons by 1985, there
would be 2,250. The strategic balance will be more stable and, there-
fore, safer. We will have greater confidence and certainty in our own
defense planning. And the defense programs that we and our allies
need and have planned can proceed forward on schedule.
Verification and Competition
But how do we know the Soviets will not violate the agreement?
The answer is—we can see for ourselves.
We have powerful and varied systems for observing the Soviets.
Besides our photographic satellites, we have other highly sensitive and,
therefore, highly classified means of verification. The large size and
limited number of bases for intercontinental missiles, heavy bombers,
and nuclear submarines eases our task.
And the SALT agreement itself makes a major contribution. SALT
II would forbid any interference which would impede our ability to
verify compliance with the treaty. And for the first time the Soviets
have agreed to regularly exchange precise data with us on each coun-
try’s missiles.
This is not a new and uncertain challenge. We have monitored So-
viet compliance with SALT I. We know what we can see. And we know
that we can detect any violation large enough to affect the strategic bal-
ance—and do so in time to respond effectively.
Yet with all this, some critics suggest that we should not move
ahead with SALT, even if it strengthens U.S. and allied security. They
contend that Soviet actions elsewhere—in the Third World or on
human rights—compel us to withhold approval of SALT II. This would
be a profound mistake.
As President Carter said two days ago, we “. . . cannot let the pres-
sures of inevitable competition overwhelm possibilities for cooperation
any more than [we can permit] cooperation to blind us to the realities of
competition. . . .” And the President said this:
It is precisely because we have fundamental differences with the
Soviet Union that we are determined to bring this most dangerous di-
mension of our military competition under control.9
9 For the full text of the President’s address at Georgia Tech on Feb. 20, 1979, see
Bulletin of Mar. 1979, p. 21. [Footnote and brackets in the original. For the address, see
Document 111.]
