588 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV Therefore, in addition to explaining what he would do to make the DYAD assuredly survivable, the President would have to explain what he was also doing to make the Soviets strategically uncomfortable in their silos. He would have to stress that the Trident 2 would definitely be a hard-­target killer with his full support, both to meet warfighting objectives and to force the Soviets to worry about stability and ICBM reductions. In short, the President would have to stress not only that he is paying the “survivability tax” that the Soviets had imposed on us, but he is going to impose that tax on the Soviets in return. He might also hint that because of increased US reliance on SSBNs we would increase our submerged ASW capability and thereby give ourselves options to imperil Soviet SSBNs in some situations. (TS) To borrow from boxing, this scenario involves fast footwork (evading the Soviet counter-­silo threat) and counter-­punching (purposely making Soviet silos vulnerable—­you could also do that with MPS but it would not have to be emphasized politically). The major flaw in it is that the President would readily sign up for the fast footwork, but not believe in the necessity for counterpunching. And even if he said the right things, as the author of the statement that one SSBN can destroy all Soviet large and medium cities, he would not be believed. Politically, you have to start from a very credible stance on strategic issues to make this scenario viable. (TS) I, for one, do believe that the DYAD scenario can be made to work politically and strategically, at home, with allies, and with the Soviets.7 But it requires a determination to follow through on the counter-­ punching elements (hard target kill and ASW), a tough campaign for future reductions in ICBMs, and a competitive thrust to our strategic behavior that I do not believe this Administration is up to. Therefore, I strongly recommend that this scenario not be adopted.8 It would draw tremendous fire from the Right and still face opposition to needed improvements from the Left. But I describe it to lay out the minimum essential conditions for making it work plausibly. 3. Disaster: DYAD without “Counterpunching” The President is likely to face a political disaster, for SALT and his reelection prospects, if he opts for the DYAD and tries to sell it in terms of cost effectiveness, ease of verification, and avoidance of the strategic challenge to the Soviets represented by M–X in MPS. If he fails to stress and follow through on the counterpunching themes of the DYAD option, it will look like strategic appeasement. (TS) 7 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this sentence. 8 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this sentence.
