1158ŌĆā Foreign Relations, 1955ŌĆō1957, Volume III, Supplement
at our disposal, to bring about improvement in relations between China 
and US. We must endeavor by every means within our ability to remove 
existing obstacles in relations between two countries. This he consid┬Ł
ered highly important necessity for both our sides. It precisely based 
on this approach to these talks that his side entered talks. All propos┬Ł
als he made were made in this spirit. We both recognized that existing 
embargo was one of obstacles in relations between our two countries.
If we could succeed in reaching reasonable solution to this dispute 
it would certainly contribute to resolution of other disputes. He believed 
this approach reasonable and realistic. He had not tried reverse order of 
things. In view my willingness consider proposal he made this morning, 
he hoped at next meeting I would have carefully studied it and make 
concrete reply.
16. I replied he had said removal of what he called embargo 
between two countries would contribute to resolution of other disputes 
between us. There were three problems between us which my side had 
thus far raised. First question was that of Americans detained in his 
country at opening these talks and ten of whom still detained in spite 
of what I thought was resolution of that problem last September. Other 
two as we well know were: question of renunciation force specifically 
applicable to Taiwan area; I also previously raised here with him ques┬Ł
tion of accounting for military personnel still missing from Korean hos┬Ł
tilities. These were questions I had thus far raised in these talks. Could 
I interpret his remark, therefore, to imply that if question of embargo 
satisfactorily resolved from this standpoint, it would contribute to res┬Ł
olution of these problems I had raised.
17. Wang said obliged point out question of what I called miss┬Ł
ing Americans which I had just mentioned, not within terms reference 
these talks. As regards other questions I raised he might say his side 
also not satisfied. For instance, on question of returning civilians if US 
had faithfully abided by agreement we reached here last year, he sure 
situation would be much more satisfactory than now. Situation equally 
true on question making declaration renunciation force. If my side had 
accepted his proposal making declaration without prejudice to sover┬Ł
eign rights and territorial integrity of parties and without prejudice to 
domestic matters of partiesŌĆöhe satisfied we able make progress that 
regard. If my side had accepted that principle he satisfied we would 
long ago have made declaration. I had repeatedly made allegation of 
existence threat force but why had my side not made declaration on 
renouncing force on basis principles contained his proposalsŌĆöthat is 
without prejudice sovereign rights and territorial integrity and with┬Ł
out interfering internal affairs other side. It could thus be seen which
