652
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
241.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, March 20, 1980, 1–3 p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
Alexander Bessmertnykh, Minister-Counselor, Soviet Embassy
Marshall Brement, NSC Staff Member
SUBJECT
Afghanistan and US-Soviet Relations (U)
Bessmertnykh opened the conversation by insisting on the need
to maintain channels of communication between us, a sentiment with
which I readily agreed. (U)
It was particularly important for us to understand, he continued,
the sour view of the US that is now widespread in the USSR, not only
in official circles, but among the general populace as well. He said he
was struck during his recent home leave by the fact that most people
who specialize in foreign affairs were taken aback by the US “overreac-
tion” to Afghanistan. We, of course, understood that there would be
a strong response, said Bessmertnykh. That was unavoidable. But what
surprised us was the vehemence of the response, the language used,
and the willingness to throw away what had been built up painfully
over almost a decade. (S)
This contrasts markedly with Soviet behavior in Vietnam in 1972,
Bessmertnykh went on. When the Americans were blockading Hai-
phong and bombs were falling right next to Soviet ships, the USSR
nevertheless went ahead with the first Moscow Summit and the signing
of the basic agreements which led to the period of detente, a period
which has now ended. There were those who counseled a cancellation
of the 1972 Summit, but their advice was rejected. We had a sense of
balance and knew what was important. It is that sense of balance which
seems to us completely absent in the US reaction to Afghanistan. (S)
The situations are hardly comparable, I replied. The bombing of
North Vietnam was in response to a major direct invasion of South
Vietnam by mainline North Vietnamese divisions supplied by the
USSR. That invasion was planned with the support and foreknowledge
of Moscow. It is not the Soviet Union which deserves praise for entering
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Records of Under Secretary of State for Political
Affairs David Newsom, Lot 81D154, folder 2. Secret. The meeting took place at the Soviet
Embassy. In a covering memorandum to Vance and Turner (attached but not printed),
March 28, Dodson noted that the memorandum of conversation “should be given tight
distribution within your agency and be sent to Embassy Moscow ‘Eyes Only.’”
