Japanese Delegates should ascertain the views of the British Delegation with respect to their proposals. Mr. Hioki replied that they had arranged for a conference with the British Delegation on the following morning. On the afternoon of June 19 it was learned from the British Delegation that the Japanese Delegates had made the same proposals as they had previously made to the American Delegates and that they had been informed that the British Delegates would submit the proposals for the consideration of their Government. So far as can be ascertained, the British Delegation is not yet formally in a position to make known the views of the British Government with respect to the Japanese proposals. However, from conversations which Messrs. Mac-Murray and Strawn have had with the British Minister, we believe the British, if necessary to come to an accord with the Japanese, would consent to the deletion of the first two paragraphs of the proposed Protocol (paragraph one being with respect to the coast-wise reimport duties $4,000,000, and paragraph two the transit pass permits $5,000,000) and let all of the revenue from the surtaxes, except the $9,000,000 annually for administrative purposes, be impounded to await future disposition by the Conference. The Japanese attitude during the past six weeks has been very disappointing to the American Delegation especially in view of the very cordial spirit of co-operation which had existed between the two Delegations throughout the Conference and of the efforts which the American Delegation had consistently made to accommodate the Japanese in matters which were regarded by them as of primary importance in the maintenance of their commercial and financial interests in China. The new attitude of the Japanese, indicative of a desire to dictate terms, or, in the alternative, of a readiness to take independent action, has been a surprise. The situation is probably to be explained by reason of a difference of opinion between the Japanese Foreign Office and the Japanese Delegation … Whatever the cause, the effect has not been the less annoying with respect to proceeding with the work of the Conference. While it is, of course, impossible to ascertain the exact purpose of the Japanese proposals, one cannot avoid the impression that the Tokyo Foreign Office does not desire, at the present juncture, to make any commitments,
