Afghanistan
303
The President concluded that our maximum goal, however, was to get
the Soviets out. Mr. Powell noted that this, however, was not likely to
be successful.
The Vice President said that the Soviets had created a traditional
buffer state into a satellite. Dr. Brzezinski agreed and noted that it was
a buffer state that protected a tier of three states along the Indian Ocean.
Thus, their action was a very dangerous step strategically, and we
must send them a message which reflects this broader concern.
As for SALT, Dr. Brzezinski said that we do not link the intervention
with SALT, but we are not going to be silenced by the possible domestic
reaction and its impact on SALT. The President agreed.
Mr. Powell said that a private message to Brezhnev would not be
adequate from the standpoint of our public position. It was agreed
that we would develop a brief public statement for the President’s use
as well as a more formal statement that could be released by the White
House. (Subsequently, the President decided to make only his own
statement.)8
The Vice President suggested the Soviets were trying to hurt the
President’s reelection chances with this move. General Jones said that
Afghanistan itself is a loss and of no particular help to the Soviets
strategically. In his judgment, they were obviously looking beyond it
and to cause perceptions of their willingness to use power and are
seeking a stepping stone. Secretary Brown said, on the other hand, the
Soviets were faced with a hostile Islamic state on their border. Secretary
Vance agreed with that view. He said that the Soviets were unwilling
to face the political damage if Afghanistan went down the drain.
The President concluded by saying we should push this issue
vigorously and be prepared to go all the way with the UN if necessary.
Returning to the question of support for the Afghan insurgents,
Admiral Turner said we should be clear that the objective of getting
the Soviets out is unachievable and much beyond the program of
support he was recommending. That program will ultimately cost only
$10 million and will barely keep the insurgency going.
Turning to Pakistan, the Secretary of State outlined the steps recom-
mended by the SCC: first, a high-level mission to consult with the
Pakistanis; second, to resume military sales; third, because we cannot
sell on credit to Pakistan because of the Symington Amendment, it
8 Carter spoke to reporters at 4:30 p.m. on December 28 about the hostages in Iran
and the situation in Afghanistan. For the text of his remarks, see Public Papers: Carter,
1979, Book II, p. 2287. He also addressed the nation on the crisis in Afghanistan in a
live speech from the Oval Office at 9 p.m., January 4. Text of the speech is printed in
Public Papers: Carter, 1980, pp. 21–24.
