division between the 2½ per cent and the 5 per cent and to draw up a schedule for the 5 per cent luxuries to be levied under the provisions of Article III of the Washington Treaty and not to discuss any amounts of money to be raised. Mr. Stewart suggested that to begin the discussion, the Advisers should accept at once and without alteration “A” and “B” in the Chinese classification as coming within the 5 per cent basis. Mr. Hornbeck objected to this because he feared that the acceptance of these two classes might ultimately lead to including in the luxury list only the commodities in those two grades. He said that the attitude of the American Advisers in regard to “A” and “B” depended somewhat on the attitude of the other Advisers in regard to articles in Class “C”. The plan of procedure adopted was that the chairman should read out the list item by item, and ask if any one had any objection to the inclusion of a particular item in the 5 per cent list. Beginning with the Commodities in Class “A” the list was read item by item and various reservations were made. There had been such a large number of reservations on the “A”, “B” and “C” lists that at the suggestion of Mr. Stewart, concurred in by Mr. Perkins, it was deemed inadvisable to proceed to the reading of the “D” and “E” classes of commodities. It was agreed to leave these two lists for consideration at a further meeting, at which the reservations made on the “A”, “B” and “C” could be adjusted. For a table of estimated revenues derivable from the proposed surtaxes see Appendix 1, Minutes of February 25, 1926, and for a table showing the value of the import trade of China for 1924 on which duty was assessed see Table I in same Minutes. For value of “free goods” see Table II and for value of dutiable goods specially exempted from duty in 1924 see Table III in Minutes of February 25. In the same Minutes may be found the Tables, with explanatory notes, showing the items in Grades “A”, “B”, “C”, “D”, “E”, “F” and “G”.
