Arms Control and Disarmament 1245 range missiles or to ban testing of missiles alone, until further technical study of the problem has been made within the U.S. Government. This study should be designed to answer the major question: Is it possible to devise an effective inspection system to police an agreement banning production and/or deployment of strategic missiles, taking into account present and prospective U.S. and USSR progress in developing and testing operational missiles traversing outer space? We believe that conclusions as to the military effect of a cut-­off of testing could, if our studies are pressed with sufficient vigour, be com­ pleted in time to include proposals on the subject in this package before it is discussed with the Soviet Union or our allies. A ban on testing may well prove to be the only feasible and inspectable method of preventing development of operational ICBM capabilities. It may also be found that the problem of missiles must be treated as a whole and that the valid distinction among missiles systems must be based upon range and not upon whether a particular missile is “air-­breathing” or ballistic and capable of travelling outside the earth’s atmosphere. Probable reaction of our allies U.K.—reluctant to accept principle that missiles would be con­ trolled apart from other disarmament measures, but could be persuaded to support proposal cast in above terms which does not prejudge sep­ arability pending completion of study. France, Canada and other allies would probably support. Tab E REDUCTION OF MANPOWER AND CONVENTIONAL ARMAMENTS PROPOSED POLICY (a) Provided any two of the three surprise attack measures pro­ posed in Tab C are accepted; (1) Reduction of U.S. and Soviet armed forces to the level of 2.2 million men, and to corresponding levels for the U.K. and France; (2) Placement of designated quantities and types of modern con­ ventional arms capable of serving as nuclear delivery systems (subma­ rines, missiles, aircraft, etc.) in international arms depots. (b) If the nuclear cut-­off and wider inspection zone (U.S.–USSR-­ Canada-­Europe) are accepted: (1) Reduction to 1.8 million men for the U.S. and USSR, and com­ parable levels for other states (with a listing of the overseas bases which the U.S. would give up as a consequence of such a reduction). (2) Placement of such amounts of important conventional arma­ ments in international arms depots that the armaments retained will have a general agreed relationship to the armed forces remaining.
