World Hunger and Food Policy
909
273.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
World Hunger Aspect of Your Rome Visit
Bob Bergland and Tom Ehrlich propose (Tab A)2 that you take the
opportunity of your visit to Rome to call public attention to the ad-
vanced countries’ responsibilities and the United States’ good record in
the War on Hunger. They suggest that you either make televised re-
marks to the four UN food agencies headquartered in Rome, or issue a
press statement on this theme during your visit.3 I offered the former
idea during early planning for your visit, but it got nowhere.4
I now suggest a different approach, serving the same purpose as
Bergland and Ehrlich have in mind, but more likely to get media cov-
erage here and requiring no change in your visit schedule. I suggest:
1) That you take up with the Pope and Cossiga our common con-
cern about world hunger and, specifically, the need to translate concern
into effective action in helping the starving Ugandans (whose plight
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 93, Food: 1979–1980. No classification marking. Sent
for action. A typewritten notation at the top of the page reads: “Last day for action: June
18, 1980.”
2 Bergland and Ehrlich’s June 5 memorandum to the President is attached but not
printed.
3 In telegram 15563 from Rome, June 16, the Embassy also endorsed the idea that
the President should address the four UN food agencies: “It would be far more effective
and dramatic for the President, in addition to discussing this issue [food relief] with the
Pope, to give twenty minutes of his schedule to a meeting with these important U.N.
agency heads. This in itself would generate favorable publicity. Out of such a meeting
could emerge an appropriate call to action (which would include sending a senior relief
coordinator to Uganda) linked with whatever additional effort the US was willing to
make. The outcome could be shared with Prime Minister Cossiga if this were deemed ap-
propriate.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800293–0488)
4 In the NSC Global Issues Cluster’s May 2 Evening Report, Bloomfield noted,
“Even if the President is unable to make an FAO stop in Rome to deliver a talk on food,
Owen, Poats, and I agree that an early occasion should be found for the President to pro-
claim his commitment to the anti-hunger war, in implementation of recommendations of
his Hunger Commission that US AID program for ’80s adopt an anti-hunger focus. We
think it would be very helpful to the President, particularly now, to have a vehicle to reaf-
firm his humanitarian convictions.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff
Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 37, Evening Reports:
4–6/80)
