918 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 578. Memorandum of Conversation, Hill, Robertson, and Members of Congress1 Washington, April 16, 1956 SUBJECT Proposed Investigation by Dodd Subcommittee of Mistreatment of Americans in China PARTICIPANTS Robert C. Hill, Assistant Secretary, H Walter S. Robertson, Assistant Secretary, FE Rep. Thomas J. Dodd (D-­Connecticut) Rep. Clement J. Zablocki (D-­Wisconsin) Rep. Lawrence H. Smith (R-­Wisconsin) Rep. John Jarman (D-­Oklahoma) Rep. Robert Byrd (D-­West Virginia) Rep. J. L. Pilcher (D-­Georgia) Ralph N. Clough, Deputy Director, CA Mr. Robertson expressed his complete agreement with the objec­ tives of the Subcommittee in desiring to investigate mistreatment of American citizens in Communist China. It was purely a question of tactics and timing that he wished to discuss with them. He reviewed the past negotiations with the Chinese Communists for the release of Americans, beginning in June 1954 pointing out that 52 ­Americans had been released as a result. However, 13 Americans remained in jail in Communist China and we were still engaged in protracted and tedious negotiations to bring about their release. It was obvi­ ous that the ­Chinese Communists hoped to obtain political conces­ sions in exchange for release of these persons, but we had made no concessions and were determined not to do so. We saw no other way to bring about the release of our citizens than to continue to negotiate. We believed that an investigation by the Subcommittee at this time might be counterproductive and therefore hoped that the ­Subcommittee would delay its investigation. Furthermore, we consid­ ered it highly desirable to employ all available material on mistreat­ ment of ­Americans in ­Communist China at the psychological moment when it would have the greatest effect. We had a carefully prepared report on this subject, covering 157 cases of Americans who had been imprisoned as well as other material but we did not intend to release this now. It should be released as part of a carefully planned campaign with a clearly defined objective rather than dissipated little by little in an uncoordinated manner. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/4–1656. Confidential. Drafted by Clough.
