Collectors of Customs and Excise of Canada and Collectors of Customs of the United States will refuse to clear any vessel in accordance with the provisions of Article II of the Convention. Lists of articles, the importation of which is prohibited and to which it is desired that the provisions of Article II shall be applied, will be exchanged between the Minister of Customs and Excise of Canada and the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States. ARTICLE III Section 1. A national of the United States or of Canada desiring to make claim under the provisions of Article III of the Convention shall file a petition with the Minister of Customs and Excise or the Secretary of the Treasury, as the case may be, setting out the facts and making request for the return of the property. Section 2. The claimant must produce evidence of his ownership and of the absence of collusion on his part in the theft of the property. Section 3. Upon the submission of satisfactory evidence, the return of the property will be authorized by the appropriate official, provided the claimant pays to the Collector of Customs or Collector or other proper officer of Customs and Excise, as the case may be, all expenses incurred in the seizure and detention of the property and files in writing a waiver and release of all possible claims for compensation and damages incident to the seizure and detention of the property against the Government and any and all Government officers involved. Section 4. Customs officials of the United States or Customs and Excise officials of Canada will give assistance to the nationals of the other Government by permitting the inspection by such nationals of property under seizure; provided the Customs or Customs and Excise officials are satisfied that such requests for inspection are made in good faith. When such stolen property is identified, such nationals will be furnished, so far as known, with the names and description of persons from whom the property was seized and other persons who have had possession of such property subsequent to the theft thereof. ARTICLE IV Section 1. The information to be exchanged under Article IV of the Convention shall be the name, and, where available, the
