386 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX US–GDR relationship forward, Goodby asked why the US did not want to do so. Is there nothing in such forward movement for us but trade? Neets (Agriculture) replied that, while the GDR agricultural market is not great, it is active and capable of growth and currently represents the largest part of US trade with the GDR. Asked by Woessner how close we were to reaching the growth limits of that market, he said that, while we have made great strides, it will be more difficult to obtain a larger share as long as the Soviets continue their present levels of supply. Porter (Commerce) noted that overall trade turnover had increased an estimated 15 percent over 1977, with a sharp increase in GDR industrial exports from $16.7 million to an estimated $36 million. The GDR, she concluded is learning more about the US market, while the quality of GDR goods is becoming better known to American firms. With MFN, trade would probably expand significantly, with more turn-key contracts going to the US. Most of these contracts would otherwise go to other countries in the West. By way of example, she pointed to the estimated $300–400 million in GDR business that currently goes to US offshore subsidiaries each year. In this regard, Woessner noted that the British and French had long competed fiercely for the GDR market, divorcing such competition from political considerations. Touching briefly on the GDR’s indebtedness, Goodby asked if we could do a study of the question. Gray replied that indebtedness is supposed to be discussed in an ongoing CIA study of the GDR economy. He said he would check on the status of that study. 6. Turning to a consideration of the GDR as a CEMA/Warsaw Pact member, Goodby noted that not all the cards were in the Soviets’ hands. Larrabee (NSC) added that the GDR’s importance to the Soviet Union stemmed primarily from its security role. While the GDR is also of great economic importance to the East, over the last few years there had been a decline in its trade with CEMA, though there were recent signs that the GDR was making efforts to try to reverse this trend. With regard to foreign policy, he detected few meaningful signs of East German independence, except at times in relations with the FRG. Farlow (INR) agreed, saying it was hard to accept the assumption that the GDR enjoyed any meaningful independence or was any more liberal than most other East European countries. The GDR, he added, tends to act on two foreign policy levels. Publicly, the GDR’s leaders tend to take milder, less polemical positions than they do in private discussions with their allies. Their position on China, he said, was a good example, being more restrained in major public pronouncements compared to some other East European statements, but more outspoken in less publicized allied discussions—as during the recent Sofia Ideological Conference of Communist Parties. Gray noted, however, that the GDR was in the forefront of those publicly backing Vietnam and that the
