922  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Long-­Range U.S. Policy toward the USSR and its Satellites. With 
respect to this subject, the Vice President felt we needed to develop a 
proper policy line on liberation of the Satellites and on all the concepts 
which had been talked about when the Administration first came into 
office and which had been modified some what since. He pointed out 
that we now rule out revolution but say the satellite peoples should 
have freedom to choose their governments. He felt this would be a very 
good subject for Council discussion.
Utilization of Non-­Military Technological Advances: International 
Scientific Cooperation. Dr. Kistiakowsky said he would be happy to 
prepare terms of reference on utilization of non-military technological 
advances, but he hoped someone else would prepare the paper. Dr. 
Kistiakowsky then suggested that the Council might also discuss an 
intensification of efforts to achieve international scientific cooperation 
which would enhance our leadership among Free World nations and 
relax tensions by cooperation with the Soviet Union in certain areas. 
This topic, of course, had less urgency than some of the others men­
tioned at this meeting.
U.S. Bases Overseas. The Vice President felt that any new report on 
U.S. bases overseas should take into account the effect of missile devel­
opments through about 1965 on our base system. According to his rec­
ollection, the Nash Report had dealt with aircraft and had not taken 
missiles into account.
The National Security Council:
a. Discussed the subject in the light of a list of suggestions by NSC 
Members and Advisers, prepared by the NSC Planning Board, trans­
mitted by the reference memorandum of December 15, 1959.
b. Agreed, subject to consideration by the President, that:
(1) A Discussion Paper on Cuba should be prepared by the 
Department of State and discussed in the Planning Board under special 
security precautions prior to its submission to the NSC.
(2) Discussion of the means by which the U.S. can best obtain the 
cooperation of De Gaulle in political, economic and military matters 
should be deferred until after the NATO and Western Summit meetings.
(3) Consideration of a Discussion Paper on the U.S. Attitude toward 
Nasser and on Poland should be deferred to a later date.
(4) Further discussion of Disarmament should be deferred pend­
ing completion of the study in preparation by the Director, Joint 
Disarmament Study.
(5) The Council on Foreign Economic Policy should be asked to 
undertake the initial review of Economic Defense Policy (NSC 5704/3).
(6) The Planning Board should give further consideration to devel­
opment of a paper on Long-­Range National Strategies.
(7) Consideration of a Discussion Paper on the future of NATO 
should be deferred until after the NATO meeting.
(8) The Planning Board should develop Discussion Papers on 
U.S. Foreign Policy and Military Capabilities, on Implications of the
