1032
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
panded educational opportunities and health services for the masses,
and improvements in legal, social, and economic status of women, in-
cluding greater participation of women in making decisions as to
family size), as well as (2) to raise the coverage and quality of family
planning services. All of these measures are necessary if past gains in
reducing fertility are to be solidified and future reductions accelerated.
World Bank President McNamara observed in his recent speech
(MIT, May 1977)6 that, if, through some extraordinary concentration of
effort, the worldwide fertility rate would decline to the replacement
level (NRR=1) by the end of this century, world population would ulti-
mately cease to grow at about 8 billion. Delaying this fertility transition
another 20 years would eventually produce a stable population of 11
billion. Thus, for every decade of delay in achieving replacement-level
fertility rates, the ultimate size of world population will increase by
some 15 percent.7
[Omitted here are Section II: Program Developments in Key Coun-
tries; Section III: Developments in U.S. Population Assistance Pro-
grams; and Section IV: Developments in Population Assistance from
Other Donors.]
V. Conclusions
A. Overall Strategy.
The Ad Hoc Group endorses U.S. strategy in dealing with interna-
tional population issues as set forth in Section II of last year’s Report.
We continue to believe, based on reports from our Missions in de-
veloping nations, that the most successful population programs usu-
ally depend on: (1) national leaders being clearly, firmly, and actively
committed to promoting broadly based national population programs;
(2) rooting family planning in communities (villages) and relating
family planning to the economic interests and social development of
6 According to a May 2, 1977, editorial in The Christian Science Monitor, McNamara
spoke at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) the last weekend of April, ex-
ploring the connection between population control and the status of women. (“Wives’
clubs and population warnings,” p. 36) See also David R. Francis, “Social justice and eco-
nomic progress . . . ,” The Christian Science Monitor, May 2, 1977, p. 11.
7 The above population projections, developed by Tomas Frejka of the Population
Council, are not intended to predict the actual situation but are meant to illustrate the
enormous potential for growth built into the current age structure of much of the world’s
population. It is not inconceivable, for example, that, at some point in history, average
family size in countries, regions, and the world may consist of fewer than two children
(i.e., that fertility may stabilize at a level below replacement of the parental generation). A
sustained fertility level below replacement, however, would eventually lead to a decline
in the absolute size of the population. This, to our knowledge, is not an objective of any
governmental population policy and, hence, is not used—even for illustrative pur-
poses—in this Report. [Footnote in the original.]
