458  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
able to give you an answer. To be honest, I don’t know anything about 
the two radars you mention.
Baker: Don’t worry. I didn’t know and still don’t know anything 
about the radars and the two in Fylingdales. But your request is reason-
able, and I believe we shouldn’t have anything to hide. Nevertheless, 
this was a knock-­down drag-­out fight on our side.
One other point that I was going to raise tomorrow. When we 
were in Wyoming you said you would be completely destroying 
Krasnoyarsk. Now, however, in the SCC, we are hearing that you plan 
to take down only half the building. So our bureaucracy is saying that 
your people at the SCC haven’t gotten the word from Shevardnadze. We 
have even had a debate about whether you should destroy the founda-
tions of the buildings. The proponents of that argument are saying that 
it is necessary to do that because it was a violation and therefore the 
standards for construction have to exceed the standards for destroying 
legal radars. Obviously, there is a confidence-­building need right now. 
I want to put the Krasnoyarsk issue completely behind us. To do so, 
I think you have to do what you said you would do in Wyoming and 
that is completely eliminate the buildings. I want to put this behind us 
because as you know it has been our policy that we cannot enter into 
START until Krasnoyarsk is eliminated. I hope there is no difference of 
opinion on what it means to eliminate the structures.
Shevardnadze: This is not a problem. It will be done just as I said it 
would be in Wyoming. What I said was the result of a political deci-
sion taken at the time. What you have told me will make it easier to 
carry out and ensure that we carry out the steps that I told you we 
would.
Baker: I think word should get to your representative at the SCC.
Shevardnadze: Maybe we ought to disband the SCC at some point. 
Anyway, I will speak to you tomorrow about the SS–18. This is a dif-
ficult question. You may not know how difficult it was for us to say at 
Reykjavik that we would destroy 50% of these missiles. I know that 
Reagan and Shultz did not expect us to do that. This is a question and 
an issue that needs to be looked at in a larger context—­the context of 
the SDI program and the ABM treaty. They are all interrelated. We 
have no vested interest in this missile but it is interconnected. Many 
things can become clear when we begin our dialogue on strategic 
stability.
On ALCMs, there are quite a few new elements in your proposal. 
I am not sure we will agree on all of them. One difficult question is 
range. But you have made an effort to accommodate us on verification. 
You have made some important moves but our experts are going to 
need to study this.
[Omitted here are discussions not related to START.]
