530
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
“In order to achieve peace between them, the parties agree to nego-
tiate in good faith with a goal of concluding within three months from
the signing of this framework a peace treaty between them, while in-
viting the other parties to the conflict to proceed simultaneously to ne-
gotiate and conclude similar peace treaties with a view to achieving a
comprehensive peace in the area.”
This is our commitment. With respect to the peace treaty between
Egypt and Israel, it is an absolute commitment. It is not predicated on
any other factor, including acceptance of the invitation as quoted
above. Certainly, we both seek a comprehensive peace settlement in the
Middle East. As you know, I have never suggested to you to conclude a
separate peace with Israel. The envisaged peace treaty between our
countries constitutes the first indispensable step towards the broader
settlement we seek.
In order to make this momentous prospect possible, the Govern-
ment of Israel a fortnight ago took the decision that it was ready to sign
the draft Egyptian-Israel peace treaty as it stands.3 In so doing, the gov-
ernment expressed its willingness to forego two amendments to the
draft which it had held to throughout the negotiations. Those amend-
ments are important, but I will not dwell on their significance now be-
cause of the action we took in favor of what we hoped would lead to the
immediate achievement of our common goal.
As far as the text of the peace treaty is concerned, it seems that the
obstacle in the way of our two governments putting our signatures to
it—a turning point, indeed, not only in our mutual relations but for the
whole region—is your insistance on changing or deleting sections of
Article VI and, I am informed, also Article IV. These articles, as they
read, were negotiated and renegotiated by our delegations. They are
vital and indispensable.
In this context may I comment on your remark about “legal formu-
lations.” To put it simply, everyone tends to display a preference for his
own formulation while showing little sympathy for that of his partner.
Beginning with the paper you read to President Carter and myself at
Camp David4 and continuing through all the other Egyptian draft doc-
uments, I have found numerous “legal formulations.” I say this
without any recrimination. We should both agree, surely, that this is in
the nature of things, for after all, we are dealing with political docu-
ments that should have proper international standing. Hence, by defi-
nition, they are formulated in judicial language. The “legal formula-
tion” to which you address yourself in seeking to change both the letter
and substance of Article VI of the draft peace treaty is an immediate
3 See footnote 2, Document 141.
4 See footnote 8, Document 28.
