80 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 the compound. Security includes 20–30 “students” and Islamic Revolutionary Guard (IRG) personnel at the Chancellory gate, supported by foot and motorized patrols. News reports on evening of 16 November indicate that up to 100 “soldiers” are joining guard personnel around compound. There are 20–30 additional “students” and IRG in the Chancellory, with 125–175 “students” providing direct security of the hostages, who are reportedly loosely bound. “Students” inside the hostage holding areas appear to be armed with pistols while those outside have automatic rifles and submachine guns. Explosive devices on the perimeter wall have also been reported. It is likely that the compound is under surveillance from adjacent buildings although no observation posts or gun positions have been seen on surrounding rooftops. Reinforcements: Within 10–15 minutes after beginning to move about 100 local IRG militia can be at the compound, followed by an IRG motorized “Strike Team” of 150–200 personnel in 20–30 minutes. A motorized 120–160 man Ranger reaction company and up to 1500 IRG back-up strike force personnel may arrive in 30–45 minutes, followed shortly thereafter by an additional 1500–2000 man IRG Strike Force. In addition, an easily excited populace has tended to rally to the compound in large numbers in support of the students when unusual events occur (e.g., recent power outage resulted in mob scene at Embassy). The sheer numbers, without regard to their discipline, cohesion or competence, add up to a most significant threat. Rescue Assault at the Compound: Best judgment is that it would take all of the available 75 specially trained Special Forces Operational Detachment-Delta personnel scaling the walls during darkness and with complete surprise to have a reasonable chance of freeing at least a substantial number of the hostages. The assault personnel would have to complete their task within 30–40 minutes, from assault to movement from the compound. The assault would be timed for the quiet hours after midnight when few people are on the streets. If surprise is achieved and Delta’s actions can be completed quickly within the compound, the probability of successful movement away from the compound is enhanced. However, there is a high risk of any movement being impeded by the convergence of reinforcing elements and civil mobs. Cover and deception actions elsewhere in the city and the neutralization of the radio/TV stations are being planned. Insertion and Extraction: Any chance for success is critically dependent upon achieving surprise and therefore a low visibility insertion concept is envisioned. This
