36  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
financial matters due to their prolonged preoccupation with the 
­IMF-IBRD meeting in New Delhi and other matters like the Colombo 
Plan Conference.3
Now, however, we are at grips with the Latin American economic 
problems in the Special Committee of the Council of the OAS4 which 
convened Monday.5 Attached is a copy of Doug Dillon’s very good 
speech of yesterday with certain key parts underlined for your con-
venience.6 The fact that we are engaged in our meeting demonstrates 
again the rapidity with which we are moving in our efforts to find con-
structive solutions, on a cooperative basis, to Latin America’s problems. 
This is truly an operational phase of our relationship.
You should know that a rather serious problem has arisen with 
the Treasury Department over the handling of the discussions regard-
ing the Inter-American Development Institution. We are pledged, 
and have constantly reiterated this pledge as in the case of Dillon’s 
speech, to negotiate and draft the outline for this Institution in the 
Committee of Experts of the Inter-American Economic and Social 
Council which will convene on January 8. Treasury, at least the work-
ing level officials there, holds that this precludes any discussion prior 
to that meeting. The Latin Americans are determined, with possi-
bly two exceptions in Mexico and Cuba, to discuss the Institution at 
least along general lines during this present meeting of the Special 
Committee of the OAS Council. I do not see how we can avoid lis-
tening to their observations, and perhaps expressing a few views 
ourselves as to its general character and outline without in any way 
committing our Government. The Treasury Department is against 
this and even complained about the references to the Institution in 
Dillon’s speech, simply in the form of questions which will have to 
be faced by us all.
3 Reference is to the 10th ministerial meeting of the Consultative Committee of 
the Colombo Plan, representing 18 countries and 3 dependent territories in South and 
Southeast Asia, held in Seattle, Washington, November 10–13, 1958.
4 The Special Committee to Study the Formulation of New Measures of Economic 
Cooperation was established under the auspices of the Council of the Organization of 
American States pursuant to a recommendation approved at the informal meeting of 
the 21 Foreign Ministers of the American Republics, held in Washington, September 
23–24, 1958. The Special Committee subsequently held its first meeting in Washington, 
November 17–December 12, 1958. Documents pertaining to the Special Committee are in 
decimal file 363.
5 November 17.
6 No attachments were found with the source text. For the text of Under Secretary 
Dillon’s address before the Special Committee on November 18, see Department of State 
Bulletin, December 18, 1958, pp. 918–922.
