466
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
a commitment that Israel has made in writing and which is supported
and appreciated, I’m sure, by all the world.
Over the last 18 months, there has been, of course, some progress
on these issues. Egypt and Israel came close to agreeing about the first
issue, the nature of peace. They then saw that the second and third
issues, that is, withdrawal and security, were intimately connected,
closely entwined. But fundamental divisions still remained in other
areas—about the fate of the Palestinians, the future of the West Bank
and Gaza, and the future of Israeli settlements in occupied Arab
territories.
We all remember the hopes for peace that were inspired by Presi-
dent Sadat’s initiative, that great and historic visit to Jerusalem last No-
vember2 that thrilled the world, and by the warm and genuine personal
response of Prime Minister Begin and the Israeli people, and by the mu-
tual promise between them, publicly made, that there would be no
more war. These hopes were sustained when Prime Minister Begin re-
ciprocated by visiting Ismailia on Christmas Day.3 That progress con-
tinued, but at a slower and slower pace through the early part of the
year. And by early summer, the negotiations had come to a standstill
once again.
It was this stalemate and the prospect for an even worse future that
prompted me to invite both President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin
to join me at Camp David. They accepted, as you know, instantly,
without delay, without preconditions, without consultation even be-
tween them.
It’s impossible to overstate the courage of these two men or the
foresight they have shown. Only through high ideals, through compro-
mises of words and not principle, and through a willingness to look
deep into the human heart and to understand the problems and hopes
and dreams of one another can progress in a difficult situation like this
ever be made. That’s what these men and their wise and diligent ad-
visers who are here with us tonight have done during the last 13 days.
When this conference began, I said that the prospects for success
were remote. Enormous barriers of ancient history and nationalism and
suspicion would have to be overcome if we were to meet our objectives.
But President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin have overcome these
barriers, exceeded our fondest expectations, and have signed two
2 See footnote 6, Document 63.
3 Sadat and Begin met in Ismailia December 25–26, 1977. See Christopher S. Wren,
“2 Leaders Tour Suez Canal City, Symbol of Egypt’s Peace Hopes,” December 26, 1977,
p. 47 and Henry Tanner, “Rift on Palestinians: Plan for a Joint Declaration Dropped After
West Bank Issue Stalls Meeting,” December 27, 1977, pp. A–1, A–17, both The New York
Times.
