588
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
This is not cause to be sanguine; but it is reason to be confident that
practical progress can be made. But only if:
• We and the other industrial countries recognize that we share a
common destiny with the developing world;
• They, the developing nations, recognize their responsibilities
both within the international system and for equity as well as growth in
their own societies; and
• All of us, together, recognize the wisdom of a great man the
world has now lost—Jean Monnet.20 “We must put our problems on
one side of the table,” Monnet said, “and all of us on the other.”
20 Monnet died in mid-March.
116.
Editorial Note
President Jimmy Carter took part in an interview with editors and
news directors, consisting of his introductory remarks and a question-
and-answer session, at the White House on April 7, 1979. The session
began at 1:16 p.m. in the Cabinet Room. In response to a question con-
cerning the global perception of the administration’s human rights
policy, the President commented:
“Well, there have been a number of occasions around the world
where our human rights policy, which I espouse very strongly and
think we ought to maintain, has been a diplomatic problem—in dealing
with the People’s Republic of China, the Soviet Union, South Korea, Ar-
gentina, Chile, Brazil, the Philippines—just been described—and other
countries. I could name a lot of them.
“Q. Afghanistan.
“The President. Afghanistan and others. I acknowledge that. I
think, in balance, it’s one of the best things that we have ever done since
I’ve been President. I think for us to raise the banner of being deeply
committed to human rights has been and has had an enlightening effect
on the rest of the world.
“Some of the administrations or the regimes in other nations have
been embarrassed. But I can assure you—and I don’t think I’m saying
this in a gloating way—that in previous administrations, quite often—
even in very popular administrations—when visits were made to coun-
tries, say, in Latin America just to use an example, there have been,
sometimes, massive anti-American demonstrations against very pop-
