800.51 W 89Czechoslovakia/101: Telegram
[Document 71]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, July 6, 1925—8 p.m.
26. On July 6 the Czechoslovak Chargé, Dr. Lípa, conversed at the Department with
Mr. Richardson, Acting Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs. Dr. Lípa
stated that he was under instructions from his Government to say that it had been
giving consideration to your note of May 2 regarding indebtedness of Czechoslovakia
to the United States and that his Government had in principle agreed to meet all
obligations toward this Government. Specifically, they agree to recognize the sum of
approximately $80,000,000 verified by commission which came to Washington in
1923; to negotiate in immediate future for verifying of balance of about $11,000,000
that is still in dispute between Czechoslovakia, War Department, and Shipping Board,
the verified amount on account of these items to be added to the already admitted
$80,000,000; and to acknowledge the total as the sum of indebtedness of
Czechoslovakia to the United States.
According to the Chargé, the Government of Czechoslovakia is prepared to negotiate at
once conditions of payment of the $80,000,000 verified, and to do so either through the
Czechoslovak Legation in Washington or through a special mission, whichever the
Government of the United States might deem preferable.
 
Dr. Lípa stated that above points would be incorporated in formal communication to be
addressed to this Government within a week or so, and he wishes to ascertain if they
would constitute a basis satisfactory to the World War Foreign Debt Commission upon
which to begin negotiations, as his Government does not wish to send a formal
communication in sense of the foregoing if the conditions are unacceptable.
The Department has communicated substance of Chargé’s statement to Treasury
Department for its comment, and would be pleased to have you report by telegraph any
information discreetly available on actual intentions of Government of Czechoslovakia.
GREW
