International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 343 Chancellor Schmidt replied that it was kind of the President to say this. This morning, he had given his annual “state of the union” speech, and in it there were two or three pages devoted to the deep-seated and deep-rooted relations between our two peoples, and the historical ties. He would like the President to have the full text, and would arrange for the U.S. Ambassador to get one.3 The President said he knew they were thinking alike on this; and he asked how things are going in Germany. Chancellor Schmidt replied that, in terms of the domestic situation, there are two complexes of different factors. On the one hand, there is, stronger than before, the problem of labor disputes, since they have about 1 million people out of work. But on the other hand, the economic situation is going up. In the last quarter of 1977, they had a real increase in growth of 6%, calculated on the “Anglo-American” yardstick. This was an enormous upswing, though he could not say whether it would endure into the first quarter of 1978. But the domestic outlook is fine. The foreign outlook, however, is not as good, especially with exchange rates and currency. (The President agreed.) U.S. officials from Treasury, and German officials from the Finance Ministry, will be working together this weekend, on a common communique,4 which should show the market what we jointly would do. We should do all that we can to defend the dollar. The President said he looked forward to seeing the communique, and was sure it would be very positive. On energy, we are moving forward here. On natural gas, we should have a result shortly. He is invoking the Taft–Hartley Act,5 with regard to the miners. Some coal production is going up—though the miners are certainly an independent lot. He cannot predict the outcome of the strike. 3 In telegram 4556 from Bonn, March 13, the Embassy summarized and commented on Schmidt’s March 9 “Report on the State of the Nation” before the Bundestag. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780112–0064) 4 An unknown person underlined the phrase “will be working together this weekend.” On March 13, the United States and West Germany announced a joint dollar support program that included increasing the U.S.–FRG swap from $2 billion to $4 billion; U.S. acquisition of $740 million in marks through SDR sales, as well as the suggestion that the United States would seek up to $5 billion in IMF assistance if necessary; and a shared commitment to “continuing forceful action,” as well as “close cooperation,” to combat “disorderly” exchange market conditions. The joint U.S.–FRG statement also noted that exchange market stability hinged “on a climate of confidence and a high degree of stability in the world economy. Although progress has been made in some respects, these conditions have not yet been adequately met: growth rates in some countries are still lower than desirable; unemployment remains too high and inflationary pressures persist in many parts of the world, hampering more growth-oriented policies.” (Clyde H. Farnsworth, “Plan is Announced by U.S. and Germany to Stabilize Dollar,” The New York Times, March 14, 1978, p. 1) 5 The 1947 Taft–Hartley Act, officially the Labor-Management Relations Act, regulates the activities of labor unions.
