National Security Policy 413 Mr. Harlow General Goodpaster Major Eisenhower Secretary Quarles, in speaking for the Department of Defense, summarized the questions for discussion as: (a) the revision of the Key West Directive in the light of the Defense Department reorganization, and (b) certain issues as to Service-DOD relationships in that directive. Turning first to the revision of the Key West Directive as a whole (DOD Directive 5100), Mr. Quarles described it as a functional paper which sets forth the working relationship between unified and specified commands, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, channels of command requests, etc. As pertains to the military Services, and their relationship to each other (roles and missions), Mr. Quarles stated that this directive indicates nothing new. He assured the President, however, that the provisions of the new unified command plan have been brought into this directive without disagreement. Mr. Quarles went on to say there were one or two points unre­ solved in this directive, however. In particular, he mentioned the man­ ner in which the Joint Chiefs of Staff are portrayed in the organization charts of the Department of Defense. In the two directives which are current, the Office of the Secretary of Defense proper is considered an extension of the person of the Secretary of Defense himself; whereas the Joint Chiefs of Staff are treated as a separate military staff, through whom the Secretary of Defense issues his instructions in exercising stra­ tegic direction of our armed services. Mr. Quarles said that this pro­ posed revision of the directive has also placed the Joint Chiefs of Staff outside the Office of the Secretary of Defense; however, he feels that the Joint Chiefs of Staff could better be included within the Office of the Secretary of Defense. In response to a question from the President, Mr. Quarles admitted that this problem is largely one of semantics, since the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Secretary of Defense in either case would be components under the Secretary of Defense. Mr. McElroy pointed out that in the proposed directive the Assistant Secretaries are in one group and the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the other. General Twining then spoke for the Joint Chiefs of Staff. He pointed out that the Chiefs wish to avoid being under Assistant Secretaries of Defense. He supported this view by citing that the Joint Chiefs of Staff are responsible by law to be advisers to the President and to the National Security Council, as well as to the Secretary of Defense. He feels that incorporation of the Joint Chiefs establishment into the Office of the Secretary of Defense would be downgrading to them, and this would be bad for morale. He finished by stating that the “reorganization group” had not recommended this change.
