Summary of Print Volume III XXXI element of its basic policy statement on “undeveloped” countries. Eisenhower strongly objected, however, claiming that if a policy state­ ment on the issue was adopted, “we would be accused of all kinds of terrible things.” (61) The main debate over BNSP concerned the problem of conventional forces to fight limited wars. While these discussions foreshadowed the Kennedy administration’s subsequent adoption of the strategy of “flex­ ible response” to potential Soviet provocations, they did not get that far under Eisenhower. The discussions initially developed in reaction to the traditional Eisenhower administration doctrine of “massive retali­ ation,” which could result in either a massive nuclear strike or retreat in the face of Soviet aggression, and the desire for greater flexibility in U.S. military capabilities. In this view, the need for a revised BNSP seemed more urgent as the Soviet Union moved closer to “virtual nuclear parity” with the United States. In 1957 the NSC had adopted a policy statement on “limited war” that called for “the development of a flexible and selective capability, including nuclear capability” to resist “local aggression” in developing countries where U.S. interests were involved. General Maxwell Taylor of the Joint Chiefs of Staff especially con­ tinued to advocate great emphasis on conventional forces to resist limited aggression, and even Secretary Dulles, the principal architect earlier of the “massive retaliation” concept, believed by 1958 that the United States had to develop a more coherent policy in dealing with wars not directly involving the United States and the Soviet Union and to allow the United States “to fight defensive wars which do not involve the total defeat of the enemy.” Dulles also stressed that public opinion among the Western allies was beginning to reject the notion of reliance on a U.S. pushbutton to start a global nuclear in their defense and would demand some kind of modernized defensive capabilities of their own to resist possible Soviet aggression. But while trying to keep an open mind on these complicated issues, President Eisenhower remained skeptical, arguing that “each small war makes global war the more likely.” (18, 23) Despite wide-­ranging NSC discussions in 1958, no revision of the 1957 paragraphs on limited war were approved (24, 25), but fur­ ther extensive discussions occurred in 1959. Largely because of State Department lobbying for a change in policy, the resulting BNSP added language calling for planning for “situations short of general war where the use of nuclear weapons would manifestly not be militarily necessary nor appropriate to the accomplishment of national objectives, particu­ larly in those areas where main Communist power will not be brought to bear.” (64, 70) Although this wording suggested less emphasis on nuclear weapons, it was never implemented in force planning levels,
