International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1089
and adequate housing. In the current economic climate, all industrial-
ized countries will be hard pressed to maintain development assistance
at levels commensurate with increased need and their long-term
interest.
The response of the United States under these circumstances will
have a major influence on our industrial partners and on the
North-South “global negotiations” starting in mid-1980. Some of our
industrialized allies have decided to sustain higher growth rates in de-
velopment aid budgets than we, despite severe budget deficits. Japan
will have doubled its aid in the years 1978–80 and is projecting further
increases in 1981. Germany will increase its aid budget 12.5% in 1980
and the Netherlands, France and Sweden are also planning increases in
their aid contributions.
We no longer question that the development of the Third World is
important to the United States. This importance relates to our moral
values and our economic, political, and strategic self-interest. A combi-
nation of these factors has impelled us to promote development for the
last three decades. An interdependent world, made ever smaller by in-
creasing trade and sophisticated communications and transportation,
demands that we carry on this work.
In the years ahead, to be true to our values and to achieve our na-
tional interests, at a minimum we must:
1. Accelerate the Attack on Global Poverty
—Major changes should be set in motion to carry out the recom-
mendations of the Hunger Commission2 by increasing the attention de-
voted to agricultural development and food security by international in-
stitutions as well as by our own bilateral programs.
—We will increase our population and health programs, and will give
priority to countries with a demonstrated commitment in these areas to
help meet their objectives.
—We will take the lead in encouraging the design of development
plans and programs that explicitly recognize the crucial role of women.
2. Manage Economic Interdependence with Developing Countries for
Mutual Prosperity
—Programs are being designed to increase the amount of energy
available to developing countries from their own resources.
—The United States should cooperate with other countries and in-
ternational institutions to forestall debt problems in developing countries
and to respond to financing problems promptly, and with adequate re-
2 Probable reference to the preliminary recommendations issued by the Presidential
Commission on World Hunger in December 1979; see Document 263.
