386
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
viets unwilling to adjust their positions on less central matters until the
PNE issue is resolved.
Despite the concentration on PNEs, the initial round gave us an
opportunity to probe Soviet thinking on the other substantive matters
covered in your instruction letter of July 11,4 including such verification
measures as secure, internal seismic networks and on-site inspections
as well as such political/legal issues as the adherence requirement for
entry into force, duration, and withdrawal provisions. Although the
Soviets consistently stood by the provisions of their draft CTB treaty
covering these matters, the consultations gave us a better impression of
where they may eventually be flexible.
The British were a positive factor in the talks, reinforcing our posi-
tions effectively on key matters while taking exception with us infre-
quently and only on minor issues. The Soviets see this as a two-sided
negotiation which, with the convergence of U.S.–U.K. positions and
close coordination between the U.S. and U.K. Delegation,5 it really is.
Both the British and the Soviets expressed reluctance to accept our
suggestion that the first round of formal negotiations be held in
London this Fall. They both expressed a preference for Geneva on the
ground that their facilities in Geneva were more adequate for their
purposes.
The three Delegations have agreed to resume the trilaterals in Ge-
neva on October 3 and to remain in close contact during the interval
preceding the next round.
The following is a summary of the major issues covered during the
initial round of trilaterals.
Peaceful Nuclear Explosion
Discussions on PNEs focused on two principal questions; whether
it is possible to carry out PNEs without acquiring military benefits and
whether non-proliferation objectives would best be served by a PNE
ban or a PNE accommodation.
On the first question, we explained in detail our position that PNEs
would inevitably provide military benefits, no matter how intrusive the
arrangements designed to constrain those benefits. In this connection,
we pointed out that a PNE program: would (a) provide the infrastruc-
ture to the state carrying out the program to maintain personnel and fa-
cilities specialized in the design, fabrication, and use of nuclear explo-
sives at a substantially higher level of competence and readiness than
4 See Tab A, Document 163.
5 The U.S.–UK discussions held before the trilateral talks are reported in telegram
172338 to London, July 22; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D770263–1012.
