1979  581
Secretary Brown observed that we were then talking about two dis-
tinguishable target sets: (a) war-­supporting industry, a relatively small 
set which could be attacked with or without special efforts to reduce col-
lateral fatalities, and (b) an urban industrial or general economic target 
set, very large and practically indistinguishable from what is targeted 
under the criterion of suppressing economic recovery, which could be 
withheld to counter coercion and perhaps terminate the conflict.
Dr. Brzezinski observed that while the utility of discretely targeting 
war supporting industry might not easily be measured, it was likely to 
be positive.
Mr. Aaron thought it would nevertheless be useful to attempt to 
measure the potential effects of such a targeting package including the 
expected levels of collateral fatalities and the potential effect on the 
Soviets capability to wage war.
Secretary Brown noted that collateral fatalities from targeting war 
supporting industry could be quite low.
Mr. Slocombe observed that such targeting might involve 10–15 mil-
lion fatalities if no care were taken to avoid them.
Warren Christopher asked if we are simply discussing possibilities 
or proposing to recommend some specific action.
Secretary Brown proposed that a war supporting industry package 
for inclusion the SIOP be prepared for Presidential decision.
Dr. Brzezinski said that this should be developed along with mea-
sures of the utility of such a targeting option.
Secretary Brown observed that the utility of targeting war sup-
porting industry would be scenario dependent, for example, whether 
Soviet general purpose forces were engaged and could be degraded by 
the loss to those industries.
Mr. Slocombe then noted that, setting aside war supporting indus-
try, the practical difference between targeting against recovery and gen-
eral urban industrial targets could not be usefully measured.
Dr. Brzezinski observed that the distinction was not too useful for 
deterrence.
Mr. Keeny concluded on this agenda topic with the observation that 
the threat to urban industrial targets overall was most important for 
deterrence.
The discussion then turned to the topic of hard-­target capability.
Secretary Brown observed that over the years US planners had 
worried a great deal about the potentially adverse implications for 
arms control and stability of US threats to Soviet silo-­based forces. The 
­Soviets on the other hand showed no signs of reciprocating this concern 
at all. He noted that in our own programs the accuracy improvements
