International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
965
ergy decisions to increase our commitment to this energy system.
Obviously revitalization of the International Energy Agency is needed
along with major efforts by oil consumers at conservation.
Oceans
The issues are: the equitable allocation and conservation of re-
sources, the support of marine scientific research and the development
of a “law of the sea” which reflects modern political, economic, and
technological reality. We are failing in most of these areas. Much will
naturally depend on the outcome of the LOS Conference. But this con-
ference will only establish the “bare bones”, in essence it is only the
basic framework. Specific substantive solutions are required to deal
with the exploitation and conservation of living and non-living marine
resources, agreeing on stronger pollution discharge standards for
ships, helping marine scientific research, increasing the protection of
navigation and assisting the mobility of our Navy.
Antarctica
We need to examine closely the medium and long-term future of
this continent. The main issue which should be decided is by whom
and how should control over this continent be exercised. We are now
only in a “holding pattern” but have not resolved the major issues or
problems in this area. The probability of success is greater if we move
swiftly while there appears to be limited desire to exploit than later
when others are likely to perceive profit from unilateral action or im-
plementation of claims.
Science and Technology
The problem is not to “get over” the forthcoming US [UN] Science
and Technology Conference. The issue is how can we effectively mobi-
lize existing relevant knowledge and technology for development pur-
poses. One assessment is true: the world has done, up to now, a very
poor job in applying state-of-the-art technology to the problems of the
poor. There are so many “appropriate technologies” that are not widely
available as to make any sensitive soul cry. Items: use of simplified
water pumps, para-professional medical and nutritional experts, solar
heaters, electricity for food preservation, telecommunications tech-
nology for educational needs, etc. Nor has thoughtful and realistic work
been done in utilizing the private sector. So much “ideology” has been
thrown around by both sides as to make realistic efforts difficult. Yet in-
novative solutions exist: creation of new funding mechanisms to facili-
tate purchase of new technology, manufacture locally of simple items,
subsidies for transfer of private and government-owned technology
and know-how, loan of specialized personnel to LDCs to manage de-
velopment and distribution of new methods and technology. More in-
