September 18–December 16, 1978 243 The Secretary said that in his view evolutionary progress will start in the transitional period, reminding Fahd that there will have to be discussions among the parties in order to work out the treaties. Fahd said the agreements spoke of negotiations up to the end of the transitional period. The Secretary said they provide a limit so that they cannot drag on indefinitely. The process will determine what evolves from it. It was his belief that in the West Bank and Gaza some sort of Palestinian entity will emerge. It is his guess that this entity will have some sort of link with Jordan but that is up to the Palestinian people. Fahd said that is fine and logical. It represents the principle of nonimposition by outsiders. The Secretary said that is precisely why the Palestinians must be given a role in the negotiations. Fahd said that freedom of choice is the only sensible solution. Thanks to the American effort, by the end of the transitional period the Palestinians will be ready to make a responsible choice. The Secretary said it is our deep hope that they will be ready to govern themselves responsibly. Fahd said the problem, which is deep one, would be if Israel is permitted to insist on not permitting the existence of a Palestinian entity. What if Israel permits local government but keeps for itself the elements of sovereignty such as defense and foreign affairs? He had wanted to see language giving the Palestinians a free choice with regard to attachments or affiliation at the end of the transitional period. The Secretary said we were not able to get “self determination” into the agreement. Instead we were able to get the Aswan wording5 about Palestinian participation in determining their future. We had felt this inadequate without spelling out the procedures to achieve it. Fahd said there is a basic difference. After five years either Israel says there will be no Palestinian entity or Israel says the Palestinians will have to determine their own future. That is a big difference. What worries the Saudis is that the ink is hardly dry and Israel is already saying that there will never be a Palestinian entity. This is causing anxiety. This will tie the Saudis’ hands. For instance, on the settlements, now they are saying three months. If they are saying this the Saudis will not be able to help President Carter as much as they would like. Even on the Egyptian agreement the Saudis fear Begin might obfuscate. These agreements are serious, and Israel must treat them as such. 5 See footnote 5, Document 3.
