170
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
to the graduate and undergraduate group who, I understand, is the largest in
the history of this great institution, friends and parents:
[Omitted here are the President’s introductory remarks in which
he referenced his honorary degree and praised Father Hesburgh for his
commitment to civil rights and human rights. He also acknowledged
the other honorary degree recipients and their support for human
rights.]
Last week, I spoke in California about the domestic agenda for our
Nation: to provide more efficiently for the needs of our people, to dem-
onstrate—against the dark faith of our times—that our Government
can be both competent and more humane.2
But I want to speak to you today about the strands that connect our
actions overseas with our essential character as a nation. I believe we
can have a foreign policy that is democratic, that is based on funda-
mental values, and that uses power and influence, which we have, for
humane purposes. We can also have a foreign policy that the American
people both support and, for a change, know about and understand.
I have a quiet confidence in our own political system. Because we
know that democracy works, we can reject the arguments of those
rulers who deny human rights to their people.
We are confident that democracy’s example will be compelling,
and so we seek to bring that example closer to those from whom in the
past few years we have been separated and who are not yet convinced
about the advantages of our kind of life.
We are confident that the democratic methods are the most effec-
tive, and so we are not tempted to employ improper tactics here at
home or abroad.
We are confident of our own strength, so we can seek substantial
mutual reductions in the nuclear arms race.
And we are confident of the good sense of American people, and
so we let them share in the process of making foreign policy decisions.
We can thus speak with the voices of 215 million, and not just of an iso-
lated handful.
2 On May 17, the President flew to Los Angeles, California, to attend the annual na-
tional convention of the United Auto Workers of America (UAW), held at the Los An-
geles Convention Center. At the convention, he announced that Woodcock would serve
as his representative to the People’s Republic of China. (Carter, White House Diary, p. 53)
Carter then went to the television studios of KNXT–TV, where he participated in a tele-
vised question-and-answer session with a live studio audience and persons stationed at
five shopping centers in the Los Angeles area. At the conclusion of the broadcast, Carter
departed for the airport and flew to Fresno to survey the effects of the California drought.
His motorcade drove to Reedley, where he participated in a walking tour of the Kryder
Farm and Silva Ranch. Carter’s remarks at the UAW convention, during the studio
broadcast, and at the farm and ranch are printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pp.
887–894, 895–914, and 917–921.
