1956  1127
We have told the prisoners that they will be given a free choice 
and that they will receive a visit in order that their choice may be ascer­
tained. We are morally committed to implement our offer, regardless of 
this non-­cooperation.
With the Indian Embassy unable to discharge this function as 
described in our Aide Memoire of May 31 (Tab C), the best choice for 
this responsibility appears to be the American Red Cross. The Red Cross, 
upon making the visits, could vouch for the fact that the prisoners were 
given a free choice and made their decision without coercion or influence 
from any official source. No one could effectively challenge the motives, 
the veracity or the impartiality of the American Red Cross. The certifica­
tion of the Red Cross that the prisoners had been allowed to make their 
own decision would be generally accepted throughout the world.
Accordingly, I confirm the oral request which I made of you 
yesterday that the American Red Cross undertake to interview the 
30 remaining Chinese prisoners (four of the original 34 have been 
released from prison under normal procedures in recent weeks), and 
ascertain their wishes. A list of these prisoners and their whereabouts 
is enclosed as Tab D. A copy of a letter and form of designation of 
choice which we propose to send to the prisoners is enclosed as Tab E. 
The letter would be sent before the visits of the Red Cross representa­
tives, and the original of the form would be signed in the presence of 
the Red Cross representative and delivered to him.
In the undertaking of this mission you can be assured of every 
cooperation from this Department, the Federal Bureau of Prisons, 
the State prison officials, the wardens of the various penitentiaries, 
and the Immigration and Naturalization Service. It is believed that it 
would be desirable to proceed without any avoidable delay, and that 
the particulars can best be worked out through consultations between 
your officials and Mr. Clough of the Office of Chinese Affairs. His 
telephone extension is 3482.
We are deeply grateful for your expressed willingness to give sym­
pathetic consideration to this matter.
Sincerely yours,
Walter S. Robertson
Assistant Secretary
Enclosures:
Tab A—Copy of Agreed Announcement of September 10, 1955.
Tab B—Copy of Letter to Prisoners.
Tab C—Aide Memoire of May 31.
Tab D—List of Prisoners and Tabulation of Prisons Involved.
Tab E—Copy of Proposed Letter and Form to be Sent to Prisoners.
