National Security Policy  613
contested areas, relying upon threats to prevent the West from taking 
counteraction to preserve its influence. In this sense, we believe that 
there is currently a tendency on the part of the Soviets to view the risks 
of a more aggressive policy as less serious than in the past. This ten­
dency could be reversed as a result of Western actions or as the result of 
a change in the Soviet leadership. But so long as this tendency persists 
we believe that the danger of war by miscalculation will be increased. 
At present, we believe that this danger is somewhat greater than our 
estimates in recent years have indicated.
228. A posture for “peace.” Even if Soviet political warfare does 
become more vigorous and increasing pressure is applied against 
the West, Soviet policy will continue to garb itself with the slogans of 
“peace.” It will not go over to an overtly and frankly aggressive pos­
ture. Rather it will continue to present itself as still striving for “peaceful 
coexistence” and as leading the “struggle for peace.” The Soviet leaders 
recognize that the world-­wide fear of war is so intense that great polit­
ical strength is added to that side in the power struggle which can cap­
ture the force of this sentiment, and thus align large bodies of opinion 
with its own cause. Identification of the USSR with hopes for peace and 
the US with war and aggression will remain a principal aim of Soviet 
propaganda strategy.
229. To some extent, the desire to maintain the plausibility of 
this posture imposes inhibitions on the use of force; this is one reason 
for regarding open aggression by Bloc forces across state frontiers as 
unlikely. In general, Soviet leaders, believing they can continue to reap 
rewards with their “coexistence” tactics with little risk, are likely to 
view open military aggression as politically undesirable and unneces­
sary. Instead it will be their aim to create, mainly by political means, sit­
uations in which the West must either concede a Communist advance 
or resort to the use of force under unfavorable circumstances. Western 
concessions could then be construed by Soviet propaganda as bow­
ing to the Soviet deterrent. If the West elected to use force, it would be 
compelled to do so under political and perhaps military handicaps. In 
either case, the Soviets would expect to intensify divisions within free 
world alliances and to align the uncommitted more closely with the 
Communist camp.
230. The Soviets will probably continue also to display an apparent 
readiness to engage in direct negotiations to settle outstanding issues. 
Proposals for high level talks will probably be renewed at any junc­
ture the Soviet leaders find favorable to themselves. They will regard 
such meetings as primarily of a demonstrative character, intended not 
to result in freely negotiated settlements, but rather to force the Western 
Powers under pressure of world opinion to accede to Soviet-­proposed 
formulas. They will attempt to pose the alternatives of “peaceful
