140
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
tions to several long-standing disputes in this hemisphere. The United
States will support his efforts and initiatives.
The OAS, of course, is not the only instrument of cooperation
among the nations of the Americas. The Inter-American Development
Bank is among the most important multilateral mechanisms for pro-
moting development of the world today. By bringing in nations outside
the Western Hemisphere, the IDB bears testimony to Latin America’s
growing involvement with the rest of the world.
Within this hemisphere, many of you are working toward regional
and subregional integration efforts—including those in the Caribbean,
in the Central American Common Market, and the Andean Pact—and
we favor such efforts.9 They are the first steps toward Bolı´var’s vision
of a hemisphere united.
Let me conclude by bringing up a matter that is particularly close
to me because of my long interest in inter-American affairs. My wife
and I have traveled and made many friends in Mexico and Brazil, the
two largest and most rapidly changing countries in Latin America. And
we have traveled elsewhere and made many friends in Central and
South America. My wife is presently studying Spanish, along with the
wife of the Secretary of State,10 and I have tried to keep up with my own
Spanish that I learned at school. I have seen clearly how greatly our
country has been blessed and enriched by the people and cultures of
the Caribbean and Latin America. And we are bound together—and I
see it very clearly—in culture, history, and by common purposes and
ideals.
The United States actually has the fourth largest Spanish-speaking
population in the world. I tried to meet many of them during my cam-
paign the last 2 years. And they gave me their support and their en-
couragement and their advice. The novels we read, the music we hear,
the sports that we play—all reflect a growing consciousness of each
other.
These intellectual, social, cultural, and educational exchanges will
continue, either with or without government help. But there are steps
that governments can take to speed up and enhance this process. In the
months ahead, therefore, we plan to explore with your governments—
individually and here in the OAS—new people-to-people programs, an
9 The General Treaty on Central American Economic Integration Between Guate-
mala, El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua established the Central American Common
Market (CACM) on December 13, 1960. Costa Rica joined CACM in 1963. The 1969 Car-
tagena Agreement established the Andean Pact, a trade bloc comprised of Bolivia, Chile,
Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru. Venezuela joined the Andean Pact in 1973.
10 Grace Vance.
