1312 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX uation would generate increased tension with Syria’s neighbors, especially Israel. A weak successor might seek a limited military confrontation with Israel—such as air clashes over Lebanon or artillery duels on the Golan Heights—to unite the country, but such confrontations, especially on the Golan, could escalate to wider war. [handling restriction not declassified] A post-Assad regime might extricate itself from Lebanon even though a complete withdrawal would increase the risk of renewed civil war there. An unstable leadership probably would not sustain the steady financial drain and corrosive effect on the armed forces without substantially greater Arab financial and military support. A new regime could also fear that keeping a sizable military force outside Syria would increase the likelihood of countercoup plotting within the military. [handling restriction not declassified] It is unlikely that a successor regime would moderate Syria’s approach to Middle East negotiations. There is no evidence that Assad’s Alawite lieutenants, the officer corps, or Syrians in general support the existing peace process. Chronic domestic instability would make it extremely difficult for Syria to moderate its stance toward Israel and to play a constructive role in reaching a comprehensive peace settlement. [handling restriction not declassified] The Palestinians would welcome increased room for maneuver as a consequence of instability in Syria. They, and the Jordanians, however, would remain unwilling to enter peace talks under the Camp David framework and would also be unlikely to risk entering negotiations under a new framework until the policies of a successor regime in Syria had been worked out. By virtue of its central geopolitical position, any government in Syria would possess substantial capability to foil unilateral Palestinian or Jordanian peace initiatives. [handling restriction not declassified] A change of leadership would at least temporarily increase Syria’s isolation in the region and further erode Syrian influence in inter-Arab councils. A weak regime would invite outside meddling in Syrian affairs by those who have done so in the past, notably Iraq. [handling restriction not declassified] A new leader in Syria, uncertain of his power base, might seek additional support from the USSR in an attempt to deal with the internal threat. While most successors will want to preserve some ties to the United States in an effort to keep a balance in Syria’s relations with the superpowers, all will be compelled to maintain Syria’s military supply line to Moscow. Soviet influence in Damascus is likely to increase initially, especially if Syrian-Israeli tensions increase. A new Alawite regime is likely to seek increases in Soviet aid and closer military and security ties, but, like Assad, is probably unlikely to request the sta-
