1312
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
uation would generate increased tension with Syria’s neighbors,
especially Israel. A weak successor might seek a limited military con-
frontation with Israel—such as air clashes over Lebanon or artillery
duels on the Golan Heights—to unite the country, but such confronta-
tions, especially on the Golan, could escalate to wider war. [handling re-
striction not declassified]
A post-Assad regime might extricate itself from Lebanon even
though a complete withdrawal would increase the risk of renewed civil
war there. An unstable leadership probably would not sustain the
steady financial drain and corrosive effect on the armed forces without
substantially greater Arab financial and military support. A new re-
gime could also fear that keeping a sizable military force outside Syria
would increase the likelihood of countercoup plotting within the mili-
tary. [handling restriction not declassified]
It is unlikely that a successor regime would moderate Syria’s ap-
proach to Middle East negotiations. There is no evidence that Assad’s
Alawite lieutenants, the officer corps, or Syrians in general support the
existing peace process. Chronic domestic instability would make it ex-
tremely difficult for Syria to moderate its stance toward Israel and to
play a constructive role in reaching a comprehensive peace settlement.
[handling restriction not declassified]
The Palestinians would welcome increased room for maneuver as
a consequence of instability in Syria. They, and the Jordanians, how-
ever, would remain unwilling to enter peace talks under the Camp
David framework and would also be unlikely to risk entering negotia-
tions under a new framework until the policies of a successor regime in
Syria had been worked out. By virtue of its central geopolitical position,
any government in Syria would possess substantial capability to foil
unilateral Palestinian or Jordanian peace initiatives. [handling restriction
not declassified]
A change of leadership would at least temporarily increase Syria’s
isolation in the region and further erode Syrian influence in inter-Arab
councils. A weak regime would invite outside meddling in Syrian af-
fairs by those who have done so in the past, notably Iraq. [handling re-
striction not declassified]
A new leader in Syria, uncertain of his power base, might seek ad-
ditional support from the USSR in an attempt to deal with the internal
threat. While most successors will want to preserve some ties to the
United States in an effort to keep a balance in Syria’s relations with the
superpowers, all will be compelled to maintain Syria’s military supply
line to Moscow. Soviet influence in Damascus is likely to increase ini-
tially, especially if Syrian-Israeli tensions increase. A new Alawite re-
gime is likely to seek increases in Soviet aid and closer military and
security ties, but, like Assad, is probably unlikely to request the sta-
