16  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
information situation quite not correct as Nationalists are carrying 
out raids most recently in July and this obviously difficult situation 
for CHICOMS etc.
CHICOMS interested in internal development and do not want 
war. Are making great strides, while still behind India work together 
much better and with more enthusiasm than Indians and before long 
will pass India. CHICOMS do not like present great dependence on 
Soviets and want diversify trade to West including US.
Also much talk about not important whether public knew role he 
and India had played in release Air Force personnel and other devel­
opments; qte he and I unqte and China, US and India knew. That was 
all that counted. India entirely disinterested this aspect, only interest 
was in helping where they could and when they were wanted. Fully 
appreciated domestic political and public opinion problems faced by 
Secretary and President. However he had been received in US qte much 
better unqte this last trip than previously.
He was still fishing hard for invitation stay in Geneva while drop­
ping inconsequential tidbits of his conversation yesterday evening with 
Wang. He was apparently hoping I had since yesterday asked for and 
obtained authority from Washington to ask him to stay.
Dept fully aware Menon’s conversational style and difficulty pin­
ning down his exact meaning. I also deliberately refrained from much 
questioning as I did not desire get drawn into discussion as he was 
carefully probing for anything he could carry back to Chinese. How­
ever I believe foregoing and previous tels represent substantially accu­
rate account.
I did keep coming back CHICOM renunciation use of force but 
without any immediately apparent constructive result. I did let him 
know I was planning request some explanation from CHICOMS for 
461 personnel still missing from Korean War as well as 11 Navy and 
Coast Guard personnel missing off Swatow. I went into some detail 
regarding our efforts this regard MAC and elsewhere. He suggested 
some agreement send someone China investigate. I said this was not 
problem—obviously if any other Americans held in China no investi­
gator was going to find them. Only CHICOMS knew whether any these 
men alive their hands and question was CHICOM good faith in giving 
us honest and reasonable answer. In reply my flat question he said he 
did not believe any were alive in CHICOM hands as he could not see 
any political advantage to CHICOMS in holding them without letting 
us know they had them. (I think he is right on this.)
I also gave him fairly detailed account CHICOM treatment our 
Consulates and Embassy in China during period CHICOM take-over 
taking line in light customary practice during such periods particularly 
in China as well as elsewhere CHICOMS qte had refused recognize US 
unqte rather than other way around and had made it impossible US
