962 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement and improved conditions of life, and of the impact of basic underly­ ing trends—technological advance, changes in the international trade pattern, and population growth. These problems and trends would of course exist and be a central feature of the world situation if there were no East-­West struggle. So far as that struggle is concerned, the under­ developed countries remain generally uncommitted to one side or the other, and are being more and more influenced by their need for aid and their desire to get as much help as possible whether from the West or the Bloc. However these countries may stand ideologically, such pragmatic neutralism seems certain to find new adherents in Africa and Latin America and to remain firmly entrenched in most of Asia and the Middle East, with the possible exception of countries directly threat­ ened by the USSR or Communist China. 18. In the sections that follow, we are generally far more confident of the description of forces at work than we are of our judgments of outcomes, and we have not elaborated all the repercussions of possible developments mentioned. We do believe, however, that the trends pre­ sented in this estimate point with assurance to one overall conclusion, that the stature of the USSR and of Communist China in the world will continue to increase markedly over the next decade, thus posing increas­ ingly serious challenges and a growing menace to the US and the West. II. POWER TRENDS AND POLICY PROBLEMS OF THE USSR 19. We estimate that:6 a. Soviet economic and scientific strength will continue to grow at a rapid rate. b. The Soviets, despite some force reductions, will maintain a high level of conventional military forces and will greatly increase their long range attack capabilities, above all through a substantial ICBM buildup. However, the Soviet leaders probably do not count upon acquiring, by any particular date, a military advantage so decisive as to permit them to plan attacks on Western retaliatory forces with the degree and cer­ tainty of success required to insure that they could win a general war without themselves incurring unacceptable damage.7 6 This paragraph is based on the longer discussion of these matters in the forthcom­ ing NIE 11–4–59, “MAIN TRENDS IN SOVIET CAPABILITIES AND POLICIES.” [Foot­ note is in the original.] 7 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, would revise sentence two as fol­ lows: “While the Soviet leaders probably do not count upon acquiring it by any particular date, they are vigorously attempting to acquire a military advantage so decisive as to permit them to plan attacks on Western retaliatory forces with the degree and certainty of suc­ cess required to insure that they could win a general war without themselves incurring unacceptable damage.” [Footnote is in the original.]
