December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 787 reached during the Blair House talks. This statement, Khalil insisted, represents a USG obligation to support what had earlier been agreed upon, especially since Sadat had, against Khalil’s advice, agreed that ambassadors would be exchanged one month after completion of the interim withdrawal. — (D) Khalil also insisted that he had told the Secretary in Cairo that GOE will not rpt not be involved in the oil for Israel question before the end of the interim withdrawal period and that this will come only in the context of normalization.13 I noted that neither the treaty nor Annex III, including the agreed new minute, preclude normal trade relations before the negotiation of an Egyptian/Israeli trade and commerce agreement. I urged that GOE consider the matter on practical rather than legal basis. Khalil was clearly expecting this one. He simply said no, he could not agree with our point of view. USG has committed itself to provide Israeli oil requirements, he reiterated, and this should be source of Israeli oil in the interim period. 5. In response to my warning about disastrous effect on Israeli Knesset debate which Egyptians again raising question of exchange of ambassadors would have, Khalil said that is simply too bad. There would be no problem if Israelis would for once honor their word instead of constantly reneging.14 Sadat had reinstituted his earlier agreement that ambassadors will be exchanged one month after termination of interim withdrawal. He had done so, Khalil insisted, on clear understanding Israelis would reinstitute sub-phasing arrangement worked out at Blair House—not something totally new and different. Once Israelis get what they want, Khalil charged, they constantly seek whittle down their obligations. 6. By this time, he had worked himself into quite a stew and stated emphatically that GOE has had enough of this. USG, including President Carter, must be aware of what Sadat has done to facilitate the peace process.15 He expressed distress that American negotiators now seem to be looking for further compromises instead of pressing Israelis to honor their word. I assured Khalil that we are all aware of what Sadat has done on the peace treaty issue, but emphasized that it is in all of our interests find suitable compromise on the remaining issues. Khalil’s response was that Egypt has compromised all that it can. 7. To make the matter more personal, he recalled that he had spoken on TV about sub-phasing based on the Blair House arrangements. That TV interview is to be repeated tonight. Was he to be ex- 13 Carter underlined this sentence. 14 Carter underlined this and the previous sentence. 15 Carter underlined this and the previous sentence.
