462.00 R 296/746: Telegram
[Document 369]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, January 3, 1925—9 p.m.
11. L–186 for Logan. You are referred to Ambassador Phillips’ telegram of December
4, 1924, on Belgium’s request for American support of her priority.
(1) The Department appreciates greatly the attitude of Belgium toward
American participation in German payments and desires, of course,
continued Belgian support. In principle, also, this Government desires that
Belgium receive equitable treatment.
(2) The Department understands from Ambassador Phillips’ telegram that
Belgium desires our support of her priority. The principle of Belgian priority
has already been viewed with sympathy by this Government, and, in
principle, the Department is entirely willing that Belgian priority should be
realized. The points on which Belgian priority has been contested, however,
have not been made clear. Ambassador Phillips’ telegram refers to German
payments held at Coblenz. Department’s view is unchanged that this
Government would not wish to be considered as expressing any opinion on
these funds. If Belgium desires American support on some specific point
please telegraph particulars to Department.
(3) Referring to Belgian debt question raised in your L–285, December 19,
1924, 7 p.m.,8 question 5: The Department’s general position has already
been set forth in its L–142, November 7, 1924, 6 p.m.9 Obviously it is
essential for us to maintain integrity of our position of looking to Belgium for
payment. I do not see, therefore, how the United States could assert a claim
to participate in German payments without implying change in Department’s
position. The Department appreciates, however, that as we continue to look
to Belgium for payment we have a deep interest in Belgium’s strengthening
her finances in order to be in a position better to reimburse this Government.
The Department perceives no reason, therefore, why Belgium should not
receive proportionately increased participation in German payments if she is
unable to look to the United States for release from the obligation in
question. The Department has consulted the Treasury and authorizes you to
