Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI formed of the issues. You also indicated that with some of the options, there in effect is no treaty—i.e. a CTB; and that we first have to know how severe the stockpile degrading problem is before determining whether to go to an option that is less politically significant. In response to Jay’s question about the value of a CTB on vertical and horizontal proliferation, you indicated that there is a subjective judgment; but that you see the importance of a CTB as being more in terms of U.S.-Soviet relations than proliferation. Jay indicated the Prime Minister’s concern about a CTB in terms of the Indian nuclear problem. You said that we are not approaching this issue as an excuse to back out of a CTB—although there are some people in the government who would use the issue in this way—but rather because there is a serious problem for review. We will move quickly, and within two weeks will be giving it close attention. Because of the May 4 resumption of the CTB talks, we should have a meeting here next week on the issue. There is a large number of unknowns—including on our own needs. Jay said that we understand the UK position on this. [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test ban.] 195. Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency (Warnke) to President Carter1 Washington, April 28, 1978 SUBJECT Likely Timing on the Comprehensive Test Ban The Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty negotiations with the U.S.S.R. and the U.K. will resume on May 4. Although progress was made at the last round—nine weeks ending on March 21—it is probable that the trilateral negotiations will continue through the summer. Because it is expected that the product of these negotiations will then be sent to the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva for its consid- 1 Source: National Archives, RG 383, Records of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, Office of the Director, Paul C. Warnke Files, December 1974–July 1979, Ac-
