121.5751/–
[Document 163]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
WASHINGTON, April 21, 1925.
No. 1475
SIR:
[Here follow, mutatis mutandis, the first five paragraphs of the instruction to Austria,
printed supra. To the fifth paragraph of that instruction is added the following:] At the
time that you make the above notification to the French Government, you are instructed
to furnish to the Foreign Office a Memorandum containing the more comprehensive
and detailed description of the activities of Customs Attachés that is contained in the
Department’s Circular Instruction of April 2, 1925, with reference to this subject.
At this time you will explain to the French Government that the procedure which is
outlined in the Department’s Circular Instruction of April 2 is the result of a
painstaking effort on the part of the Treasury and of this Department to meet the views
of the French Government, expressed in the note, dated May 26, 1924, addressed to the
Department by the French Chargé d’Affaires at Washington,45 a translation of which is
transmitted herewith, and at the same time to carry out the mandatory provisions of the
Tariff Act of 1922. You may express the hope that the full explanation of the American
law and of the duties which the Customs Attachés are directed to perform under it, as
well as the procedure established for these Attachés, in the Department’s Circular
Instruction of April 2, 1925, will remove any misunderstanding on the part of the
French Government.
[The next three paragraphs, which have been omitted, are the same, mutatis mutandis,
as the last three paragraphs of the instruction to Austria.]
Special reference is made to your despatch No. 5038, of April 2, 1925, transmitting a
memorandum by a member of your staff outlining the French objections to the
activities of Customs and Tariff Commission representatives, and recommending that
Section 510 of the Tariff Act of 1922 be amended. With regard to your
recommendation, it may be observed that the Congress will in all probability not be in
session again until December. The Department understands, informally, from the
Treasury that there is little practical probability of amendments to the Tariff Act being
acted upon favorably by Congress in the near future.
