Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
67
ognizes the fact that we alone do not have all the answers to the world’s
problems.
“The United States alone cannot lift from the world the terrifying
specter of nuclear destruction. We can and will work with others to do
so.
“The United States alone cannot guarantee the basic right of every
human being to be free of poverty and hunger and disease and political
repression. We can and will cooperate with others in combating these
enemies of mankind.
“The United States alone cannot ensure an equitable development
of the world resources or the proper safeguarding of the world’s envi-
ronment. But we can and will join with others in this work.
“The United States can and will take the lead in such efforts.
“In these endeavors we need your help, and we offer ours. We
need your experience; we need your wisdom.
“We need your active participation in a joint effort to move the re-
ality of the world closer to the ideals of human freedom and dignity.
“As friends, you can depend on the United States to be in the fore-
front of the search for world peace. You can depend on the United
States to remain steadfast in its commitment to human freedom and lib-
erty. And you can also depend on the United States to be sensitive to
your own concerns and aspirations, to welcome your advice, to do its
utmost to resolve international differences in a spirit of cooperation.
“The problems of the world will not be easily resolved. Yet the
well-being of each and every one of us—indeed our mutual survival—
depends on their resolution. As President of the United States I can as-
sure you that we intend to do our part. I ask you to join us in a common
effort based on mutual trust and mutual respect.
“Thank you.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pages 4–5)
The United States Information Agency videotaped Carter’s re-
marks for broadcast to 26 nations on January 20. Additional documen-
tation on this message is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. XXX, Public Diplomacy.
