880
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
prove unavoidable. We should provide a scenario which offers an
alternative to an automatic U.S. military response and which provides
the basis for a prior understanding that we could restrain our reaction
for a brief period in order to resolve the crisis if there were assurances
that a trial will be followed by release. (S)
Secretary Brown noted that prearrangements in the past had always
come apart, and this kind of scenario would be no different. In his view,
the most realistic course would be to leave our position of opposing
all trials as it is. He felt that Beheshti and Khomeini are determined
to bring down the U.S. government, and they would use the situation
against us. Bruce Clarke commented that the Iranians would be able
to agree on having real trials more easily and more quickly than they
could agree on such a scenario. (S)
Mr. Cutler commented that the ICJ ruling forbids all trials involving
the hostages,6 and he did not accept that the U.S. could sit still for
trials of any nature. Since we would have to misrepresent our position,
it was not an honorable course. The United States should never lie. (C)
Mr. Christopher also disagreed with the proposal on the grounds
that it would suggest U.S. acquiescence in trials, thereby opening that
issue to negotiation. It is also possible that the Iranians would lose
control of the process and the scenario would get out of hand. Secretary
Muskie commented that the Iranians would probably take our proposal
and then escalate to a discussion of additional concessions they may
want. If we have to offer some bait in advance to the Iranians, he would
prefer consideration of monetary inducements or a carefully drafted
apology of some sort rather than accepting trials. In any event, we lack
a credible interlocutor in Tehran. (S)
Mr. Donovan disagreed with the notion of trials or an apology, on
the grounds that it would promote hostage-taking elsewhere around
the world. (S)
All agreed that this should be regarded as a preliminary discussion
of possible alternate courses of action. The issues had not been exam-
ined sufficiently to permit any decision or recommendation. The nature
of the discussion should be reported to the President for his informa-
tion, and a small working group should examine in more detail the
kinds of contingencies we may face suddenly and how we might deal
with them. (S)
Mr. Cutler noted that we are progressively losing control of any
ability to return the frozen assets. The court cases are proceeding and
he believes we will not be able to stop a judgment. Mr. Shenefield
commented that this issue was really a lawyers’ discussion that had
6 See footnote 2, Document 286.
