1956 927 authorities carry out that agreement. I had many times spoken here in all seriousness and earnestness of effect this having on public opin­ ion in my country and on my government’s estimate of pledged word his government. I had pointed out before and wished again point out adverse effects their failure permit these Americans expeditiously return is having and effect it will continue have in future discussions here find solutions to problems between our two countries. Certainly release of only six individuals in these 7 long months that have passed since September 10 cannot be interpreted as permitting these people expeditiously to return to own country. This still continued contrast very much with situation concerning Chinese in US, who returning steadily to his country. According our best information, nine Chinese from US were known to have crossed border into his country March 16, seven more April 7, making total at least 130 definitely known to have returned since our talks began. How many more might have returned by other routes I had of course no way of knowing. How­ ever, what was undisputable was that Chinese were allowed to return and were returning whenever they wished to do so. For any those who had not returned, had been entirely their personal decision. I hoped in interest our talks here, with their potentialities for future relations between our two countries his authorities would correct the bad situation existing in spite our announcement September 10. 10. Wang said situation respecting return nationals each country directly related to improvement our relations. I had stated that since talks began 130 Chinese had returned to his country. Bearing in mind existence some 5,000 Chinese students in US, what proportion would the 130 Chinese who have returned make to this integral number? Might point out, however, since talks began number American nationals in China having returned my country exceeds two-­thirds total number. From these two proportions it is quite clear as to whether more Americans or more Chinese have returned to their countries since talks began. As such, from point of view September 10 agreement between us situation concerning nationals not satisfactory his side. Had already called my attention names 49 Chinese in US, however, I had not yet given accounting for any of them. At last meeting I had remarked infor­ mation he gave me concerning case Yuan Jui-­hsiang not sufficient find out about him and identify him. I seemed to have found some pretext by which I was refusing make inquiry and give accounting of all 49 Chinese who have been prevented returning. They had provided such information as name, profession, and cir­ cumstances obstructions received. No one could ever believe country as large as US having such huge and extensive investigating setup as FBI cannot find and identify Mr. Yuan. Therefore, hoped my author­ ities would promptly correct treatment and attitude toward Chinese
