552  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
and assistance programs work, much more than money is required. 
Trained personnel are absolutely essential to the success of any pro-
gram, whether in industry or such fields as public administration. We 
have also learned, said the Under Secretary, that programs can be suc-
cessful only if their benefits are visible to the people.
The Under Secretary said that the recently announced Program 
for Social Development in Latin America was initiated particularly 
because of our feeling of hemispheric solidarity with Latin America and 
because it appears that most Latin American Governments shared U.S. 
views in this field and believe that effective cooperation is ­possible.2 
The program will probably be carried out largely through the Inter-
American Development Bank and the United States is ready to work 
with Ecuador in the fields of agriculture, road construction, credit, 
power supply, training of personnel, urban housing, etc. Much of this 
will be organizational help since it is beyond our capability to do every-
thing. We need to begin work where we can—where good planning 
exists—before the Program for Social Development becomes effective 
next spring. Other cooperative arrangements have been made recently, 
on the basis of excellent planning, with Peru for development of its 
eastern area and with Colombia (to be announced shortly) in the field 
of housing, land settlement, education and general development after 
careful study by ICA.
The Under Secretary emphasized his belief that this type of devel-
opment, on the basis of adequate preparation, is much better than the 
other road for the people of Ecuador, the road of giving up their free-
dom in return for promises. He said that President Eisenhower had 
asked him to express his best wishes to the new President of Ecuador 
and his associates, and to say that the United States wants very much to 
cooperate with Ecuador. Naturally we must operate under certain laws 
which require that we know what we are doing before we do it. Speed 
in fact results from good planning, frequently based on studies made 
by DLF or other missions.
The Under Secretary mentioned that the Geodetic Survey mapping 
program is obviously very fundamental in Ecuador’s development 
program. An application to the DLF for this program could be han-
dled very quickly. The Under Secretary also referred to ICA, DLF and 
other missions which are to visit Ecuador shortly and to the future role 
of the Inter-American Development Bank. The Bank, he said, would 
be helpful in technical assistance fields as well, and in many ways the 
use of bank personnel might be more advisable than the use of U.S. 
technicians.
2 For documentation on the referenced program of aid to Latin America, see 
Documents ETA–34, 36–37, 39–40, 44–45, 49.
