National Security Policy  157
effectiveness of these missiles can be improved by diversification of 
deployment. Plans call for 1 squadron at Camp Cooke, 2 squadrons 
at Warren AFB, Wyoming, 1 squadron at Offutt AFB, Nebraska and 1 
squadron at Fairchild AFB near Spokane, Washington. Considerations 
are being given to a semi-­hard, 20 1b. base deployment method for the 
6, 7, 8 and 9 squadrons.
With respect to the TITAN program, the 1959 budget augmentation 
request includes 50 million additional dollars for this program. Total 
will now be $454.5 million. This funding will permit the deployment of 
three TITAN squadrons on a hard base by CY 1961. The 4th squadron 
will be deployed in CY 1962, using later funding. These squadrons will 
be deployed outside of Denver, Colorado and will be serviced by the 
Martin plant located at Denver.
We are at the present time reviewing the TITAN program to deter­
mine whether it will be practicable to substitute a storable propellant 
combination instead of the current liquid oxygen-­kerosene combina­
tion. There are several factors in favor of making such a substitution, 
including a significant reduction in logistics and reaction time. On 
the other hand, there are certain engineering problems which must be 
resolved before we can be assured that this simplified technique can be 
used. It is expected that these studies will be completed this summer. 
While we are not recommending an increase in the TITAN program 
over the approved level of 4 squadrons and 40 missiles, we believe that 
if the fuel work is successful we will need additional squadrons and 
would ask for an increase to a total of 8 squadrons as part of the 1960 
budget.
With respect to the POLARIS program, the FY 1959 budget aug­
mentation request included funds for two more POLARIS submarines 
and the necessary missiles. This will provide 5 submarines plus mis­
siles as the approved program. It is not practicable to program, at this 
time, for additional submarines and missiles until the development 
program proceeds into the test phase and a better measure is estab­
lished of system performance and the projected availability dates. The 
present Navy plan is to continue the production of POLARIS subma­
rines at a rate of about 1 per quarter. If the program continues to show 
promise, it is likely that additional funds will be included in the 1960 
budget request to finance 3 additional submarines.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff have recommended that the number of 
operational IRBMs be increased to a total of 16 squadrons (240 mis­
siles) by FY 1963. On the basis of a review of the possible deploy­
ment locations suggested by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, comments on 
these locations by the State Department, and progress at the NATO
