Costa Rica  395
railroad and shop workers, has been known to be non-Communist but 
has entered into a cooperative working relationship with FOBA during 
the past half year. A third, minor organization, the Rerum Novarum, has 
about 100 members in the Company’s facilities at Golfito.
None of the three unions supported Echandi in the recent election. 
Rerum Novarum very definitely supported the National Liberation Party 
and both FOBA and FETRABA, according to the Embassy, overwhelm-
ingly demonstrated they were in the Calderonista-Communist camp.
Problem:
How will the Echandi administration handle the problem? 
Harassment for nonsupport of Echandi can strengthen the Communist 
position. Indifference, if it is felt to be an area not worth courting, 
could do likewise. Perhaps an ORIT-ICFTU campaign, now being 
contemplated, could be permitted to operate provided it is carried 
out on a strictly trade union, non-­political basis designed to diminish 
Communist influence.
Additional Subjects President-Elect Echandi May Discuss
(1) Change of Authority in Awarding Contracts for the Inter-American 
Highway:
It is understood that President-­elect Echandi is interested in having 
the Government of Costa Rica take over the awarding of the contracts 
for the remaining work for completion of the Inter-American Highway 
in Costa Rica.
Our Position:
In view of the advanced stage of construction of the Inter-American 
Highway in Costa Rica it appears to be a poor time to change the pro-
cedure for the operation and final construction of this highway. In 
addition the United States is not aware that the Government of Costa 
Rica presently has in being a highway department which could ade-
quately handle the letting and awarding of contracts on the highway. 
The United States does not believe that it would be advantageous for 
Costa Rica to build up a highway department to handle this project as 
the Inter-American Highway is a much larger project than any future 
foreseeable projects in Costa Rica. Therefore, it would seem to be to 
the benefit of the rapid completion of this project not to undertake to 
change the methods of operations at this time.
The United States through the Bureau of Public Roads is willing 
to cooperate with and assist the Government of Costa Rica to build up 
and train a highway organization capable of carrying on and maintain-
ing the highway after its completion and the Bureau of Public Roads
