Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, December 28, 1979 SUBJECT Proposed Radio Liberty Broadcasts to Soviet Muslims (C) Attached at Tab A2 is a memo from State outlining their strategy for implementing the December 11 SCC decision authorizing them to investigate the possibility of leasing transmitter time in Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Israel and possibly Jordan for Radio Liberty programs beamed at the Soviet Muslim populations. (C) There are existing short-wave transmitters powerful enough to reach Soviet Central Asia in Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Israel. Jordan has no short-wave transmitters capable of reaching Soviet Central Asia and therefore has been dropped from consideration. (C) State argues—correctly in my view—that we ought to make our first approach to the Saudis in order to capitalize on their strong sense of responsibility for Muslim peoples and to offset any Saudi reaction, should we later turn to the Israelis. While there may be some reluctance on the part of the Saudis, State believes that a well-prepared approach, explained as an information effort aimed at oppressed co-religionists could overcome these hesitations. They recommend that the BIB send a senior representative to talk to the Saudis and explore the possibility of leasing transmitter time. (C) If the Saudis prove unwilling, State recommends approaching Egypt next. They caution, however, that Egypt may be wary of agreeing to another highly visible bilateral project at a time when they are trying to mend their fences with the Soviets. (C) State thinks Israel should be approached only as a last resort, and that the decision should be reconsidered if this is the only option. They feel any broadcasts from Israel could be exploited by the Soviets to blunt the impact of our effort directed at the Muslim populations. In particular, the Soviets could portray the broadcasts as evidence of a joint US-Zionist conspiracy. Embassy Tel Aviv shares this concern. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of
