1040  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
sides agreed that the points between which length was measured must 
be specified; they simply disagreed on what those points should be.
12. Obukhov said that he could not understand the problems with 
the Soviet approach. Brooks noted that a stage could be as short as four 
meters. Five percent of that would be only 20 centimeters. It was not 
technically difficult to redesign nozzles so that they were 20 centime-
ters longer. Thus a side could create a “new” ICBM simply through a 
nozzle change. This would undermine the treaty.
New Types
13. Brooks suggested that the two sides were working at cross pur-
poses. The U.S. side was trying to craft a sound general new types defi-
nition. In contrast, Brooks believed that the Soviet side was trying to 
protect a specific missile or missiles now under development. Perhaps 
the sides could craft a good general rule and then deal separately with 
certain systems which were under development. Obukhov said that 
he did not believe it would be useful to look at such an approach. He 
would not specify why.
14. Obukhov said that the Soviet side had been disappointed by 
the U.S. proposal to use volume as a new types criterion. 15 percent 
volume change was much too great. It would be much better to con-
tinue to explore a solution based on throw-­weight plus a length change. 
The Soviet side could only accept a change that was close to five per-
cent. Brooks asked if the problem was the concept of volume or the 
value of 15 percent. Would the Soviet side be able to accept volume if a 
lower number were used, for example, 10 percent? Obukhov said that 
his instruction only mentioned five percent in length and gave him no 
flexibility. It was his view that volume approach made no sense. He 
could not sell such an approach in Moscow. (Comment: Obukhov was 
not clear on whether the problem was volume or 15 percent. He kept 
rejecting the concept of volume, but using as his reason that 15 percent 
was too great. End comment.)
PPCM/SSI
15. Brooks said that the new Soviet proposals on PPCM and SSI 
were being reviewed in Washington. It would naturally take some 
time to determine whether or not the facilities the Soviet side proposed 
could be made available for mandatory suspect site inspection. Brooks’ 
discussions in Washington, however, had indicated that Washington 
was not prepared to evaluate the PPCM portion of the Soviet proposal 
without more information on production units.
16. Obukhov said that U.S. interest in production had been 
reported to Moscow. The best way to get the information the U.S. 
sought was to give constructive responses to Soviet proposals. In this
