586
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—The failure of the Executive Branch to strongly work for the rati-
fication of the Genocide Convention, International Covenants and
other human rights agreements.
—The uneven application of the policy. When security or eco-
nomic interests are involved, human rights are ignored.
—The absence of anyone in the White House or National Security
Council strongly supportive of human rights.
—The continued insensitivity to and lack of knowledge about
human rights by many foreign service officers here and abroad.
—Diminishing U.S. pressure on major violators, in particular
South Korea, Argentina, Indonesia, Nicaragua, the Philippines, South
Africa, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Rhodesia (Freedom House ex-
cepted on Rhodesia).
II. Recommendations: Because the Executive Branch is viewed as
having passed through its “human rights phase,” “triumphs” were
said to be needed to demonstrate the importance of the policy and to
make clear that it was not on the wane but on a new plateau.
The triumph that virtually all NGO’s recommended was ratifica-
tion of the human rights treaties. Specifically, NGO’s urged intensive
Executive Branch “lobbying” with the Senate to ensure prompt passage
of the Genocide Convention and recommended that the Secretary for-
mally request the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to hold hearings
on the Covenants.
Other recommendations were:
—A major speech by a high-level USG official (Christopher, Vance,
Brzezinski, or Carter) realistically setting forth the future direction of
the policy and its accomplishments and setbacks to date.
—The appointment of a human rights advocate to the White
House and National Security Council.
—The enlargement of the Human Rights Bureau to enable its ade-
quate handling of the enormous task before it.
—A massive foreign service education program aimed at institu-
tionalizing the teaching of human rights as a regular feature of foreign
service training.
—A vigorous effort to enlist Congressional support for human
rights issues.
—Provision of strong support and encouragement to countries
with good human rights records and those in which major advances
have occurred.
—The clear reflection in U.S. aid patterns of an alliance with demo-
cratic nations or those in which such processes are developing.
—The re-formulation of the human rights policy to include:
a) Greater attention to the promotion of civil and political liberties and
