1980  899
modernization. This would be in Japan’s own strategic interest and 
would relieve the burden on the US. Moreover, we see little risk that 
a reluctant Japan will go so far in rearming as to pose again a threat to 
US strategic interests. Instead they are in the same boat as we are now.
Since it would be difficult for the US to defend South Korea if we 
were fully engaged elsewhere, [6 lines not declassified] A third part of this 
strategy would be to use the leverage of our aid to press China to deter 
any NK attack.17
DoD stresses a Far East “threat-­in-­being” concept because both 
Japan and China probably would prefer to remain neutral as long as 
possible in any NATO/WP or US/USSR conflict. Nor could we pose 
a major offensive threat to the USSR in the FE so long as they did so—­
and maybe even if they joined us. Moreover, Moscow too might prefer 
to refuse its FE flank until it had won in Europe and/or the PG (which 
would give it a stranglehold on Japan’s oil).
For all these reasons DoD believes that the US must face up to the 
need for (1) accelerated Japanese rearmament; (2) [1 line not declassified] 
and (3) the sale of limited defensive arms to China, [less than 1 line not 
declassified] The chief risk we see is that of provoking the USSR to pre-­
emptive action.18 But, we regard this risk as modest so long as US or 
European arms sales are carefully calibrated to be defensive, and so 
long as the USSR faces major problems in EE and the PG/IO. We must 
also weigh against this risk the likelihood that otherwise US defense 
outlays would have to be further increased in order to cope with the 
“simultaneity” problem.
Issue #5—How can we best get our friends and Allies to do more for the 
common defense? This issue has bedevilled US policy since the early 50s. 
But the loss of US strategic nuclear superiority, increasing Soviet con-
ventional capabilities, European and Japanese economic growth, and 
now the US need to fill the security vacuum in yet a third theater all 
compel imparting new vigor to this effort. Even if we wish to do so, 
we cannot any longer carry so much of the burden of Western defense. 
Since we prefer to remain the chief Free World nuclear defender (a 
major call on our resources even in a SALT II regime), it must become a 
cardinal aspect of US political, economic, and military policy in the 80s 
to get our Allies—­and friends—­to contribute a lot more to conventional 
defense. Moreover, their failure to do so at a time when US defense 
17 Brzezinski underlined “third,” and drew a vertical line and a checkmark in the 
right margin next to this sentence.
18 Brzezinski drew two vertical lines and an arrow pointing to it in the right margin 
next to this sentence.
