1980  939
intensifying intra-Arab and Israeli-Arab tensions have increased the instabil-
ity in the region. This has also increased the risk to U.S. and Allied interests, 
both directly and by giving the Soviets added opportunities for interference.]10 
At the same time, our success in normalizing relations with the Peo-
ple’s Republic of China has improved our strategic position in East 
Asia. Given the danger that Soviet success in asserting influence over 
the oil producing status of the Persian Gulf region could undermine the 
viability of NATO and Japan, cause enormous economic disruptions in 
Europe, Japan, and the United States, higher priority must be given to 
developing adequate strategic lift, general purpose forces and facilities 
access for Persian Gulf contingencies. (S)
Approve State preference (deleting portions underscored in brack-
ets) _____
Approve NSC/Defense preference (no deletions)11 _____
While NATO will retain first call on force deployments in peace-
time for wartime operations, the Persian Gulf shall have highest prior-
ity for improvement of strategic lift and general purpose forces in the 
Five Year Defense Program. [East Asia will have third priority for resources 
and wartime operations.]12 This priority calls for maintaining improved 
relations with the People’s Republic of China, accelerated growth of 
Japan’s defense capabilities as a contribution to U.S.-Japanese security 
ties, and improved relations with the ASEAN states. STATE ALTERNA-
TIVE—ADDITION: . . . ASEAN states, “and greater progress in getting our 
NATO Allies to bear a larger share of the burden of defense in Europe.”
Approve State preferences (deleting portion underscored in brack-
ets and adding portion underscored in quotes)13 _____
Approve NSC/Defense preference (no changes) _____
Soviet projection of power in the Caribbean region with Cuba’s 
assistance over the past two years has created another area of increased 
security concern. In support of the objectives of Presidential Directive/
NSC–52, it is necessary to achieve quietly a stronger military presence 
in the region by gradual shifts in our military exercise activities and 
basing of U.S. forces in the Southeastern part of the United States and 
its territories in the region which will be perceived by Cuba and the 
Soviet Union as evidence of our determination to limit Soviet and 
Cuban regional influence. (S)
10 Carter deleted the brackets around this sentence and wrote “ok” in the left margin 
next to it.
11 Carter approved this option.
12 Carter deleted this sentence.
13 Carter approved this option and wrote in the left margin next to it: “Smooth the 
Transition.”
