March 27–December 31, 1979
983
Secretary Vance said that they see progress, and are more sophisti-
cated politically. Therefore they will take what looks like a constructive
position, and they will get stronger. Eventually, they want a dialogue
with the U.S. But they see this as realists, that it will not happen now.
Dr. Brzezinski asked how constructive the PLO would be. Would it
be tacit? A cease-fire?
Secretary Vance said that complicated arrangements need to be
worked out. The Lebanese should take the lead. We and others should
help lead this to a more stable situation.
Dr. Brzezinski asked if there would be understandings.
Secretary Vance agreed.
Dr. Brzezinski asked if the understandings would be written.
Secretary Vance said he didn’t know.
Ambassador Habib said that some things were clear. The UN would
need an expanded role. The UNIFIL role should be increased.
Dr. Brzezinski asked who would negotiate with the PLO.
Secretary Vance replied the UN and Lebanese.
Ambassador Habib suggested Syria.
Assistant Secretary Saunders suggested Saudi Arabia and Kuwait.
Secretary Vance said that we would not negotiate with the PLO.
Ambassador Habib said that the PLO has not met our terms, so that
there would be no contact.
Ambassador Strauss said it isn’t what we start out to do that matters,
it’s where we would get, and how the press puts it. It would take skill
to assure the American people, the Jewish community, the Congress
what we will not do. Therefore, is this worth it?
Assistant Secretary Saunders said we should see Lebanon on its own
merits.
Ambassador Strauss said that if we say we will talk with the PLO in
the Lebanon context, we will still get screwed.
Ambassador Habib said that we should have limits not to go that far.
If we set limits we are ok.
Ambassador Strauss said we need a protective coating.
Secretary Vance said we must talk with the Israelis next.
Ambassador Strauss added that we should tell them the truth.
Dr. Brzezinski said that this (talking with Israel) seems to be a
change from the State paper, which says that Israel should be brought
in at some point.
Ambassador Habib said this should be before the initial phase.
Secretary Vance said that first we have talked with the UN about the
role it will play; second we have talked with Lebanon about its role;
third we should talk with Israel now.
