723.2515/1711: Telegram
[Document 258]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
SANTIAGO, December 2, 1925—11 p.m.
[Received December 3—12:30 p.m.]
126.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I saw Minister for Foreign Affairs on Monday afternoon and expressed to him your
regret and resentment over publication in Chilean press of articles impugning motives
of Arbitrator and his representatives and calculated to inflame ill-feeling. I read
paraphrase of your telegram No. 76.77 Minister expressed regret and said that Edwards’
speech had been given to press by former [latter?] without consulting Minister, and
that he first learned of it by telegram from Edwards stating that when General Pershing
first requested him not to publish speech, Edwards replied it had already been given to
Buenos Aires papers. Minister said he had begun cable to Edwards disapproving action
and requesting not to publish in Santiago papers, but before he had finished he was
shown copy of Santiago evening paper belonging to Edwards containing Edwards’
speech. Minister said he then cabled Edwards his regret at publication, but mentioned
inutility of instructions under circumstances.
The Minister continued that some days before he had called director of the Edwards’
press to the Ministry and had requested discontinuance of articles against Pershing and
the United States and had stated that as Edwards was on the Commission articles such
as these were especially embarrassing to the Chilean Government and made Edwards’
position almost untenable. I asked whether, in view of the unauthorized publication of
Edwards’ speech since then, he would remain on the Commission. The Minister replied
that he hardly dared remove him, his influence was so great. He added in a joking way
that if the United States would remove General Pershing, Chile would withdraw Mr.
Edwards; that both men had become nervous and irritable.
I replied that General Pershing enjoyed your confidence, had given out no speeches,
and had not impugned the motives of the Chilean head of the State. Minister replied
that on the contrary General Pershing at session of Commission on November 21 had
made a speech, admittedly prepared before Commission had received Edwards’ note of
