of recording a protest and be constructive in hinting to the Cantonese that if they gave suitable guarantees that there would be no further increase of illegal taxation and if the collection of the new taxes were placed in the hands of the Customs, etc., there would be a willingness on the part of the powers to make an agreement in some form with the regime in Canton in order to regularize the situation. Much discussion of this ensued. It seemed to be the general opinion that the implications of such action would be very far reaching but that nevertheless it was constructive, at least theoretically, and took account of the real movement of events in China in the direction of regional arrangements. Recognition was given to the fact that at this time whatever we could do could be only a device for “saving face”, inasmuch as the powers concerned were unwilling to undertake the adoption of a resolute policy: the only practical means to check treaty violation. The belief was rather generally held that in these circumstances perhaps some such suggestion as was offered by Macleay was the best course to take. Accordingly, it was agreed that a draft formula should be sent to the respective Governments for approval or rejection. The first two paragraphs follow: [End paraphrase.] “In view of the levying by the Canton and other authorities in China of certain taxes on foreign trade,68 the diplomatic representatives in Peking of the powers concerned declare that they cannot recognize the legality of these measures which are in direct violation of the treaties. In any case they cannot acquiesce in the collection of taxes on foreign trade which is not effectuated by the Chinese Maritime Customs and not regularized by agreement.” The third and last paragraph being the same as the second in the original draft. (See paragraph 3 of my 462, October 8, 8 p.m.) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5. [Paraphrase.] As to whether it is advisable for us to agree to the British proposal, I frankly believe that it makes no particular difference what action we take regarding the new taxation or in China in general by way of trying to safeguard our citizens’ rights under the treaties, unless a realization is brought home to the Chinese that there is a purpose to employ force to
