Chapter 6, June–December 1990  841
an annex to this paper, I am including a short-­list of these “dangling” 
heavy issues.
— START/ABM Relationship and Conversion of Missiles for Space 
Launch Vehicles: Like you, we are a little mystified by this Soviet topic. 
We’ve recently received good and bad news concerning START/ABM 
linkage. The good news is that the Soviets have followed through on 
Shevardnadze’s promise last February and told us that they intend to 
make a unilateral statement saying that if one side violates the ABM 
Treaty, the other, under the “supreme national interests” clause, can 
choose to leave START. This is basically harmless and means they have 
dropped their push for a joint statement on START/ABM linkage.
The bad news is that in the course of discussions on missile elim-
ination and conversion, the Soviets have told us they are very serious 
about their proposed ban on using converted missiles for deploying 
weapons in space. My thoughts on this are below, under the heading of 
missile elimination.
Finally, the only other linkage-­type issue is the START preamble, 
where Nazarkin has agreed to refer only to Article II of the ABM Treaty, 
which refers only to offensive arms. I hope Washington accepts this ad 
ref deal, because it will also mean that Moscow will drop its proposal 
for Article XIV—­on follow-­on negotiations—­that could also pose the 
troublesome linkage question.
— Backfire: I think this is an easy one, because we have what we 
need. The existing Soviet language on no refueling is fine and if we can 
get the Soviets down to a combined total of 550 Backfires (350 Air Force 
and 200 Naval), that should let us finally put this issue to rest.
— Noncircumvention: This is a big, politically-­sensitive issue. 
I know that Washington is prepared to fall on its sword on this one, and 
expects Moscow to give. At the same time, we don’t want this to be the 
final end-­game issue: It would put Mrs. T in a very difficult, exposed 
position. Thus, one compromise you should consider is defining the 
“existing pattern of cooperation” a little more narrowly than we do 
now; that is, permitting the open-­ended continuation of SLBM cooper-
ation, but ruling out the future transfer of ICBMs, heavy bombers and 
ALCMs. Obviously, we need to talk to the British on this, but to avoid a 
last-­minute donnybrook, we should do it fairly soon.
— PPCM: This one is becoming more difficult. We are pushing 
a very elaborate scheme, involving PPCM for about four solid-­rocket 
motor plants and final assembly facilities as well as inspections and 
tours of other motor plants. The Soviets, who originally wanted to 
PPCM final assembly plants, have decided to drop PPCM altogether. 
On the one hand, we can’t afford to abandon PPCM: It would be a 
political disaster for START ratification. On the other hand, the Soviets 
will never accept our existing approach. The solution probably lies in
