Dominican Republic  519
sentence is “realistic” and I am sure that is why you inserted it. First and fore-
most, the transition must not be a sham. This means that we must not fall 
into Trujillo’s trap of being satisfied with measures which legalistically 
remove him from control but, in fact, permit him to continue his dicta-
torship. An example of his efforts to achieve this is his announcement 
yesterday that he will run for Governor of the Province of Santiago. 
This is obviously a maneuver on his part to satisfy the U.S., the OAS 
and the OAR that he has bowed out of national politics, but which, at 
the same time, will permit him to remain in the country, to continue 
controls over its economic and financial life by his time-­honored meth-
ods. Trujillo as Governor of Santiago will be in every practical sense 
the same as Trujillo is now. While he is in the Dominican-Republic and/or 
while he maintains his economic domination, he will also continue his politi-
cal domination whether he is President or dogcatcher. While this is a politi-
cal fact, the responsible opposition to his regime will not dare to form 
true opposition parties. There will be no real freedom of assembly, of 
speech, or of the press and radio for these people. On previous occa-
sions when they rose to his lure, once he spotted them he took severe 
reprisals against them and they are not prepared to put their necks on 
his chopping block again.
A realistic program to bring about free elections can only, in my 
opinion, be built around one keystone – ­namely the removal of Trujillo 
from the country. Once this happens we should work toward an orderly 
break-­up of his economic stranglehold on the national life. I admit it is 
quite likely that once the opposition gets moving, this break-­up may be 
anything but orderly. This country, however, is as desperately in need of a rev-
olution as any country. I remember reading about and revolutions are not usu-
ally orderly affairs. It should be our objective to see that the Dominican 
revolution is as bloodless as possible. At the same time, it is not rational 
to expect, in view of all the pressures of hatred which have been build-
ing up here over thirty years, that no one is going to get hurt. I would 
hope 1) that we could prevent the Ramfis-Espaillat-Abbes-Sanchez 
gang of cut throats from staging a St. Bartholomew’s Day Massacre 
of the leading oppositionists in an effort to save the situation for the 
Trujillistas, and 2) that we could persuade the opposition, if they gain 
control, not to carry their purge beyond those immediately responsible 
for the criminal actions of the Trujillo regime. Our friends here favor a 
limited purge but if they cannot maintain their prestige among the oppo-
sition as a whole, there is no telling what excesses may result. If we attach 
importance to the future in this country, I cannot urge strongly enough 
that we do everything possible to restore the pro-U.S. oppositionists at 
least to their influence at the time of the Sixth MFM. This can only be 
done if the U.S. takes strong measures against Trujillo in one way or 
another.
