1978 327 [2 paragraphs (21 lines) not declassified] Mitchell stated that he had been appalled at the neglected state of affairs when he became Director of FPA. We cannot defer the budget issue for long if we are serious about continuity of government. The “Washington arc” of hard sites goes back to the Eisenhower Administration. Little improvement has occurred since that time. Brzezinski asked if we could postpone the decision for two weeks and use the time to get a sufficient understanding of the “continuity of [41 lines not declassified]. Huntington observed that perhaps Brown had in mind “assurance” rather than “insurance.” [7 lines not declassified] Brzezinski rejoined that “equivalent survivability” makes it less likely that we would need to evacuate in a crisis because both sides would realize the other has an equivalent response. Keeny insisted that evacuation would make no difference for a crisis, a point that Brown challenged. Brzezinski went on to argue that “equivalent survivability” might not mean an equivalent civil defense program. [1 lines not declassified] In SALT III we must eliminate both civil defense and air defense on both sides. Harold Brown, responding to Keeny, insisted that an option to evacuate for civil defense is worth $100 million. Keeny replied that he fears an insurance policy will raise expectations which are illusory. Tirana insisted that an explicit civil defense policy is very important for explaining anything we do to the public and Congress. If we have no public policy rationale as we increase the program, we encourage the public to believe that civil defense will be effective. Silence on a policy rationale, therefore, encourages the public to believe we have “equivalent survivability.” Harold Brown admitted that it is difficult to reject the “equivalent survivability” but he fears putting it down on paper. He does not worry about Soviet civil defense being effective. If he did, he would support a civil defense policy. There are genuine differences among us on this point, he added. Christopher observed that the policy choices as stated in the paper are loaded. There are other ways to achieve “equivalent survivability.” Brown agreed and noted that “equivalent survivability” might be achieved on civil defense the way cruise missiles were substituted by the B–1. Brzezinski said that “insurance” may be all right as a policy but its substance and definition should be that as stated in the paper for
