National Security Policy 125 500 to 5000 persons) has not yet been sufficiently tested and the con­ tribution of such shelters sufficiently evaluated to warrant the conclu­ sion that a network of such shelters is desirable, however financed, as opposed to a program placing major emphasis on smaller private shel­ ters available at places of residence and employment. It is believed that construction as prototypes of a number of public shelters to accommodate 500 to 5000 persons, development of compre­ hensive shelter plans and organization in a few typical cities, inclusion of public shelters in new Federal civilian buildings and in many new military facilities, and the construction of shelters in existing post office buildings throughout the nation as well as in many existing military facilities, might well, because of public and Congressional reaction to such steps, commit the nation to an approach to the shelter problem which would rely heavily on large public shelters, placing only minor emphasis on shelter protection in homes, other places of residence, and places of employment. It is believed that steps which would lead to such commitment are premature and should be held in abeyance pending completion of the above-­described studies. Treasury proposes, therefore, that the Council withhold decision on recommendations 1–­b, 2–­c, 5 and 6 of NSC 5807. 36. Letter From John Foster Dulles to Eisenhower1 Washington, March 25, 1958 Dear Mr. President: I have read the draft you sent me of your proposed speech to the American Society of Newspaper Editors and make these comments: It seems to me to be unnecessarily somber. After all, quite a lot of your “Chance for Peace’’ aspirations have been realized. There is the Korean Armistice. There is an Indochina Armistice. There is an Austrian State Treaty. There is an International Atomic Energy Agency. There is great progress in the development of a “European community, conducive to the free movement of persons, 1 Source: Comments on draft speech. No classification marking. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Nuclear Exchange.
