National Security Policy  923
Development of Additional World Power Centers, and on Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons and of Delivery Systems.
(9) The Planning Board should undertake the immediate prepa­
ration of a Discussion Paper on the Implications of Sharing of Nuclear 
Weapons with Allies.
(10) The Council should discuss the basic organization of the 
National Security Council, including the Operations Coordinating Board, 
by examining how it has operated over the years and recent suggestions 
for changes in the current organization.
(11) The Planning Board should prepare a Discussion Paper on 
Effects of Change in the Character of the Cold War.
(12) Consideration of a Discussion Paper on the Economic Threat 
Posed by the USSR and Communist China should be deferred, pend­
ing preparation of a study agreed upon by the Planning Board on 
an Examination of the Principal Factors affecting the Future Power 
Positions of the Free World and the Sino-­Soviet Bloc.
(13) The NSC Planning Board should prepare Discussion Papers 
on Long-­Range U.S. Policy Toward the Soviet Union and the European 
Satellites and on Long-­Range U.S. Policy toward Communist China.
(14) The Council on Foreign Economic Policy should be asked to 
give initial consideration to a Discussion Paper on Trade Competition 
Between the U.S. and Europe.
(15) The Planning Board should give further consideration to 
Discussion Papers on Utilization of Non-­Military Technological 
Advances and on International Scientific Cooperation.
c. Noted that:
(1) A proposed revision of Preliminary U.S. Policy on Outer Space 
(NSC 5814/1) is scheduled for consideration at a Joint Meeting of the 
National Security Council and the National Aeronautics and Space 
Council on December 29.
(2) The Planning Board is currently reviewing and revising U.S. 
Policy Toward Africa South of the Sahara (NSC 5818).
(3) The current review by the Department of Defense of the find­
ings and recommendations of the Nash Report on Overseas Bases, 
pursuant to NSC Action No. 2142, should provide a basis for Council 
discussion of U.S. Bases Overseas, with special emphasis on the impli­
cations of developments in the missiles field.
NOTE: The above actions (NSC Actions Nos. 2163, 2164, 2165 and 
2166) subsequently submitted to and approved by the President.
NSC Action No. 2166–­b–­(1) subsequently transmitted to the Secre­
tary of State for appropriate action.
NSC Action No. 2166–b–(5) and –14) subsequently transmitted to 
the Chairman, CFEP, for appropriate action.
NSC Action No. 2166–­c–­(3) subsequently transmitted to the Secre­
tary of Defense for appropriate action.
Marion W. Boggs
