144 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII FC: They have already given us some indications they want to do something. GB: Then I withdraw my observations. ZB: What about the package I have suggested? ST: It will take a survey before we can give financial aid to anybody. DN: You have to do the survey before you can make a precise recommendation on financial support? FC: We can engage the Pakistanis in discussion of financial support for dissident groups and then channel the support with their knowledge. DN: When do we have to make the Presidential Finding? FC: I strongly recommend that we make a Finding first. ZB: What do you think, Griffin? GB: You can talk to them without making a finding. FC: But that would confront us with the problem of arousing expectations that we could not meet. We would feel a lot better having these discussions after having a Finding. GB: If you do that, it may leak and then we don’t have the chance to do it. ZB: Can we have a Finding by the President and then not do it? FC: We have to inform the Congress in a timely manner. GB: You don’t have to tell the Congress until you do it. ST: You can have the SCC approve the finding and not have the President sign it. FC: Our people in the field want to have some blessing before they talk about this sort of thing with the people they are dealing with. GB: If the SCC authorizes you to negotiate that is enough—if they say that they don’t want to do that—how will we then unravel this thing that we have started? FC: If the position of the SCC is clear that if we negotiate and the Pakistanis are interested, then we will get finding and go ahead, then we can do it. ZB: Is that possible, Griffin? GB: That is possible. ZB: Let us say what we will be saying. DN: I am willing to go along with the radio broadcasting and financial aid subject to agreement from the Pakistanis. I am only in favor of a survey without future commitments. ST: I fear we may have confused this in the way we have presented it. Unless we find out what is really going on in Afghanistan and among these insurgents, any money we give to the Pakistanis could simply go down the drain.
