496  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
that trend. Without an increase in defense spending at the 3% level, which has 
been committed to and urged on our allies, the issue of credibility will certainly 
be raised, as it has been already even by such a socially-­sensitive paper as the 
Washington Post.3
At the same time, there is no question that reducing the level of 
real growth in defense spending will help—­although marginally—­in 
meeting a reduced-­deficit target (although as I have pointed out often, 
Defense has shrunk dramatically as a portion of the federal budget 
from what it was fifteen years ago, and cannot be held responsible for 
the current deficit problem). To some degree it might make it much eas-
ier for other departments and constituencies to accept program reduc-
tions, though I doubt that they would ever acquiesce; at the same time, 
probably many overlapping and conflicting claims would be made 
against any supposed “defense dividend.” As you know, a decision 
among ten such claimants would produce nine infuriated losers and 
one ingrate.
In summary, excluding national security needs, which I believe 
to be the central issue, and considering only the political questions, I 
believe that while cutting the defense figure would ease slightly a tough 
budget problem, it would be of only marginal help, and not enough to 
offset the many negative consequences of such an action. In the overall 
political picture, I suspect that while a visible shift away from defense would 
give short-­term satisfaction to some constituencies (although they would prob-
ably continue to complain that the shift was only a token), over the next few 
years the majority of the American public will weigh steadfastness on defense 
as a virtue and an extremely important one.
IV. Conclusion
I have planned the defense program in light of the needs of the 
future—­a future which our actions now are shaping—­as well as in light 
of present contingencies. I have built it with my eye on the defense 
programs we need, not a particular budget figure—­but not of course 
without paying attention to realistic constraints on resources. The diffi-
cult task has not been to build a program to reach the range of a 3% annual real 
growth budget level. Rather, it has been to cut enough important programs in 
order to reduce it down to that level, yet retain an overall program which I can 
assure you will provide adequately for the security of the United States.
The programs presented here are as they have been balanced by 
me, with the advice of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Secretaries of the 
Army, Navy and Air Force, and our staffs. Not every item is sacrosanct, 
and each is open to your questioning. But the programs have been 
3 Reference is to Art Pine and Edward Walsh, “Carter Seen Wavering on Defense 
Rise,” Washington Post, November 29, 1978, p. A1.
