46 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement reference made there to number of cases still under review. Wang said he would also like to know names these people. On basis statements I had made in course talks his government believed return these people should not be subjected any obstruction. Question of return civilians both sides not only involved return those who had applied to leave, but also involved return all civilians. Those who may want return any time in future should also be allowed to go. That is why he had given me list of all American nationals in China for our convenience. He expressed view his government also entitled request US make reciprocal arrange­ ment by offering him list all Chinese nationals, including students. Said this was not beyond terms of reference but was precisely what he and I should be dealing with. Wang continued that many Chinese nationals US who have expressed inherent desire return motherland treated as political prob­ lems. As result they restricted for long time from departing and sub­ jected all kinds of pressure such as interrogation procedure and time limit for departure. Obstructions still prevail. Many Chinese nationals have apprehensions regarding applying to leave. State Dept’s April 2, 1955 press statement acknowledged some Chinese students may refrain from applying to Immigration Service for permission to depart for fear of being refused. “If it can be said there is contrast between situation Chinese nationals in US and American nationals in China this is appar­ ently great contrast”. From time of founding Chinese People’s Republic to date 1523 Americans left China only 87 remain. Law-abiding American nationals in China can leave any time providing make reasonable arrangement for unsettled civil cases. However many law-abiding Chinese nationals in US dare not apply for permission depart. Furthermore as result of prohibition against remittance money by families of Chinese nationals to them many such nationals no means obtaining travel funds. There­ fore it is necessary both China and US should entrust to 3rd country of own choice care of affairs nationals in other, in first place, affair of their return. Arrangements should be based on equality and mutual benefit. This would be reasonable solution to problem of return of civilians of both sides. With regard to supplementary list five persons given him last meeting, Wang said Bradshaw two Romanoffs and Walsh already included in list Americans given US. Regarding Mrs. Huizer he under­ stood she wife of Dutch national. According his information she was former American but in December 1951 on expiration her American passport she replaced it with Dutch passport. Situation is she mar­ ried to Dutch national and is now Dutch subject holding Dutch pass­ port. Dutch Charge has repeatedly claimed she is Dutch national and ­Chinese ­Government respects claim of Dutch.
