Afghanistan
371
There was general consensus that the Soviets also recognize that this
is a major departure and were prepared to run the risks entailed.
Second, the consequences of Soviet action were related to its scope
and its persistence. Several of the Allied representatives had experience
with the Czech invasion and the Hungarian invasion. They agreed that
our response cannot be modest nor short-lived. The allies are willing
to consider both positive and negative steps. As to the nature of these
steps, the allies were prepared to take “serious steps,” steps that would
lead back from detente, steps that would hurt themselves even as they
signalled to the Soviet Union our displeasure.
Third, the allies emphasized that the TNF decisions reached only
a few weeks ago were clearly necessary decisions. They also expressed
the hope that the qualifications of Belgium and the Netherlands would
now be dropped. However, neither Belgium nor the Netherlands indi-
cated that they would take this step. Nonetheless, there was a concurr-
ence that the U.S. leadership moving ahead on TNF deployments was
all the more valid in the light of subsequent Soviet activities in
Afghanistan.
Finally, the allies were quite prepared to come to the aid of Pakistan
and other countries which might be threatened by these developments.
The President asked whether India was discussed. The Deputy
Secretary replied yes. He said that even if the Indians rationalize the
invasion and downplay it, down deep they will be worried. [2 lines
not declassified]
The Deputy Secretary explained that two groups had been set up:
(1) to consider and discuss retaliatory actions towards the Soviets; and
(2) to coordinate aid to Pakistan. The Deputy Secretary said that these
groups could come under the NATO umbrella or they could be broad-
ened from the six to include Japan. The Deputy Secretary thought that
it was important that both in retaliation to the Soviets and aid to
Pakistan we could use as many participants as possible.
The Secretary of State noted that Ambassador Hummel in Pakistan
said that the aid to Pakistan should not be under NATO. The President
noted that the French also were anxious not to coordinate under NATO.
The Secretary of Defense expressed the hope that the Saudis and
Japanese could join the group. Dr. Brzezinski said that we may wish
to expand it to include Australia. Lloyd Cutler suggested that the
Pakistani aid consortium countries might be used for the economic aid
coordination.
The President asked what countries in the UN might raise the
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, absent U.S. leadership. Mr. Christopher
replied that we have had a report that a number of countries want to
do it—several Gulf states, four to five ASEAN countries, as well as
