793.00/114: Telegram
[Document 668]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, August 1, 1925—9 p.m.
[Received August 2—2:15 p.m.]
306. Your telegram number 165, July 23, 3 p.m.
1. Except as the Department might instruct me otherwise, in view of what follows, I
shall amend draft reply to the Chinese Government as authorized by your 170, July 28,
2 p.m., and 173, July 30, 1 p.m.
 
2. The latter telegram reached me while in conversation with the Japanese Minister,
who called yesterday evening to read me a copy of a telegram by which his
Government instructed Matsudaira to explain to you the difficulty which the Japanese
Government finds in assenting to the American draft insofar as it conveys a formal
promise to consider tariff autonomy at the Special Conference. As the Japanese
Ambassador will no doubt make clear, his Government feels that tariff autonomy, on
the removal of all conventional restrictions upon the tariffs leviable by the Chinese
Government, is a theoretical desideratum scarcely possible of realization in connection
with the Special Conference, and that we should at least be cautious in holding out
hopes of accomplishing what may or may not prove feasible—the more so as
concession on this point, in advance of any practical experience beyond the strikes and
boycotts which the agitators have inaugurated with a view to forcing their point, might
tend to encourage and sanction such methods and even justify and make possible the
use of tariff discriminations as a means of influencing future negotiations between
China and the powers.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5. Japanese Minister said that this introduction into our draft note to the Chinese
Government (which of course means full publicity) of our willingness to consider tariff
autonomy was a surprise to his Government; and he added Shidehara had asked him
whether I would not be willing to convey to you my personal opinion on the question.
6. I trust the Department will not misunderstand my saying that, since this further
development of its views in the matter of the Chinese tariff, I have felt a mental
reservation on this particular point. Conceding theoretical rightness of the Chinese
