162 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 before latter cld lead country to ruin. I might after reminding Ala this conversation ask him whether in his opinion time had come for him to make decision of this character”. I told Middleton that, of course, my tentative position might be altered by instructions which I might receive from my govt or in light subsequent events. I cld not (rpt not) bind myself. 7. I wld be grateful if Dept wld inform me whether it approves my reply to Middleton. Present position here extremely critical. On one hand there is undoubtedly great danger that “free elections” under Mosadeq might result in Majlis dominated by irresponsible elements. On other hand for US, while maintaining outwardly friendly relations with Mosadeq, covertly to bring pressure for his overthrow, wld place it in invidious position regardless whether or not (rpt not) Mosadeq’s overthrow was effected. It wld not (rpt not) add to US reputation for us to play double-faced role in Iran. If we think that Mosadeq’s policies are so dangerous that we must work against him we shld let him know what we think before taking action. It seems to me, particularly in view statements made to me yesterday by Ala (Embtel 1983, Nov 28),2 Shah not (rpt not) likely relish idea attempting replace Mosadeq so soon after latter’s return as natl hero and while latter is probably more popular with masses than any polit figure in many years. Henderson 2 In telegram 1983 from Tehran, November 28, Henderson reported Ala’s appraisal that Mosadeq was now displaying considerable political skills. The efforts of the Queen Mother to intrigue with Ahmad Qavam, in Ala’s estimation, were likely to backfire. The Shah had directed Ala to speak to Mosadeq, “who repeated anti-Brit line as entire justification his policies of intransigence re oil solution . . . Further, Primin expressed opinion US would give budgetary aid rather than see Iran go communist, since if economic chaos came to Iran there would be no chance for pro-Brit govt and communism would result.” (Ibid., RG 84, Tehran Embassy Files, 1950–1952, classified general records, Box 29)
