(See Appendix I for Japanese [Chinese] draft of resolution relative to the
levying of Washington surtaxes and Appendix II for the American draft on
the same subject, Minutes of March 8, 1926) Sub-committee to Draft a
Resolution on the Levying of the Washington Surtaxes, Fourth Meeting,
March 12, 1926.
At the Fourth Meeting of the subcommittee to draft a resolution on the
levying of the Washington surtaxes, held on March 12, 1926, the chairman
announced, at the beginning of the meeting, that there were only two or
three points on which agreement could not be obtained at the last meeting,
on the resolution implementing the Washington Treaty. The question of the
date of shipment arose and Colonel Peel remarked that at the previous
meetings he had objected to the principle of the date of landing on the
ground that it would be a handicap to British trade and he said that he was
still of that opinion. However, he announced that he had been instructed by
his Government to abandon, for the sake of harmony, the principle of the
date of shipping if they were allowed three months’ notice from the date of
passage of the resolution. Count de Martel supported Colonel Peel in this
position. The chairman emphasized the need of introducing the surtaxes
with as little delay as possible and said that every day of delay would cause
less money to be available to meet the purposes which might be agreed
upon. He considered that the Chinese Delegation had been very liberal in
consenting to give seventy days’ notice, which was only a difference of
about twenty days from the three months’ period suggested by Colonel Peel.
Mr. Strawn concurred in Colonel Peel’s suggestion and Mr. Oudendijk
expressed a desire to expedite the passage of the resolution with as little
further discussion as possible. Mr. Hioki said that his proposal in
connection with using the date of landing was based strictly upon a question
of principle and that so long as that principle was admitted he had no
objection to the ninety days’ notice. The chairman, however, declined to
agree to the three months, saying that the original idea was only one month,
which had been changed to a month and a half, and ten days and again to
two months and ten days, and now the Delegates had asked for ninety days.
He felt compelled, therefore, to make a reservation on the point.
The sub-committee passed on to the paragraph relating to the custody of the
funds and Mr. Hioki submitted a new draft on this point, prepared by the
