Honduras  811
situation reference ratification Honduran-Nicaraguan Accord. Pointed 
out as previously failure to ratify has put Honduras in unfavorable inter-
national position and one where at least as far as outside opinion con-
cerned Honduras could be accused of bad faith. Referred to Rubottom’s 
conversation with Foreign Relations sub-­committee (Department 
telegram 365)4 and increasing criticism of Honduran position in U.S. 
Suggested if any incident should arise resulting in Nicaraguan appeal 
OAS Honduran posture hardly favorable. Also pointed out that during 
Velasquez crisis both Department and I had done everything possible to 
assist Honduras and agreement with subsequent expulsion Velasquez 
was part of these efforts. I would undoubtedly be handicapped in future 
efforts to assist Honduras if no action taken.
Not withstanding these and other arguments Rodas Alvarado 
made following points: 1) impossible because of technical requirements 
for Congress to ratify Accord before scheduled closing tomorrow even 
were deputies willing to approve. 2) He convinced that if agreement 
were submitted to Congress at this time would definitely be rejected. He, 
Alvarado Puerto and the President have all talked with various deputies 
trying to convince them of necessity for Honduran ratification but have 
not been successful. In addition to strong emotional prejudice against 
agreement with Nicaragua, Rodas said that a majority of the deputies 
had advised Villeda against signing the agreement and hence did not feel 
any obligation when he proceeded contrary their advice. Deputies felt 
that Nicaragua itself had been guilty of bad faith during whole Velasquez 
incident since she and Honduras were already bound by previous inter-
national agreements to prevent just that sort of activity.
I am satisfied that President and Alvarado Puerto and possibly 
Rodas Alvarado have made genuine effort to obtain favorable action. 
Believe that if Rodas Alvarado’s conviction that Accord would be 
rejected is correct, lack of action is preferable such outcome, which could 
only further complicate Nicaraguan-Honduran relations. Alvarado 
Puerto has assured me as emphatically as he can that not withstanding 
lack of action on ratification, Honduras would act as though bound by 
agreement and would under no circumstances permit use her territory 
anti-Nicaraguan movements. He will also request Davila give similar 
assurances to Department.
While Embassy distressed inability obtain ratification this time I 
consider inaction essentially reflection basic public opposition Somoza 
regime and not indicative any unwillingness observe existing noninter-
vention commitments.
Newbegin
4 Not printed; 615.17/5–1959.
