942  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
aspect our dispute in Taiwan area. This draft provided no basis for 
alleging it required his side recognize anything it did not want recog­
nize or in any way prejudice his position. What this draft did do was 
require his side say unequivocally and clearly it will not use force to 
impose its views. Apparently it was that to which he objected, in fact, 
rather than to any other aspect of draft. We had done our utmost to 
produce draft which both sides could unqualifiedly accept and which 
should be accepted if [omission in the original] arriving at solution.
16. I was puzzled by and could hardly believe that he really meant 
his statement asking what purpose of peaceful negotiations would be 
if each side were free pursue its policies by peaceful means. If what he 
appeared be saying was that he saw no prospect of a solution to ques­
tions in Taiwan area unless they be able maintain their threat use force 
in that area. There was great difference between that and a renunci­
ation of force that would genuinely make possible real negotiations. 
It seemed to me that this strikes to very root of question between us 
and represents not the slightest change from announced policy with 
respect use of force which his government had long maintained. Fun­
damental question was whether his government was willing without 
reservation or purpose of evasion renounce force so that there would 
be genuine peaceful negotiations. Central thought behind my origi­
nal proposal had been and remained that genuine peaceful negotia­
tions between us on these complicated and complex problems were 
not possible under overhanging threat that one side on one pretext 
or another would resort to use of force. Renunciation of force and 
peaceful negotiations were not separate and unrelated items. If one 
was really determined discuss problem peacefully, one could not at 
same time threaten use of force with regard that problem. Unless he 
accepted that principle, I could come no conclusion other than that 
there was not genuine sharing desire my government for peaceful 
solution.
17. I said I never had and did not now ask him abandon his views 
with respect our disputes in Taiwan area, but I did ask him accept appli­
cability declaration as a whole to our disputes in Taiwan area. Not just 
that portion declaration relating peaceful negotiations but that indis­
pensable concomitant thereto, of renunciation of force. The two went 
together and could not be separated. I could not escape conclusion 
that in his insistence on linking any mention Taiwan area to Foreign 
Ministers meeting he was, in fact, separating those two fundamental 
concepts.
18. I said I also could not escape conclusion that objection to self-­
defense clause in its present position was based upon an attempt to 
obtain a document which he would interpret as renunciation by US 
of its position. I was not asking him recognize in any way US position
