International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
971
3. Fourteen Country Diplomatic Initiative
—You have mentioned publicly your interest in improving diplo-
matic relationships with the 14 countries with which we do not have
formal diplomatic relations.
—I have been attempting to pursue this recently using primarily
medicine and health but also wildlife management to open up diplo-
matic relations and to follow-up your initiative in this area in a compre-
hensive fashion. For example:
—The medical diplomacy initiative with Iraq. This has recently re-
sulted in a formal request from the Minister of Health for assistance in
medical and public health despite the fact that we do not have diplo-
matic relations with them.
—The People’s Republic of China. I have been encouraging and in-
volving the private physicians in the United States to become involved
in diplomatic initiatives. Most recently, the U.S.-Chinese Friendship
Association met with the Vice Minister of Health and the Chinese For-
eign Minister, Huang Hua, and provisionally agreed to send a medical
team to the United States next year.
—The People’s Republic of Mongolia has been quite interested in
wildlife management and endangered species. I have been very quietly
working with experts in the wildlife management and endangered
species area to develop communications linkages directly with the
Mongolian officials and through the Soviet Union.
—Somalia. We have been successful as the result of my discussions
in Geneva in placing five U.S. Public Health Service people in Somalia
to work on the smallpox eradication program.
—Cuba. The Minister of Health of Cuba complained about isola-
tion from U.S. medical/scientific journals. We have been able to
identify problems in the transfer of this literature; I believe we have
worked out an arrangement where it will not be a problem in the near
future.
4. The Soviet Proposal to Involve Them in Third World Medical Assist-
ance Projects with the U.S.
—This proposal3 has been widely accepted throughout the gov-
ernment as a unique and creative proposal that will have the effect of
reducing the competition over potentially neutral countries which are
in need of medical and public health assistance. The State Department
is now preparing to formally propose this proposal after months of
preparation of the concept.
—To involve the Soviet Union in an international human needs en-
deavor with the United States will be a dramatic manifestation of the
effect of your international human needs/human rights policy, and
will give them an opportunity to score big internationally with you in
3 See Document 286.
