362
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The President said the whole text of the Camp David agreement
should be appended in any case to the exchange of letters. It would be
better not to start selecting different parts of the agreement. The Presi-
dent said that he also suggested a letter on U.N. forces. There could be a
problem if the Soviets or the Chinese refused to approve the stationing
of U.N. forces in the demilitarized zones. The United States wants to in-
sure that the treaty would not fail on this account. The President would
be prepared to send the letter which he showed to the Egyptian delega-
tion. El-Erian said that the letter was acceptable.
The President said that there could be troops from many different
nations, provided they were mutually acceptable. If Begin accepts all of
these suggestions, we will have resolved all of the difficulties. We will
try to get the Israelis to drop any reference to Egyptian internal law. We
also talked to them about the missiles, and have said that only SA–7
missiles should be allowed across the canal. The other missiles could
move up the canal. This can be done as soon as the treaty is signed. This
is acceptable to Israel. Boutros Ghali said this would be all right.
Atherton said that three annexes remained to be completed. The
one7 dealing with diplomatic relations was most important. It needs to
be worked out in detail. Boutros Ghali said that he hoped to get answers
from Sadat. The question of the settlement is also unresolved. He did
not want to put the reference to one month for the exchange of ambas-
sadors in the treaty. He asked if this could be handled in a letter. Egypt
agrees and will do it. He will send a letter to Dayan if necessary.
The President said that he would try to work this out. If Sadat
agrees to do this within a month, perhaps he can refer to it in a letter
along with the letter that says negotiations will begin within one
month. The President said that he would try to get the Israelis to accept
the idea of referring to this in a letter rather than in the annex to the
treaty.
El-Erian said the Israelis are also asking for a guaranteed oil
supply. They want an advantageous position. They will already have a
de facto advantage because of their location. The President said that he
agreed with Egypt on this point. Atherton said the oil experts have not
yet begun meeting and the talks could be complicated. The President
said that he would not support the idea that Israel has any right to pref-
erential treatment on oil. Maybe they can negotiate a five-year supply
contract, but Israel cannot demand this of Egypt. This should not hold
up the signing of the treaty. Israel should not have to be given preferen-
tial treatment. Boutros Ghali said that he agreed this should not delay
the treaty. The President said that Israel already had some advantage
7 See Annex III.
