1956  733
part your government to take this first and essential step toward find­
ing genuinely peaceful solution our differences. I am reluctant believe 
you have all along been contemplating declaration that would not have 
been reunification force at all, but rather only pious repetition in bilat­
eral form of hope that our two countries might settle their differences 
peacefully. Was that hope not already implicit in agreement both sides 
to hold these talks? Was it not our purpose in these talks progress from 
hope to realization of hope?
N. As I say, Mr. Ambassador, I am truly reluctant believe your 
objective in these discussions has been, not to carry us forward, but to 
take us back to July 25 last year or even prior that time.
O. I am left, however, with just two alternative conclusions. First 
is, as I have previously pointed out, your position constitutes demand 
that in negotiating this declaration, US concede to you all points in 
dispute in Taiwan area, rather than properly leaving them for discus­
sion following agreement between us to declare we will not resort 
force settle those disputes. Second, is that your objection to self-­defense 
clause arises from fact that you view it in different context from one 
in which it was intended to be seen. I have tried make it clear, in its 
intended context, self-­defense clause implies no more nor less than this 
utterly reasonable proposition: if either party should in violation of 
declaration initiate hostilities, then other party may defend itself. I am 
unable suggest any [garble] in which that can be set forth than in my 
amended draft January 12. If you have other suggestions I shall be glad 
hear them.
2. Wang said he had difficulty understanding my statement and 
its interpretation, would like retire with assistants to another room 
to check notes. I agreed. Wang and assistants were out of room from 
10:36 to 10:55.
3. On his return, Wang said he had spent few minutes checking 
notes with interpretation of statement I had made this morning. He 
agreed that we holding these talks in order settle more important and 
urgent dispute now existing between China and US.
4. Wang said they had always held hope dispute between two 
countries might be settled peacefully without use force. At same time 
they had hoped that Ambassadorial level talks might achieve results 
they  called upon to achieve. However, with reluctance he had to 
say they disappointed every time.
5. Wang said this been caused by rigid attitude on part US 
­Government which delaying progress and success talks. We find 
selves at moment still confronted with most urgent and grave dispute 
unsettled between our two countries. For instance, situation exactly 
so with regard to negotiations on declaration between both sides, as
