Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII when and if this occurs. It would, therefore, be in our interest to begin thinking about how we will handle this situation in terms of US- Soviet relations, SALT, and the Congress in advance. Otherwise, an intelligence “breakthrough,” plus a press leak, or a Congressman’s statement about “Soviet brigades in Afghanistan” could put us right back in another US-Soviet confrontation. At a minimum, we should try to ensure that any public announcement of such an intelligence finding be placed in the proper context. This would suggest an official spokesman’s statement that while we deplore Soviet intervention we see it as a sign of the failure of Soviet policy and not as a success. Moreover, I recommend that you discuss with Stan Turner how to ensure that intelligence reports on Soviet military actions are not allowed to reach persons who might make them public in a sensational manner. In particular, we should consider ending our present practice of treating this subject in the NID and other publications which receive wide distribution. Instead we should work with CIA to develop a means of providing this information only to a carefully selected list of officials under stringent controls over further dissemination. We should also consider similar restrictions on cables from Embassy Kabul which deal with Soviet military involvement in Afghanistan. Editorial Note Following an October 4, 1979, meeting with the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs, Zbigniew Brzezinski, Director of Central Intelligence Stansfield Turner wrote in a memorandum for the record: “We discussed the Afghan situation and reported that we have disbursed the funds authorized.” Brzezinski “suggested we come in for more. I said no. I said that all the signs were that only arms were really wanted at this point. He then indicated that he was really the one who advised Mubarak that he would try to get the Paks to buy Russian arms from the Egyptians to give to the Afghans. I didn’t make any real progress on where that left us from a legal point of view.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelli-
