160
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
55.
Memorandum From Thomas Thornton and Marshall
Brement of the National Security Council Staff to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, July 19, 1979
SUBJECT
Soviet Feeler on Afghanistan (C)
We convened a meeting this afternoon of Soviet and Afghan spe-
cialists from State and CIA to discuss how we should respond to the
message conveyed to our charge in Kabul by the GDR Ambassador.
(You will remember that he alerted us that the Soviets would try to
oust Amin, probably during August, but that they intended to “protect
the Afghan revolution.” He also suggested that the situation might
become bloody and pointedly said that he was sending his family
home.)2 (S)
We did not come to any agreed conclusions about what the Soviets
really mean by passing this signal—perhaps just to alert us to protect
our people since we have been hitting them hard in the aftermath
of the Dubs killing, or perhaps they want us to acquiesce in Soviet
establishment of a new government. (S)
For starters we decided to move along two tracks:
1. Amstutz will be deciding on Saturday whether to evacuate
dependents. (There are other good reasons to do so beside the German’s
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Office File,
Country Chron File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 1979. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information.
The memorandum is stamped “ZB has seen.”
2 Amstutz reported on his “extraordinary meeting” with GDR Ambassador to
Afghanistan Dr. Hermann Schwiesau in telegram 5459 from Kabul, July 18. Schwiesau
asserted that it was Amin, not Taraki, who effectively controlled the government, and
that Soviet Minister-Counselor Safronchuk was working “behind the scenes” with DRA
officials to bring about a “radical change” in leadership through an internal military
coup. Schwiesau further noted that it would not be possible for Amin and the exiled
Parchamist leader Babrak Karmal to be part of the same government; nonetheless, the
current Khalqi-dominated government needed to extend its base and share more power
with the Parchamists. (Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 5, Soviets
in Afghanistan—General Part #1) According to [text not declassified], March 28, Amin’s
elevation the previous day from Deputy Prime Minister to Prime Minister (Taraki
remained President) “grants recognition of” Amin’s “de facto control of the country’s
affairs.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Job 91T00761R, Box 2, Taraki, Nur Mohammed)
