September 18–December 16, 1978 537 152. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, December 6, 1978 SUBJECT Strategy for the Vance Trip to the Middle East (U) My approach (unpoutful) would be as follows: Key Objective (U) —Signing of the Egypt-Israel peace treaty and a letter on West Bank/Gaza negotiations by December 17. The failure to meet the deadline will be seen as an erosion of the Camp David agreement.2 (TS) —Alternatively, position ourselves so that our links to Egypt and moderate Arabs will be preserved even if the negotiations reach an impasse.3 (S) Substance (U) —Urge Sadat to accept treaty text as it now stands. (Fallback of minor change in Article VI, paragraph 2).4 (C) —Rely on interpretive letters to explain that Egypt can honor collective defense commitments, or a strong unilateral Egyptian statement.5 (U) —Side-letter on West Bank/Gaza negotiations with target date for elections by end of 1979. (Some variants may be possible; e.g., objective of concluding negotiations within nine months of ratification—to coincide with interim withdrawal—and holding of elections within three months thereof.)6 (S) Tactics for Egypt (U) —Prospect of expanding cooperation with U.S. as part of regional strategy. Would entail greater military assistance. (C) —Our willingness to press Israel hard on target date and on settlements issue. (C) 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Geographic File, Box 14, Middle East—Negotiations: (9/77–12/78). Top Secret; Outside System. Sent for information. The date is handwritten. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the memorandum, indicating that he saw it. 2 In the margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “OK.” 3 In the margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “OK.” 4 In the margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “[paragraph] 5.” 5 In the margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “OK.” 6 In the margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “OK.”
