Czechoslovakia 287 settlement of claims/gold (ref B).4 We also were inclined to move as quickly as possible to sign the scientific/cultural exchanges agreement and its implementation programs. Moreover, we were prepared fairly soon to notify the GOC of a reduction in prior notification time for their merchant ships to enter US ports and to recommend favorable and prompt USG consideration of bilateral agreements with Czechoslovakia in the civil air and textile fields. Of special short-term significance, we were ready to urge the Department to start active preparation for the planned visit to Washington, perhaps in April, of Deputy Foreign Minister Spacil at Assistant Secretary Hartman’s invitation. 3. At this point, however, I think it would be wrong to play “business-as-usual” by moving ahead promptly in areas of our bilateral relations mentioned above. It is clear that the GOC wants to play that way. For example, on January 10 the Acting Director of the MFA Sixth Department told me at a reception at the Ministry that the text of the exchanges agreement had been sent the previous day by Foreign Minister Chnoupek to other agencies of the Czechoslovak Government for their consideration; MFA efforts to expedite approving the agreement for signature seem to be coming substantially ahead of the “three month” schedule originally indicated. In a possibly related move to improve US–GOC ties, the Minister of Foreign Trade told Economics Counselor on Jan. 20 he was eager to meet Secretary Kreps (ref C).5 4. Rather than play along with the GOC, I propose that for the time being we move forward only in those areas that are of direct and important interest to the US (such as the Civil Air Agreement) and 4 In telegram 74 from Prague, January 7, the Embassy reported that, with the completion of all minor steps for improvement of relations between the United States and Czechoslovakia, Washington must again tackle the claims/gold issue. The Embassy stressed that fast action was needed to maintain the momentum in improving U.S.- Czechoslovak relations, and delay in proposing a new settlement would lead to a worsening of relations between the two countries. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770006–1331) The claims/gold issue was the major remaining obstacle to normalization of relations between the United States and Czechoslovakia. The conflict stemmed from claims against Czechoslovakia by U.S. citizens for nationalized property in Czechoslovakia following World War II. The settlement of the claims issue was a prerequisite for the return to Czechoslovakia of 18.4 tons of Nazi-looted gold, due to the GOC on the basis of the Paris Reparation Agreement of 1946 by the Tripartite Commission (United States, United Kingdom, and France). The United States held 8.7 tons, with the balance being held in London. The last agreement was initialed in 1974, but was blocked by an amendment introduced by Senator Russell B. Long (D-Louisiana) to the 1974 Trade Act. The amendment required congressional approval for any agreement on the claims/gold issue. 5 In telegram 219 from Prague, January 21, the Embassy reported that Czechoslovak Foreign Trade Minister Barcak was interested in meeting Secretary Kreps. The Embassy recommended that, because of the anti-Western campaign in Czechoslovakia, as well as the ongoing trials and arrests of dissidents, such a high-level meeting was inopportune. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, [no film number])
