Panama  921
deter our efforts to achieve over-­increasing understanding between one 
and two countries. For my part, accordingly, I have approved a number 
of revisions in operating policies of the Canal Zone authorities which 
result from a meeting of representatives of our two Governments in 
which you actively participated. I trust that these actions, the substance 
of which will be communicated to you by Ambassador Harrington, will 
redound to the benefit of the people of Panama.
I am confident that it is your desire, as it is mine, that our two 
countries should continue their traditionally close cooperation to insure 
the efficient operation of the Panama Canal for the benefit of the entire 
world.5
Sincerely,
5 In view of the riots that occurred in Panama City on November 3, 1959, Ambassador 
Harrington, in the course of a telephone conversation on November 4 with C. Allen 
Stewart, the Director of the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs, recom-
mended against delivery on November 5 of President Eisenhower’s letter to President de 
la Guardia. Stewart accepted Harrington’s recommendation and advised the Ambassador 
that the Department would furnish the Embassy with instructions as to further action 
concerning delivery of the President’s letter. (Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, 
by Frederick D. Sharp III, November 4; 719.00/11–459) on November 4, the Department 
instructed Harrington to return the President’s letter to the Department via air pouch. 
(Telegram 151 to Panama City; 719.11–459) For additional information concerning the 
riots in Panama City on November 3, see the editorial note in Document PM–23..
PM–23.	
Editorial Note
Responding on November 3, 1959, to demands from leaders of the 
Third National Party that United States authorities honor Panama’s 
Independence Day celebrations by flying the Panamanian flag along-
side the American flag in the Panama Canal Zone as a symbol of 
Panamanian sovereignty, demonstrators in Panama City attempted to 
enter the Canal Zone and to raise the Panamanian flag there. Prevented 
by United States police from entering this area, the demonstrators pro-
ceeded to the United States Embassy in Panama City, tore down and 
destroyed the American flag flying outside the building, and raised the 
Panamanian flag in its place. Demonstrators also shattered windows 
in the United States Information Office in Panama City and initiated 
disorders in the city of Colón, at the Atlantic end of the Canal Zone. 
Further incidents occurred on November 4, but the situation improved 
sufficiently on November 5 to enable the authorities in the Canal Zone 
to withdraw United States troops from guard duty. As a result of these 
riots, over 80 American police and Panamanian nationals received 
treatment for injuries.
