Non-Proliferation
925
view, to exert appropriate influence in order to ensure the adoption of
the needed decision by the Council of Ministers of the European Com-
munity. We hope that the U.S. side will take the necessary steps in this
matter.
We believe it necessary to call to the attention of the U.S. side the
fact that, along with resolution of matters pertaining to ensuring ade-
quate safeguards for light water reactors in the EURATOM countries, it
is necessary to seek the earliest resolution of the question of implemen-
tation of effective IAEA safeguards for other nuclear facilities, above all
for nuclear fuel processing plants. At present, the main principle con-
cerning implementation of safeguards on these facilities, that is, the
principle of continuous inspection, has been preliminarily agreed. Rep-
resentatives of EURATOM, while formally supporting this principle,
are in effect working toward undermining it in developing the practical
provisions. Resolution of this question calls for adoption of effective
agreed measures. In this connection we would deem it advisable for
our Missions in Vienna to give highest priority to the solution of this
matter.
As before, the question of a radical increase in the effectiveness of
IAEA safeguards remains unresolved. The measures taken by the Sec-
retariat upon the recommendations of the USSR and U.S. have not
brought the necessary results.3 As yet, work on evaluating the effec-
tiveness of safeguards has not been properly organized. This task also
requires agreed action by our Missions in Vienna.
In this connection we should again like to call the attention of the
U.S. side to the need to replace Deputy Director General for Safeguards
Romech. As a result of our consultations, a decision was made to the ef-
fect that Romech would leave his post in May of this year. The question
of choosing a candidate for this post now arises. As you know, we sup-
ported the nomination of Jenikens, a Canadian, who, as we understand
it, is also supported by the U.S. our Missions in Vienna would now be
well advised to work without delay in support of this candidate. End
text.
Warnke
3 See footnote 3, Document 360. Telegram 10676 from Vienna, December 14, also re-
ported that “responding to U.S. initiatives, IAEA Secretariat is trying to implement more
stringent non-proliferation safeguards measures” but noted that the Secretariat “antici-
pates considerable difficulty in achieving this upgrading in view of opposition by EU-
RATOM and certain important governments and need for Board of Governors to provide
necessary manpower and other resource approvals.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D770465–1102)
