National Security Policy 1055 17. Coastal Defense. There is little evidence concerning the size of coastal artillery; our estimate is about 15,000 men. As earlier noted, antiaircraft artillery for defense of key naval bases and coastal areas is included in our total for antiaircraft artillery. Naval personnel also par­ ticipate in the overall air defense warning and control system. VI. MILITARY TRANSPORT AVIATION 55,000 18. The overall Soviet military air transport is estimated on the basis of calculations from the aircraft Order of Battle to total about 55,000 men. The assignments of transport units from Military Transport Aviation are indicated in the Table. VII. PREOPERATIONAL AVIATION TRAINING 110,000 19. In addition to the more than half-­million men in the five opera­ tional air forces, there is a substantial preoperational training establish­ ment. In light of the probable requirements of the Soviet Air Forces, we estimate the strength of these training facilities at about 110,000 men. A substantial part of the ground crews and general support personnel probably receive their initial training in courses conducted within the operational field establishment. VIII. SECURITY FORCES 250,000 20. The strength of the Border Troops of the KGB can be estimated with some assurance; including customs guards, about 5,000 maritime security men, and support personnel, they total about 150,000 men. The strength of the Internal Troops is much more uncertain, but one division and a number of small independent “regiments” (of about 800 men each) have been identified, and there is evidence of many per­ sonnel guarding bridges and other installations. In all, we estimate the internal troops to total about 75,000 men. In addition, there are about 15,000 men in special Signal Troop Regiments of the KGB, and on the order of 10,000 men in the Convoy Troops, who guard prisoners in tran­ sit and in detention. IX. NOTE CONCERNING CIVILIANS 21. There are a substantial but unknown number of civilians work­ ing for the Soviet military establishment. The major part of scientific research and development with military uses is conducted by the Academy of Sciences, by the State Committees for Defense Technology, Aviation Technology, Scientific-­Technical matters, Radio-­Electronics, and Shipbuilding, and by the Ministry of Medium Machine Building (nuclear weapons development and production). Moreover, there is evidence that some functions previously conducted by military person­ nel have in the course of reductions in recent years come increasingly to be filled by civilian employees, particularly in construction activity and other aspects of logistics.
