502  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
II. BACKGROUND
This is an informal meeting held at the request of Senators Nunn 
and Warner to express their concerns about the prospects on the Hill for 
the strategic modernization program. They will tell you that the “two-­
missile program” will not survive without a major arms control initia-
tive and that B–2 and SDI are “in trouble.” You will want to draw them 
out on these subjects as well as on Congressional support for troop lev-
els in Europe and on the defense budget as a whole.
Support for strategic modernization last year was very thin and 
required the investment of considerable political capital and time by 
you, Dick Cheney and our arms control negotiators. The political climate 
this year is far less supportive. We face a major attack on the defense 
budget, the belief by some that the strategic threat is now appreciably 
lessened, a growing clamor for payment of the “peace dividend,” and 
election year politics. Yet with START in the balance, strategic modern-
ization may be even more important.
ICBM Modernization. Your FY 1991 defense budget calls for 
$2.8 billion for the Peacekeeper ICBM, most of which is for the rede-
ployment of the missile from its silos to rail garrison. It also includes 
$202 million for continued development of the small mobile ICBM, 
the Midgetman. The first trains with Peacekeeper would be deployed 
in 1992 and the first Midgetman in 1997.
The two missiles have survived in Congress as a package. The coa-
lition that has supported both missiles was built largely around polit-
ical compromises to support one missile in return for support for the 
other, and was never very strong. That coalition is vanishing and there 
has not been a majority who support either missile for a year or more.
Now Warner has said that we cannot afford both systems; Nunn 
has called for a revision to START to ban mobile MIRVs and said that 
we should delay the treaty if necessary to achieve this; Aspin has said 
the US can no longer justify systems as needed for bargaining leverage. 
These are the members who led the fight to support the two missile pro-
gram last year.
If both programs are cancelled there is a real possibility that the 
START treaty would not be ratified since the Soviets already have two 
deployed mobile systems and we will have none. This problem will be 
compounded if the B–2 program is sharply curtailed and we are not 
able to take full advantage of the bomber counting rule in START.
Nunn will push for a change to our START position to explicitly 
ban mobile MIRVs. While I am attracted to this idea, I am concerned 
that anything we do now will delay the conclusion of START and 
potentially give the Soviets an opening to charge that we are inten-
tionally delaying the treaty. I will have some specific ideas to discuss 
with you soon. At this point, however, I note that there are no quick or
