National Security Policy 479 TRENDS IN SPECIALIZED SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL CAPABILITIES Nuclear Weapons12 104. The USSR is making a concerted effort to perfect a variety of improved nuclear weapons, particularly those employing thermonu­ clear principles. Of the 42 Soviet nuclear tests detected between August 1949 and 10 October 1957, a total of 23 have been detected since January 1956, [text not declassified]. We estimate that the Soviet weapons stock­ pile in 1957 could include a variety of nuclear weapons, with yields ranging from about 4 kilotons (KT) up into the megaton range. 105. In general, we anticipate that the USSR will be capable of producing improved nuclear weapons of the yields and characteris­ tics needed to support its military requirements. By 1958–59, the most powerful Soviet bombs could probably yield up to 20 MT, but the max­ imum yields of missile warheads will continue to be considerably less than this. In addition to the monuclear [mononuclear] weapons, a wide variety of fission weapons, including very small, low-­yield weapons, will become available. We believe that development of advanced weap­ ons will require additional testing. The absence of such tests, however, would not preclude Soviet stockpiling of very high yield (above 8 MT) weapons on an emergency or provisional basis. 106. Although we estimate a substantial Soviet program for the expansion of fissionable material production, the availability of such materials will continue throughout the period of this estimate to be a limiting factor in determining the size of many military and nonmilitary programs. Our estimate of the cumulative quantities of nuclear mate­ rials available for weapon uses is given below. The amounts have been calculated by deducting from estimated production those quantities of nuclear materials estimated to meet pre-1957 nuclear test expenditures, and to meet the inventory and fuel requirements of research and power reactors. No deductions have been made for production reactor expen­ ditures, future nuclear tests, propulsion applications, or materials tied up in weapons manufacturing pipelines. If a major nuclear propulsion program were undertaken, this would require substantial allocations of nuclear material.13 12 For detailed estimates of Soviet capabilities in nuclear weapons design and dates of availability, see NIE 11–2–57, The Soviet Atomic Energy Program, 7 May 1957 (Limited Distribution). [Footnote is in the original.] 13 The Director of Naval Intelligence does not concur in the quantities of fissionable materials listed herein as available for weapons uses, nor in the estimated production of fissionable materials upon which these figures are based. He believes that the quantities of material which will be available for weapons use will not exceed the lower limit of uncertainty indicated for the estimate. [Footnote is in the original.]
