610  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
the reported appointment to the Secretariat of Casa Presidential of Julio 
Fausto Fernandez. Lemus seems unable to determine correctly where 
his best interests lie.
The real test of whether Lemus is to continue in office promises to 
come when the state of siege is lifted (indications are that the thirty-­day 
period will be extended) although the Communist elements are now at 
work and the government anticipates further trouble. Renewed efforts 
at disturbances are appearing. A meeting, subsequently cancelled, was 
called for the 23rd at Parque Libertad. A clandestine radio is operat-
ing from across the border in Honduras. It could, of course, be that 
the above signs are the last actions of a dying cause. However, we do 
not think so. Rubio Melhado asserts that arms are being shipped to 
El Salvador from California, New Orleans and Miami. The President has 
asked our help with a reported military movement against El Salvador 
allegedly being hatched in Mexico.
My best guess is that at this moment there is a strong chance Lemus 
will survive the next few months, an even chance that he will last a 
year, but questionable if he can hold on to his office until the end of his 
term. This guess could easily be upset by further Lemus blunders. Note 
that the cabinet still remains firm. If Lemus survives the present cri-
sis, he could not survive a second, should one appear. These views are 
also shared by some of the cabinet, one or two of whom are completely 
pessimistic.
Impelled by Castro-­communist forces, whose influence on local 
situation can only be underestimated at country’s peril, the current sit-
uation has evolved into one of many complex facets. It must be recog-
nized as well that basic forces at work here are centrifugal in nature 
tending to pull apart the oligarchy consisting of the Army, Church and 
wealthy class upon which the present government is based. In this 
context, it is only possible to generalize re attitudes of the following 
elements:
1. Military. With few individual exceptions the Army would prefer 
see this government run its constitutional course. While Lemus is not 
popular among officer corps, he symbolizes constitutionality and, of 
all elements here, Army believed to be strongest backer this concept. 
Army perhaps more realistic and better able to see where its own best 
interests lie; to date we have had no tangible evidence that top echelon 
is other than prepared to back Lemus government. Should government 
begin to disintegrate from within, believe, however, that Army would 
move decisively to take power into its own hands and that it would 
succeed.
2. 14 families and their supporters. Current attitude this element gen-
erally as outlined above. While willing for most part to help Lemus, if 
indeed he will permit himself to be helped, there is strong undercurrent of
