893.74/596: Telegram
[Document 756]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
PEKING, August 22, 1925—4 p.m.
[Received 5:50 p.m.]
345. My telegram No. 330, August 14, 10 p.m.
1. From a source hitherto found reliable and believed to be so in this instance,
representatives of the Federal wireless interests have learned that in
consequence of the unremitting pressure from the Japanese Legation,
Provisional Chief Executive has directed that the interministerial committee
must report in favor of the cancellation of the Federal contract.
2. Minister of Communications who originally concluded and is favorable to
the American contracts is helpless in the matter but is reported to intend
saving face by recommending that the Mitsui contract be simultaneously
canceled. Such cancellation of the Japanese contract would not of course
eliminate the station actually built thereunder or relieve Chinese Government
from its financial obligation which might well prove actually heavier on a
quantum meruit basis than under the terms of the contract.
3. The result would be that the American interests would be left with a bare
claim against the Chinese Government; whereas Japanese interests would
have not only a claim but a station in being and capable of actual though
inefficient commercial operation and would then be in a position to demand
that arrangements be made to enable their station to be so used as to make it
reliable security for the debt incurred in its construction.
4. This fits in with a plan which the Japanese Minister has for some time
been persistently urging upon the Chief Executive in behalf of Mitsui
Company, whereby the Chinese Government would authorize that company
to operate station in its behalf under a nominally provisional arrangement
pending settlement of the question of Mitsui’s claim to a monopoly; in the
meanwhile station should “start operations for transmission of all commercial
messages for Japan, Europe, America and other overseas points” and the
Chinese Government would permit station to connect with the Chinese
telegraph system and would direct that all messages routed by wireless to
