12
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
glected by the Central Government, and to be lacking in any real anti-
Communist feelings. The Soviets undoubtedly could, if they wished,
send into the area the Barzanis (greatly strengthened with Soviet na-
tionals), together with groups which could be labeled refugees from the
“Democratic” government. If at the same time the Kurds and the Azer-
baijanis could be incited to rebel, a situation which might lead to a civil
war can easily be imagined.
The foregoing possibility should not be confused with that set
forth under paragraph (b). The situation envisaged here is one in which
a prolonged civil war, with the insurgents receiving supplies across the
border, might be developed. Such a move, if successful, could easily
drain all of the country’s military energy and lead to a situation in
which resistance to Soviet pressure would eventually be effectively de-
stroyed unless, of course, outside strength should be added to that
available to the Central Government.
(f) At the Propitious Moment, to Renew Their Demand for the Northern
Oil Concession—
The Soviets certainly have not forgotten how they were tricked out
of the northern oil concession. It is possible that they might eventually
decide to renew their demands for that concession, perhaps selecting a
moment for action in which Iranian fears have become really excited. A
flood of Russian “technicians” into the area would make it fairly easy
for the Soviets to obtain political control of the region, and possibly
even to elect Majlis deputies who could carry the Communist line into
the Majlis.
(g) At the Propitious Moment, to Renew Their Demands for the Dis-
missal of the Two American Military Missions—
The presence of the American Military Missions with the Iranian
Army and Iranian Gendarme´rie serves, from our point of view, much
more of a political than military purpose. Their presence also is none
[more?] proof, to the Iranians who see them every day, of American in-
terest in the maintenance of the integrity of Iran.
It is possible that the Soviets might again be led to demand their
dismissal, thinking that through such a move the Iranians might be
made to feel a greater abandonment by the West. It is not unlikely,
should such a maneuver be successful and given the continued weak-
ening of the Iranian will to resist, that the Soviets might then endeavor
to impose their own military missions upon the country.
(h) Increased Tudeh Activity—
There has been, within the past several months, a considerable in-
crease in Tudeh activities. That increase is not as apparent in terms of
visible demonstration as in terms of indications. Yet, there are outward
signs, as in the case of inspired disturbances in the secondary school
