1636 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Seismic Improvement and the Panel on High Altitude Detection clearly demonstrate the need for a program of creative research and exper­ imentation if the capabilities and limitations of systems designed to detect and identify nuclear explosions are to be adequately understood. While the Committee’s immediate concern is with the scientific and technical aspects of this problem, it recognizes that the under-­ standing of this problem from the point of view of national security requires the integrated study of a combination of military, technical, and political factors. It seems clear that there is no single department in government with the combination of technical, military, and political resources to study all of these factors in depth or arrive at fully inte­ grated judgments on the entire problem. The resulting organizational problems must be successfully resolved in order for studies in this area to be really responsive to the needs of policy decisions on questions of the limitation and control of armaments. The President’s Science Advisory Committee recommends that steps be taken to initiate a sustained program of systematic study, including appropriate research and experimentation, on the military and technical aspects of possible international agreements concerned with the limitation and control of armaments and that consideration be given to the manner in which this program can be most effectively organized and conducted. J.R. Killian, Jr. 455. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, April 7, 1959 SUBJECT Surprise Attack Study PARTICIPANTS Mr. Herter, Acting Secretary of State Mr. Quarles, Deputy Secretary of Defense Mr. Irwin, Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA) Mr. Farley, S/AE Mr. Quarles outlined the thinking of the Department of Defense regarding the proposed surprise attack study, as presented in his letter 1 Source: Discussion of proposed surprise attack study. Confidential. 2 pp. NARA, RG 59, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 64 D 199.
