793.00/146
[Document 677]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
MANCHESTER, MASS., August 19, 1925.
[Received August 20.]
No. 753
SIR: In my note No. 738 of the 11th instant on the subject of China I had the honour to
state that His Majesty’s Government would regard it as most unfortunate if the replies
of all the Powers to the Chinese note were not identical, and I added that my
Government regarded this as an essential sign of solidity in the interests of which they
were prepared to defer to the American draft.
His Majesty’s Government now have reason to believe that the Japanese Government
may be inclined to question the inclusion of Chinese tariff autonomy in the agenda of
the conference to be held in the near future, and that the Japanese attitude may result in
a divergence of view between the Powers and consequent further delay in replying to
the Chinese note. This being so, His Majesty’s Representative at Peking has been
reminded that recent developments in China would seem to indicate the use of a
movement aiming at the abolition of extraterritoriality and looking to complete fiscal
autonomy. This movement, in the opinion of my Government, cannot be ignored and
can only be met by a gradual and dignified surrender of treaty rights by the Powers.
As you are aware, His Majesty’s Government were originally in favour of indicating
their policy, as outlined very briefly above, in their reply to the Chinese note. When,
however, the British draft note was amended by the Japanese Government my
Government did not adopt a rigid attitude but recommended the Japanese alterations to
the United States and other Governments concerned, although His Majesty’s
Government are still inclined to feel that it would be more advantageous to adopt the
course originally suggested. Should the United States and Japan agree to omit all
mention of the decision of the Powers to consider helpfully the reasonable and just
aspirations of China on the question of tariffs, or succeed in agreeing to a formula of
compromise, His Majesty’s Government would offer no objection.
Mr. Palairet has had it made clear to him, however, that if no agreement can be arrived
at between the Governments of the United States and of Japan, His Majesty’s
Government would have no option but to decide upon a draft of their own similar, if
not identic, with either the Japanese or American. I need hardly add that my
Government would regret exceedingly having to take such action, as it would
