Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 69 This statement of renewed American commitment comes at a time of great promise in our country. We are a young Administration— some 90 hours old. We have come to office following a long period of difficulty in the United States, and of doubt among friends about our will and steadfastness. But this has also been a time of promising change in America, just as in Europe and elsewhere in the world. As President Carter said in his inaugural address, “The world itself now is dominated by a new spirit.”3 I share his belief that in the United States “there is evident a serious and purposeful rekindling of confidence.” There is a new understanding of our society and appreciation of our recognized limits. But there is also a new faith in the strength of our democratic system of government, a new willingness to meet challenges and continuing responsibilities abroad. Some of these challenges are unfamiliar to us all—as the wind of change has transformed so much of the world. We are ready to play our role in meeting these challenges. But we believe the requirement for leadership and creativity also falls upon our friends and allies in Europe, Japan, and elsewhere. I share the confidence of President Carter that, together, we will be equal to the tasks of the future as we have met those in the past. To this end, the United States is wholeheartedly dedicated: —To the security, prosperity, and well-being of our people and of our allies; —To “eternal vigilance” in preserving peace; and —To promoting human values and human dignity for people everywhere. In cooperation with our friends abroad, President Carter is proceeding immediately with steps to strengthen the American economy. He is proceeding with steps which will enable the United States to help meet the extraordinary energy challenge facing all our countries. He is giving priority attention to the agenda of vital economic and political issues before the industrialized nations of the West—in Europe, North America, and Japan. And President Carter is deeply conscious of the aspirations of people in the world’s developing nations and of the need for all of us to seek new and cooperative relations with these countries. President Carter takes office at a time when we have moved from the rigid period of the cold war into a period of expanded contact and greater potential for accommodation—for mutual benefit—with potential adversaries in particular but still limited areas. It is now possible to talk, where before it was only possible to confront one another in deadly and undiminished hostility. And it is imperative that we con- 3 See Document 15.
