3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1980
789
terms of our existing legal agreements with the Soviet Union. We will
continue our other arms control negotiations, including MBFR and
chemical warfare treaty. We have a common interest in the NPT review
and in going ahead with the CSCE review in Madrid. Dobrynin inter-
jected that Moscow until now is prepared for Madrid also. The Secre-
tary added that we are trying to move our British friends on the site
numbers for CTB and it is just possible that we will see more positive
action there. In the more general bilateral areas, cultural and scientific,
we are pursuing these activities at lower levels and at a slowed-down
pace but they should be kept in place for the future because it will be
easier to build on them than to reinitiate. The Secretary concluded that
our relationships are under strain and there are indeed many negative
factors on the immediate horizon, but there is a basic desire on our part
to get the relationship back on track through frank talks, to develop a
more stable understanding in the important areas such as arms control,
Southwest Asia, Southeast Asia, etc.
Dobrynin replied that this was his assessment of our policy. He
was very unhappy with the present state of affairs. As he saw it, there is
nothing but negativism for now and the immediate future. It was his
impression that the US is disrupting our relationship so completely that
it now affects even the least things between us. It took years to build the
relationship which the US is so easily disrupting. That kind of relation-
ship cannot be rebuilt possibly until the end of a second term, at which
time the US will only be where it was when the Administration began.
In the meantime, the US reaction is moving the Soviets to a counter-
reaction, internally, not seen but happening with considerable emotion
and even if it doesn’t show, it will be difficult to handle later on.
The Secretary asked Dobrynin what he saw in the future con-
cerning the Afghanistan problem. He would be ready to sit down and
discuss this with Dobrynin when he returned or to discuss it with Gro-
myko when we could also discuss broader concerns. Dobrynin won-
dered if this would be fruitful given the mood of the present US
Administration.
Dobrynin reverted to US negativism again and the Secretary re-
minded him of Soviet negativism in Afghanistan. Dobrynin replied:
But you ask how Moscow sees things, and they see this Administration
as 100 percent negative, right down to the lesser things. He cited as
examples:
—PanAm refused to ship the coffin containing the wife of the UN
Deputy Secretary General for Political Affairs, Mrs. Sytenko. PanAm
said this was against PanAm policy so the coffin went on Polish air-
lines. (Comment: PanAm had labor union difficulty on all freight ship-
ments to USSR at that time. The Department was not asked to help.)
