626  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
of horizontal vice vertical shelters to ease verification concerns (this 
is the only one of the original options which has basically remained 
intact).
—Common M–X/Trident II in SILOs, at Sea and Aboard Aircraft—­a 
partly common missile for use in Trident submarines (more capable 
missile, therefore less submarines), in STOL aircraft and in fixed SILOs. 
This option also accelerates the cruise missile carrier program. This is 
a hybrid (costing more than the other two options) which features the 
largest increase in warheads per dollars spent (an analyst’s dream), but 
which also dodges the question of a new large ICBM (“partly common” 
is smaller than the original M-X) and abandons our land based missiles 
to their present highly vulnerable deployment mode. (As noted in the 
NSC memorandum, this is really not a politically feasible option—­it 
does not restore survivability of the ICBM.)
What is not explicit in the PRC preparatory material is that the 
President has made it clear on a number of occasions that he has a great 
problem with MPS, although the Defense community (together with 
OMB and the NSC) are almost universally for it.
The President is concerned over what he perceives to be more dif-
ficult verification problems than are thought to be the case by his advi-
sors; he believes that the Soviet response might be to produce more 
reentry vehicles to defeat MPS or even try to “breakout” by duplicating 
MPS in an unverifiable manner, thus escalating the arms “race.”
Ironically, the MPS system, if deployed, may have precisely the 
opposite effect. By decoupling the force size from survivability, we are 
forcing the Soviets to “come clean” as to their intentions. By the end 
of the current SALT treaty, they will have matched us in total num-
ber of reentry vehicles—­this can be done within SALT constraints if 
they MIRV their SLBMs with smaller RVs—­the final political plateau 
to perceived Soviet equality. Should the Soviets seek to further frac-
tionate their ICBM RVs to try to defeat MPS (a violation of SALT II), 
they are clearly moving in a counterforce direction and there can be no 
argument as to their intent. Even if this were the case, however, we can 
build holes in the ground as fast and as cheaply as they can build new 
RVs, and the absurdity of that exercise may drive both sides to finally 
reduce forces.
This third PRC is preparatory to an NSC meeting on June 62 at 
which time the President is expected to reach a decision. Your entrance 
at this point in time into the deliberation process would serve to make you 
fully aware of the pros and cons for each MX basing option. We recommend 
that you attend.
As you know, while no one in authority is saying so publicly, a pos-
itive decision by the President on MX is seen as vital by the Joint Chiefs. 
2 The NSC meeting was held on June 4. See Document 141.
