1426 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 831. Letter 75 from Clough to Johnson1 Letter No. 75 Washington, October 4, 1957 Dear Alex: I suspect the principal subject at your forthcoming meeting will be the newsmen issue. As pointed out in the memo attached to my letter of September 27, it seems doubtful that the Chinese Communists are in a hurry to resolve the present impasse. It seems more likely that for a while at least they will continue to exploit it in their propaganda and press you hard for some sort of recognition in principle of equal and reciprocal treatment for newsmen. We will try to anticipate possible moves on their part at the next meeting and make your instructions as complete as possible. We feel we are in a satisfactory position if we con­ tinue to refuse any general agreement by holding the door open for any Chinese Communist newsmen to apply for a visa if he wishes. We have been informed by Justice that the Court has again denied Wirin’s request that the Court order the State Department to issue him a passport valid for Communist China. The case has not yet reached the posture at which the Judge would have to decide whether the refusal of a validated passport to Wirin would justify dismissing the case. When that time comes, we have told Justice we will consider our position once more. We have sent you a copy of Hammarskjold’s message to Lodge that he was writing to Chou En-lai concerning Downey and Fecteau. I am not sanguine that this will accomplish anything but it certainly can do no harm. We still have no word from Panmunjom that the matter of the unaccounted for personnel has been taken up in the MAC. I think it is just as well for you not to make any elaborate presentation on this issue pending word from the MAC. I suppose it is possible that Wang will seek a little publicity after the next meeting if he should come up with some new proposal. If it seems appropriate to do so we could consult by telephone concerning a press release by you. We felt that your release last month was quite effective. With best regards, Sincerely yours, Ralph N. Clough 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Confidential; Official–Informal. A copy was sent to Martin.
