758
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
criticize Zahedi. I believe, if anything, they have more contempt for the
present Shah than they even held for his father, if this is possible.
They hold in the highest regard the Governor General Haiat and
General Mirjahangiri, but possess a fear that they will be replaced by
someone who will not give them the consideration which they feel they
deserve. As indicated they deeply appreciate the efforts made by Mr.
Henderson, but fear also that at some date he may leave Iran and that
his influence will be forgotten. I pointed out to them that the conversa-
tions which took place had been reported and that certainly Wash-
ington would be informed of our position. This seemed to give them
some satisfaction as pertains to their future.
Since it was impossible to return to Shiraz Saturday night, I re-
mained with the Ghashghaies and later that evening Khosrow spent
about three hours with us at which time he spoke in detail of their
present situation. His attitude had softened a great deal as compared to
the early afternoon when I had talked with them as a group. It was evi-
dent that they had reviewed their situation and were fully aware that
any action on their part would ultimately benefit the Communists.
Khosrow stated that he knew they could not win, but that his first con-
cern was that they should be treated as other Iranians and that they
should not be subjected to martial law and that such action on the part
of the government might create an incident whereby they would be un-
able to avoid taking up arms. There seemed to be no doubt in his mind
as to their ability to seize the population centers of south Iran.
The one thing which the Ghashghaies seem to have in common is
an absolute lack of fear of military. Khosrow believes that many of the
officers are not loyal to the present government and stated that he was
informed by the Communist representatives that at least one garrison
held a 30 per cent Tudeh membership. He pointed out to me that
during the past week he had personally purchased 150 Bruno [Brno]
rifles sold by the army officers to them. These rifles were new and had
never been out of the box. They have been able to purchase any quan-
tity of ammunition that they desired from the army officers. They have
been promised other weapons including machine guns, bazookas, and
one officer had told them that he could secure for them two 75 mm.
guns. With this condition existing within the military they feel that it
would be completely ineffectual when placed under attack.
Khosrow stated that under no circumstance would they make an
immediate attack upon Shiraz. Their plan is to station a force near
Shiraz which would tie down the military in giving security to that vi-
cinity. They would then take as their first objective the city of Kazeroon.
Their choice in making Kazeroon their first objective is based on their
belief that 75 per cent or more of the population of that city would sup-
