January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1303
Ambassador Linowitz said that Minister Ali could say what his con-
cerns are.
Minister Ali said that he had done so.
The President said that this was adequate, and he hopes that Min-
ister Ali will relay to Sadat his (the President’s) hope that the talks can
be restarted. We have all worked hard. If something should happen
that could stop the talks again, it would be better if the talks were actu-
ally going on.
Minister Burg said that he would follow the President’s line, which
is reasonable. Quoting what the President had said in Venice, it was
best to work for an ideal. Therefore, Israel is ready to restart the talks.
The President said he was gratified that Minister Burg saw it that
way, and that he (Minister Burg) had noted what he (the President) had
said in Venice!
Minister Burg quoted former Prime Minister Macmillan,6 saying
that a statesman is a politician when he is abroad.
Ambassador Linowitz said that, if we can—after Minister Ali talks
with Sadat—agree to restart the talks, we can get them structured, to
lay out a plan for the next several months, to proceed in a businesslike
way. The groundwork is laid, and now we wait for agreement.
The President said good. We will do all that we can to help. If either
Sadat or Begin have a problem, they should call him (the President) di-
rectly. He had had a good report from Minister Burg on how the Prime
Minister is feeling.
Minister Burg said that Prime Minister Begin is active despite his
illness—and so he is also angry about what happened in New York (i.e.
at the UN)! (laughter)
Secretary Muskie joked that we are helping to restore the Prime
Minister’s health!
Minister Burg said that this is a way of judging his (Begin’s) health!
The President said it was gratifying to know that Begin is recov-
ering. Will Yadin serve as acting Prime Minister for the next few
weeks?
Minister Burg said sure—and he (Yadin) will also be defense
minister.
The President asked if this had happened before.
Minister Burg said yes. It was part of the bargain three years ago.
Yadin was the head of a strong faction. Then this deal was worked out.
Now, it is continued out of propriety.
6 Harold Macmillan, British Prime Minister from 1957 until 1963.
