February 1951–February 1952
153
press reports to effect that US thot Communism only alternative to Mo-
sadeq accurate? I replied Mosadeq went to US as Primin of Iran with
full backing of Majlis. US Govt therefore had treated him with all re-
spect due to full-fledged rep of Iran. Courtesies and consideration not
shown to Mosadeq as an individual but to head of Iranian Govt. US
prepared cooperate with Mosadeq or any other duly installed Primin
prepared to work with it. Ala said he understood Mosadeq returning to
Iran determined neither to change his policies re oil or to resign. Was
US prepared to give Iran financial assistance so it cld carry on without
oil revenues? I said I not in position answer such question just now. I
thot however it might not be easy for US Govt to give or lend Iran funds
for an indefinite period to compensate it for its loss of oil revenues.
6. Ala asked re attitude US towards Qavam. I again replied US not
supporting or opposing him. It was trying not interfere in internal af-
fairs of country. I asked if it true Shah was not favorable to Qavam’s
candidacy. Ala said “no”, but Shah not yet decided give Qavam full
support. Qavam was outstanding candidate succeed Mosadeq; never-
theless, Shah continued hesitate throw his weight behind him. Unfortu-
nately on November 14 vicious attack had been made on Qavam’s in-
tegrity by Senator Farrokh on floor Senate. Shah deeply regretted this
attack and sent message to Qavam that effect. Since Senator was friend
Shah Qavam was deeply suspicious that Court was in some way in-
volved in this attack. In his chagrin Qavam had applied for passport to
leave country. Shah was still trying dispel this suspicion and persuade
Qavam remain on. I remarked another person was being mentioned for
Primin. Ala replied that other person wld in no circumstances accept
post. He had held it for month prior to Mosadeq and his experience had
convinced him he not cut out for pol life that kind. I said that with
strong experienced and forward looking Cabinet perhaps he might be
able rally country around him. Ala said he thought he cld be more
useful in his present position. Before leaving Ala remarked Shah wld
probably like to see me in near future.
Henderson
