(d) The name of the Government which has authorised the import.
Each separate consignment which crosses the frontier of the exporting country, whether
by land, water or air, shall be accompanied by a document containing the particulars
indicated above. This document may be either the licence or export declaration or a
certified copy thereof or a certificate issued by the Customs authorities of the exporting
country, stating that the consignment is exported under licence or export declaration in
accordance with the provisions of the present Convention.
ARTICLE 5
The articles covered by Category II shall only be exported under cover of an export
document, which may be either a licence issued by the competent authorities of the
exporting country or an export declaration endorsed by or filed with them. If the
legislation of the importing country requires the endorsement of a duly authorised
representative of its Government, and if this fact has been notified by the said
Government to the Government of the exporting country, then such an endorsement
must have been obtained and submitted to the competent authorities of the exporting
country before the export may take place.
Neither the licence nor the export declaration shall entail any responsibility upon the
Government of the exporting country as to the destination or ultimate use of any
consignment.
Nevertheless, if the High Contracting Parties consider, on account of the size,
destination or other circumstances of a consignment, that the arms and ammunition
consigned are intended for war purposes, they undertake to apply to such consignment
the provisions of Articles 2, 3 and 4.
ARTICLE 6
As a preliminary to a general system of publicity for armaments irrespective of their
origin, the High Contracting Parties undertake to publish, within two months of the
close of each quarter, a statistical return of their foreign trade during this quarter in the
articles covered by Categories I and II. This return shall be drawn up in accordance
with the specimen forms contained in Annex I to the present Convention and shall
show under each heading appearing in Categories I and II in Article 1 the value and the
weight or number of the articles exported or imported under a licence or export
declaration, allocated according to country of origin or destination.
In all cases where the consignment comes from, or is sent to, a territory possessing an
autonomous Customs system, such territory shall be shown as the country of origin or
destination.
