September 18–December 16, 1978 365 port from Arab world (Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Syria) and particularly PLO. Several sought US guarantees on questions of Jerusalem, sovereignty, self-determination and settlements. Saunders reiterated US positions but said he could not guarantee that USG could bring Israel to accept Arab or even US position on all these questions and certainly not now. He could guarantee the US would be a full partner in negotiations and expressed his belief that Palestinians’ bargaining position would improve with the maturing of a self-governing authority (SGA). It was proposed that US issue statement recognizing that sovereignty lies with the people in West Bank and Gaza which could be used by moderates to convene a national assembly to draft a constructive counterproposal to CDA. Saunders did not reject idea, but urged that any counterproposal take account of political realities. ConGen urged that Palestinians rely upon themselves to act now or watch everincreasing Israeli consolidation on their land. End summary. 1. Saunders met nine Palestinians October 20 at Consulate General in Jerusalem to discuss possible Palestinian participation in peace negotiations based on CDA.3 Present were: Rashad Shawwa, Mayor of Gaza; Mansur Shawwa, the Mayor’s son; Hatim Abu Ghazellah, a Gazan attorney; Elias Freij, Mayor of Bethlehem; Hikmat al-Masri of Nablus; lawyer Aziz Shehadeh of Ramallah; Jerusalem UNRWA Director Antranig Bakerjian; Jerusalem business man Fa’iz Abdinnur and Mahmoud Abu Zalaf, publisher of “Al Quds.” Also present along with Consul General Newlin were DPO Kruse, PolOff Hull, PAO Smith, and Embassy PolOff Blackwill, and NEA Officer Howell. 2. About an equal number of invitees from the West Bank declined to come. Some of them specifically on grounds that the CDA “ignored the (Palestinian) national movement and the PLO as its recognized leadership.” 3. Consensus of those who did attend was that, aside from deficiencies of CDA, Palestinians in West Bank/Gaza could not join negotiations because they lacked support from Arab states (Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Syria), and PLO. 4. “We in West Bank have no power to negotiate . . . my own experience from public meetings in the West Bank, sponsored by communists and blessed by Israelis, is that public opinion is dead. We can’t reported on October 27 that Saunders’s comment prompted Begin to issue statements calling for the expansion of Israeli settlements in Gaza and the West Bank and the transfer of the Prime Minister’s Office and Ministry of Foreign Affairs to East Jerusalem. (Dial Torgerson, “Begin Reasserts Right to Settle on West Bank,” Los Angeles Times, October 27, p. B1) 3 Saunders also met privately with Mayor Mulhim of Halhul on October 21. The Embassy transmitted a summary of the meeting in telegram 2894 from Jerusalem, October 23. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780434–0992)
