1979 619 would be available with real increases of 3 percent. In discussing this material, the following points were made: —The strategic forces balance is worse now than in 1977, and will continue to get worse. Programs currently under discussion can begin to improve the situation by the mid-’80s, however. No matter what program decisions we make to modernize our strategic forces, in the early ’80s we are likely to be perceived as having less than essential equivalence with the Soviets. We must find ways to improve such perceptions in order to ensure that we don’t face a “Cuba-­in-­reverse”—­from which we might not recover. Improvements in C3I systems should be emphasized. —JCS said that Army computer studies show that NATO would not be able to stop an all-­out WP attack (problems are particularly severe in the NORTHAG area), much less restore prewar boundaries. It was also noted that while NATO improvements being made by our collective efforts to increase defense spending by 3 percent are achieving modest results, much larger increases are needed if we want to be able to fulfil our NATO strategy anytime soon. Dr. Brzezinski said that while declaring this strategy before we have the capability to carry it out may seem unrealistic, the strategy is essential to maintaining Alliance cohesion. —State does not see any particular signs that our current defense posture is inhibiting Allied support of the US. Our Allies are jittery about the Soviet buildup, but less than they would be in the absence of the improvements being made in NATO’s defense posture. Further, the Allies probably can’t do more than the 3 percent they have already promised. —The Middle East/Persian Gulf situation presents difficult problems. The Soviets may doubt our ability to project significant military power into the area—­and we clearly couldn’t if crises in NATO and the ME/PG area were to begin simultaneously. Having a permanent presence in the ME/PG area may deter situations requiring considerably larger forces. Given other countries’ stakes in continued access to the region’s oil, we should not be expected to provide the forces required to stabilize the region by ourselves, however. —The Korean balance looks adverse from a military viewpoint, but in the larger context of developing political relationships in the Far East, this balance is not so bad as it might seem. (S) There were several comments suggesting that some Western advantages may not be fairly reflected by the armored division equivalents measure used to assess the balance of forces in various areas. CIA commented that the Soviets probably don’t believe the military balance favors them as much as we think it does. (S)
