926
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—options for implementation of Presidential decisions on foreign
assistance strategies, and
—an evaluation of the level of support of international science and
technology assistance and cooperation extended by U.S. agencies.
Among the basic questions that should be considered are:
—An assessment of the political and economic implications of pro-
viding scientific and technological resources, both private proprietary
as well as public, to various developing country groups, including the
upper-tier. The assessment should include consideration of transfer of
dual-use technologies.
—An assessment of the developing countries’ requirements and
interests for U.S. scientific and technological resources, including
analysis of areas of convergence or conflict with current U.S. policies
and programs.
—An assessment of the scientific and technological resources
which the U.S. Government could mobilize for the benefit of devel-
oping countries, through such efforts as research and development, sci-
ence and technology assistance and cooperation, and education and
manpower training. Special attention should be given to the provision
of resources for development of and experimentation with technol-
ogies that are appropriate to developing countries’ technical, economic,
and social environments.
—An assessment of the benefits and risks of government action re-
garding private proprietary technology transfer to developing coun-
tries. This should include analysis of possible policy measures and their
impact on capital flows, market access, and labor displacement.
—An assessment of the implications for other OECD countries and
for the Communist countries of expanding U.S. scientific and techno-
logical relations with developing countries. The assessment should in-
clude analysis of opportunities for multilateral policy coordination in
the areas of trade and technology transfer with OECD countries.
—An analysis of the relationship between U.S. scientific and tech-
nological relations with developing countries and a range of global
issues, such as energy and natural resource supply and demand, nu-
clear proliferation, food and population, and others.
The review should draw on related PRM materials and other
studies. It will be chaired by the Secretary of State. It should be sub-
mitted for PRC discussion by June 1, 1978.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
