National Security Policy  481
bombers and cruise-­type missiles. On the other hand, we believe the 
USSR will not be able to place in operation a weapon system capable of 
successfully intercepting ballistic missiles by mid-1962.
110. Surface-­to-Surface Missiles: The probable Soviet firing of two 
ICBM test vehicles in the summer of 1957 and the successful Soviet 
launching of earth satellites attest both to the high capabilities of the 
USSR in long-­range ballistic missile development and to the extremely 
high priority this program enjoys. In the light of this and other new 
evidence, we have re-­examined our previous estimate of Soviet ICBM 
development, and have tentatively advanced from 1960–61 to 1959 the 
probable date when a few (say, ten) prototype missiles of 5,500 nauti­
cal miles (n.m.) range could first be available for operational use. This 
estimate is predicated upon: (a) a top priority flight test program over 
a period of about two years from the first firing of a test missile this 
summer; (b) a maximum range of 5,500 n.m. and a CEP of about 5 n.m.; 
and (c) the equipping of the first operational unit with prototype rather 
than series-­produced ICBMs. Early success of any phase of the test pro­
gram, or relaxed accuracy and reliability requirements, could advance 
the date of availability.16
111. We have likewise re-­evaluated the Soviet program for devel­
opment of an IRBM. Recent evidence indicates that the USSR has prob­
ably elected to develop a 1,000 n.m. ballistic missile which is essentially 
a modified 700 n.m. missile with a lighter warhead. With such a pro­
gram, the USSR could take advantage of existing development, pro­
duction, and operational capabilities and could probably achieve a first 
operational capability with a 1,000 n.m. missile in 1958. Most of the 
present targets on the Eurasian periphery which we believe the USSR 
would wish to attack would be within range of this missile fired from 
within the Bloc. While firm evidence indicated an early Soviet interest 
in IRBMs with ranges up to 1,600 n.m., there are no current indications 
of development of ballistic missiles of ranges beyond about 1,000 n.m., 
save for the ICBM.
112. As previously estimated on the basis of considerable evidence, 
the USSR has developed and could now have available for operational 
employment at least four shorter-­range ballistic missiles, with maxi­
mum ranges of about 75 n.m., 175–200 n.m., 350 n.m., and 700 n.m. We 
believe the Soviet surface-­to-­surface program also includes submarine-­
launched missiles. We estimate that for this purpose the USSR could 
now have supersonic cruise-­type missiles capable of maximum ranges 
of about 500 n.m., and that in 1962 a supersonic cruise-­type missile of 
up to 1,000 n.m. range could probably become available. To an extent 
16 The estimate made in this paragraph must be considered tentative, pending com­
pletion of SNIE 11–10–57: The Soviet ICBM Program, now in process. [Footnote is in the 
original.]
