National Security Policy 1195 1. OUTER SPACE PROGRAMS UNDER THE AUSPICES OF NASA (NSC Action No. 2328) Mr. Gray introduced Dr. Glennan’s presentation on the subject. (A copy of Mr. Gray’s briefing note is filed in the minutes of the meeting, and another is attached to this memorandum. Dr. Glennan said the NASA presentation would fall into two parts: (1) a long-­range identification of NASA objectives, which he would dis­ cuss; and (2) a more detailed examination of the NASA program now under way or planned for FY 1962, which Dr. Dryden would discuss. Dr. Glennan began his part of the presentation by noting that a year ago NASA had developed its first long-range plan establishing space objectives for eight to ten years in the future. NASA had just com­ pleted a revision of this first long-range plan. Dr. Glennan believed the revised plan, as well as its funding, was more realistic than the first plan. He also noted that the funds required for space activities tended to increase rather than diminish. Dr. Glennan then displayed a chart indicating that in 1960 NASA had accomplished first launchings of a meteorological satellite, a passive reflector communications satellite, a SCOUT vehicle, a THOR-DELTA vehicle, and an AGENA–B vehicle. A suborbital flight of an astronaut had failed. In addition, a scientific satellite (PIONEER 5) had been launched into a sub orbit to demonstrate long-distance communications. Dr. Glennan displayed a large chart showing the major target dates for NASA missions from 1961 through 1970. This chart indicated that in 1961 such missions as the following would be attempted: the suborbital flight of an astronaut, an ATLAS-CENTAUR firing, the firing of the first stage of SATURN, and so on. The program would continue with an impact landing of instruments on the moon and a test of the planetary space craft in 1962; the firing of the second and third stages of SATURN and a soft instrument landing on the moon in 1963; the orbiting of an astronomical observer, a MARS-VENUS probe, and the qualification of the C–2 SATURN engine in 1964; the qualification of a very large rocket engine and the testing of a prototype of the main space capsule beyond MERCURY in 1965; the flight test of a nuclear rocket and the landing of mobile instruments on the moon in 1966 or 1967; the sending of a space craft in orbit around another planet in 1968 to 1970; and a man landing on the moon after 1970. Dr. Glennan said that NASA anticipated 25 to 30 major space flights per year, ranging from JUNO–­2, ATLAS-ABLE and THOR-­DELTA to NOVA in 1968. Dr. Glennan then turned to present and projected NASA budgets. He displayed a chart indicating that expenditures for most purposes would continue to rise, on the assumption that projected programs
