1568  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
51. Developments in US policies and nuclear capabilities will 
have great effects on the policies of both those nations committed to 
the West and the countries which already are neutralist. The entire non-­
Communist world will watch closely for any sign that the US deterrent 
is becoming less effective because of technological factors or that US 
determination to stand beside the exposed and threatened areas of the 
world is weakening. If members of the Western Alliance came to believe 
that the US was using technological advances to reduce its military 
presence overseas it would become increasingly difficult to convince 
the peoples and governments of Western Europe and Asia that the US 
remained willing to defend their interests. In this case, a further devel­
opment of the present trend toward a hard line in Soviet policy lead­
ing to increased fears of the changes of general war might cause some 
members of the Western Alliance to weaken their commitments to the 
Alliance. Particularly in those countries which might have developed a 
modest nuclear deterrent of their own, there might be a disposition to 
flirt with the idea of neutrality. Certain nations around the periphery of 
the Bloc might lean toward the Bloc in an effort to gain security through 
accommodation. A belief in the West that the US had fallen behind could 
contribute to neutralist trends and greatly complicate the problem of 
maintaining a firm united front against Soviet probes and pressures.
52. If US technological advances and policies lead the Free World to 
remain confident that the US will defend local interests against Soviet 
aggression, Soviet efforts to exploit their own growing capabilities 
could have the opposite effect. Soviet probes and pressures could con­
tinue, as in the past, to serve to convince the people of Western Europe 
that neutralism, unless supported by a formidable indigenous nuclear 
capability, offered no surcease from Soviet pressures nor a workable 
substitute for common defense. A similar reaction might develop in 
Japan, which has generally reacted stoutly to Russian threats. Indian 
leaders at the national level are already showing increasing concern 
over the external and internal Communist threat. They probably see in 
recent criticism of their policies in the Communist press indications of 
less sympathetic and cordial state relations. We believe that privately, 
at least, they may adopt a less critical attitude toward Western defense 
measures and might show greater understanding for Western suspi­
cions of Soviet behavior. Similar tendencies will probably develop in 
the UAR if the USSR continues to countenance, if not actively to sup­
port, serious subversive efforts in Syria and Iraq.
53. At the same time, the development of offensive and defensive 
weapon systems will complicate the problem of assessing the relative 
balance of military power and the effectiveness of deterrent forces at 
any given moment. It is possible that one side or the other will believe 
itself to possess a temporary and substantial military advantage when 
it does not, or will believe that it is substantially inferior when it is not.
