3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
430
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
cated that at some future time he would wish to discuss the handling of
intelligence matters, but did not think it useful to do so now.
Vance
134.
Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department
of State1
Geneva, July 12, 1978, 2048Z
Secto 8022. Acting Secretary please pass to the President. Pass to
Harold Brown. Subject: Gromyko-Vance Talks: SALT.
1. At the end of this afternoon’s meeting, Gromyko came to what
he described as the “core” of his statement:
“I wish to ask a direct question—this is the core of my statement—
if the U.S. really attaches paramount importance to the solution of the
question of new types of ballistic missiles on the basis it proposes, will
it be prepared to regard as agreed all other questions (cruise missiles on
bombers, timing for reductions, Backfire, etc.) on the basis of our pro-
posals, in the event we were to consent to U.S. proposals that for the
duration of the treaty—i.e. to the end of 1985—within the limits of the
relevant aggregate levels of strategic arms and MIRVed vehicles—each
side would have the right to flight test and to deploy one new type of
ICBM which it could equip at its own discretion either with MIRVs or
with a single reentry vehicle, while there would be no limitations what-
soever on new types of SLBMs?”
2. There are a number of important ambiguities in the foregoing.
For instance: when Gromyko speaks of accepting the U.S. position on
“new types of ballistic missiles,” does he mean our full position on the
definition of new types? What does he mean by “etc.”? Do the Soviets
accept that our MIRV type rules would apply to their new single war-
head missile?
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
Presidential Messages In/Out, Box 102, 7/78. Secret; Sensitive; Niact Immediate; Nodis.
Printed from a copy that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation
Room. The memorandum of conversation of this meeting is in the Department of State,
Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs
Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109, Box 8, Vance/Gromyko: Geneva,
7/12/–13, 1978.
