472 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 Inquiry to hear Iran’s grievances and to allow an early solution of the crisis between Iran and the U.S. and that Iran desires to have the Commission speak to each of the hostages. 2. Monday night: Secretary-General Waldheim sends a message to Ghotbzadeh confirming his readiness to send to Iran within a week the Commission of 5–7 members which he discussed in Tehran early in January “to hear Iran’s grievances and to allow an early solution of the crisis between Iran and the U.S.”6 3. Tuesday: Ghotbzadeh would respond by agreeing that the Commission should come to Tehran within a week and stating Iran’s desire to have the Commission speak to each of the hostages.7 4. Tuesday night: The U.S. would remove its objections to the establishment of this Commission by a direct private communication to the Secretary-General.8 In that communication, the U.S. would state importance that Commission look into the grievances of both sides and work for early release of the hostages. At this time, the U.S. would take the following position publicly: The U.S. will discuss with the Secretary-General the concept of a Commission. The U.S. will reserve its comment until it knows what the terms of reference of the Commission will be. The U.S. has stated its position many times before and need not repeat it. While we have opposed the formation of a Commission under past conditions, we would support any steps by the UN that might lead to the release of the hostages while protecting essential international principles. 5. Tuesday night: Secretary-General Waldheim sends a second message to Ghotbzadeh which would (a) state briefly the purpose of 6 Waldheim confirmed to Ghotbzadeh his intention to establish a commission on February 13, reiterating the sentences in this step of this scenario. (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Box 8, UN and Security Channel) A report of Waldheim’s trip to Iran in January is in Document 132. 7 Ghotbzadeh fulfilled this step of the scenario in two messages. The first, February 12, informed Waldheim that Iran would accept the Commission “to make the inquiry about the crimes committed by the deposed Shah and the funds stolen by him and his family. On this basis the Commission will hear the American hostages as well.” In a second note of February 13, he acknowledged that his message had given rise to “erroneous interpretations,” and stated that the Commission “will have as its mission to examine the grievances of Iran and to allow a rapid solution to the crisis between Iran and the United States.” (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Box 8, UN and Security Channel) 8 On the basis of the exchange of messages between Waldheim and Ghotbzadeh, Vance reiterated the sentences in this step of the scenario in a February 13 message to Waldheim. (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Box 8, UN and Security Channel)
