National Security Policy 245 70. Briefing Note for the 372d NSC Meeting1 Washington, July 14, 1958 1. This meeting is chiefly concerned with the problem of shelter against radioactive fallout in case of nuclear attack—­three studies pre­ viously requested by the Council and an interim report by Governor Hoegh on the status of shelter measures. 2. Following the meeting of the Council on January 16, the President approved a modification of then-­existing civil defense policy by incor­ porating the concept of fallout shelter for protection of the civil population against radiation hazard, subject to certain specified conditions. One of these conditions was that the implementation of the concept be deferred pending Council consideration of a report by an Interdepartmental Committee as to appropriate measures to carry out the concept. 3. On March 27 the Council considered the measures recommended by this Committee, together with recommendations by the Planning Board for certain further studies. Thereafter, the President approved (1) the taking of six specific measures (to be mentioned later) to carry out the concept of fallout shelter; (2) the submission of a report by Governor Hoegh on the status of these measures through July 1; (3) the making of the three studies recommended by the Planning Board; and (4) the deferring of action on five other measures proposed by the Interdepartmental Committee, pend­ ing consideration by the Council of the studies and the report. 4. Today, there will be presented the three studies and Governor Hoegh’s report. The Council is not being asked to take any policy deci­ sion on these items at this time. 5. a. The first study was to make a special assessment as to (1) the adequacy of present research efforts by the several agencies of ­Government on the design and testing of shelters and on the effects of nuclear attack on humans; and (2) whether such research efforts should be better coordinated, integrated, or accelerated. b. The second study was to appraise the upper limit of massive, con­ centrated nuclear detonations which could be tolerated by the peoples of the earth and, in fact, by the earth itself. c. The third study was to explore the problem of survival of popula­ tions in the period following their coming out of shelter, after a massive nuclear exchange. d. The fourth item is Governor Hoegh’s status report. 1 Source: Problem of shelter against fallout. Top Secret. 3 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
