The Minister for Foreign Affairs next addressed the conference, and, after thanking the
delegates for the honor of selecting him to preside and extending a warm welcome to
the delegates and their respective staffs, he referred to the many international
conferences which have been held since the close of the Great War. He spoke
particularly of the Locarno Conference; because, as he stated, its achievements are still
fresh in our memory and have resulted in the readjustment of the relations between the
interested powers in the light of and in harmony with the new conditions which have
arisen since the signing of the Versailles Treaty. He said further that the Washington
Conference has had a more direct effect on the Pacific and the Far East than any other
conference. In referring to the Chinese customs tariff he said:
“I am inclined to think, and I feel confident that my opinion is [shared] by all
of you present, that the treaty tariff regime in China, inaugurated some eighty
years ago to meet a condition which no longer exists today, is entirely out-of-
date and should not be allowed to continue to prevail. I, therefore, venture to
hope that you, the distinguished delegates of this conference, inspired by the
spirit of good will and sympathy and availing yourselves of the opportunity
now offered, will arrive at [a] readjustment of the Chinese customs questions
so that China may be enabled at an early date to exercise her sovereign rights
of tariff autonomy.”
In concluding, he said that Dr. C. T. Wang, one of the Chinese delegates to the
conference, would lay before it on behalf of the Chinese Government certain proposals
for the settlement of the Chinese customs questions and that he was firmly convinced
that the conference, animated by the spirit of justice, would agree to the proposal[s].
C. T. Wang spoke next and referred to the presentation of the question of tariff
autonomy at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919 and also at the Washington
Conference. He stated that it remains a matter of regret to the Chinese Government that
the tariff proposals have not been accepted, in that he offered [sic] section 1 of article I
of the nine-power treaty relating to principles and policies, and stated that, placing full
reliance on the spirit of the nine-power treaty, the Chinese Government makes the
following proposals for the removal of the restrictions imposed by existing treaties
affecting the customs tariff:
The customs participating powers formally declare to the Government of the
Republic of China their respect for its tariff autonomy and agree to the
removal of all the tariff restrictions contained in existing treaties.
The “Government of the Republic of China agrees to the abolition of likin
simultaneously with the enforcement of the Chinese national tariff law which
shall take effect not later than the 1st day of January, 1929.
