Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President said that we prefer to keep the text of the treaty as it now is. But if there is a difference between having no treaty at all and a treaty with an interpretive letter, would Israel be better off with no treaty? Dinitz said no; it would be better to have the treaty. The question of collective self-defense is already covered by reference to the U.N. Charter in Article VI. The President repeated that our preference is to accept the treaty text as it is. If Sadat is adamant, he has the right to reopen this issue for negotiations. (S) Ambassador Dinitz said that Israel had agreed to a form of political linkage by accepting four references in the preamble to the Camp David agreements. While opposing any mention of a target date for elections, Dinitz said that if a target must be set, he would make two personal suggestions. The target date should be after the period when normalization of relations should have begun, for example, 12 months after ratification. Second, there should be no conditionality between the successful conclusion of the negotiations to establish the self-governing authority and the completion of the interim withdrawal and the beginning of normalization of relations. (S) The President said that this would be difficult for Sadat to accept. If there is a normalization of relations at the end of nine months, an exchange of ambassadors, and if Israel and Egypt cannot agree on the modalities for elections and for the powers of the self-governing authority, this would put Sadat in an indefensible position with the other Arabs. He would have taken his own land back and not achieved any agreement on the West Bank and Gaza. The President said he feared that in those circumstances the treaty might then be abrogated by Egypt, along with claims of Israeli bad faith. Sadat does not feel that Begin is sincere in his determination to carry out the Camp David agreements on the West Bank and Gaza. He needs assurance that there will be some time constraint working on Israel. (S) The President said that we have considered a proposal to remove the nine-month deadline for the interim withdrawal and to tie the withdrawal to the establishment of the self-governing authority, while maintaining the three years deadline for the full implementation of the Egypt-Israel treaty. In any event, the President said that he was worried that the whole discussion of target dates might become moot if agreement were not reached by December 17th. This would set a horrible precedent. (S) Ambassador Dinitz said that he agreed that it was important to reach an agreement by December 17th, but the difficulty of doing so demonstrated why a target date for the West Bank/Gaza elections was unwise. The President said that the alternative to setting a target date may be that there will be no treaty and there might then be a possible rapid deterioration in relations between the two parties. Egypt and Is-
