1372
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Prime Minister Menachem Begin
Ambassador Ephraim Evron, Israeli Ambassador to the United States
Yehiel Kadishai, Director, Prime Minister’s Bureau
Yehuda Avner, Adviser to the Prime Minister
Reuven Hecht, Adviser to the Prime Minister
General Ephraim Poran, Military Secretary to the Prime Minister
Dan Pattir, Public Affairs Adviser to the Prime Minister
Jacob Nehushtan, Minister, Embassy of Israel
Eitan Bentsur, Counselor, Embassy of Israel
(Between 11:05 a.m. and 11:37 a.m., the President and Prime Min-
ister met alone in the Oval Office.2 The following took place in the Cab-
inet Room beginning at 11:38 a.m.).
The President said that he and the Prime Minister had talked about
a number of items when they were alone; some they would relate to
their associates in private; many dealt with the Prime Minister’s con-
tribution in an historical way to enhance peace on earth. We have
strengthened ties between our two great democratic countries. He is
grateful to the Prime Minister—and to everyone else at the table. The
Prime Minister had taken constructive and courageous actions. He (the
President) had spent a large part of his political life on these issues, and
there is a new prospect for peace. He is grateful for the opportunity,
and it is his strong intention to continue doing so. Israel will find that
the new U.S. administration mirrors his (the President’s) commitment,
on bilateral relations and on peace, between Israel and Egypt and Israel
and its other neighbors. This includes continuing to work to achieve
full autonomy promised for the West Bank and Gaza; and providing
security for Israel. He hopes that the Israeli government will pursue
this with the same enthusiasm as has characterized its efforts until now.
The Prime Minister and he recalled that the Camp David Accords and
the peace treaty represent solemn commitments, which go beyond the
identity of whoever is in office in the three countries. They should and
will be binding on the peoples and governments; and not cast aside and
abandoned. There are no good alternatives: the intrusion of other coun-
tries is not beneficial; the going back to a convening of a Geneva confer-
ence under UN auspieces would not be beneficial; the weakening of
Resolution 242 commitments would not be beneficial.
Concerning progress in bilateral U.S.-Israeli relations, it is recog-
nized here that there is real importance to U.S. security in Israeli-U.S.
friendship. This is an important development; it may not have begun in
the last four years, but it has certainly been strengthened. Public
opinion here shows that support for Israel is valued by our people, and
is strong. He and the Prime Minister had talked of the need for con-
2 See Document 410. A memorandum of conversation for this portion of the
meeting has not been found.
