222 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement market. That market already is surfeited and suppliers, including Chile, have cut back production. Where then, is there another market? The siren song of sales to the Sino-Soviet sphere long has been heard in Chile, despite the obvious lack of practical results from previous attempts to sell large quantities of copper. The Embassy already has reported the increasing amount of local attention being devoted to possible Bloc sales of copper wire (see Embdesp. 845, February 21, 19585), and the press criticisms submitted (Embdesp. 874, March 4, 1958) make frequent reference to free trade in all forms of copper. It may well be that the Soviet Bloc really does not need Chilean copper, and would not buy substantial amounts. But if a United States import tax of 4 cents is placed on copper, the already growing pressure in favor of unlimited sales to the Bloc could well become an irresistible avalanche. A more serious possibility is that even if the Soviet Bloc does not urgently need additional copper, it might well decide that 1958 is the key moment for substantially increasing Chilean-Soviet trade relations. This would present obvious political as well as economic problems for the United States. The Bloc might seize this as a golden opportunity to acquire political ties with Chile at a relatively cheap price through purchase of copper even if above its own immediate needs. The final point which the Embassy feels must be given weight in considering possible repercussions from the increase of the copper import tax to 4 cents is in reference to the two American copper companies doing business here with a combined total investment in the neighborhood of US$600 million. Because of this “Yanqui” foreign-­ capital nature of Chile’s copper mining industry, there is a great deal of unfriendliness in Chile towards the companies. Only after laborious efforts, in which this Embassy played a significant role, was a new arrangement arrived at between the Chilean Government and the American companies, in the form of the New Copper Law, No. 11,828 of May 5, 1955. This law established new tax rates for the companies and did away with discriminatory exchange rates, previous treatment accorded the companies having reached near-­confiscation levels. The law also returned control of copper sales to the companies. In return for this new deal from the Government, the American companies particularly Anaconda, began large new investment programs aimed at increasing copper production. The New Copper Law never has been accepted by large sectors of the Chilean public and political body, on the time-­worn but still very popular basis that it was a “sell out” of Chile’s natural resources to foreign interests. The Law has come under increasing attack since 5 Not printed; 460.259/2–2158.
