Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 205 PROTECTION OF INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS Provision of basic human needs brings us directly to promotion of internationally recognized human rights. US policy must thus stress the broad scope of economic, social, political, and civil rights. Implementation of a human rights policy requires both consistency in our fundamental objectives and flexibility in how we deal with specific circumstances. Our goal should be a clear improvement in the practices of as many countries as possible, countries which at present are failing in their observance of the most fundamental human rights. We will engage other nations in the effort—both on a bilateral basis and through multilateral organizations such as the United Nations, the Organization of American States, the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, and international financial institutions. Underpinning all these specific objectives is the need for enhanced public confidence in our foreign policy. Without this support, we will be unable to achieve these goals. The collective effect of attending to peace, economic development, and individual rights is a new design for American diplomacy, drawn from the values and standards of the American people. It is a far reaching outline for action—clear in some areas, needing more definition in others. —There is overlap and interaction among our goals. Pursuit of peace through US-Soviet agreement on strategic arms, for example, depends in part on American domestic confidence that our policy reflects our traditional concern for human rights. Our goals regarding conventional arms sales, human rights, nuclear proliferation, and energy may collide in very complex ways when applied, for example, in the Middle East. —Diplomacy also deserves public dialogue. A shift from secrecy to raising issues for discussion with the Congress and the people before making decisions is already evident. In time, it should strengthen public support, buttress Congressional backing, give credence to calls for allied consultation, and educate the American people on the tradeoffs between some short-term costs and longer-term objectives. —Finally, diplomacy succeeds most surely when it takes into account domestic priorities. Conflicts and contradictions are inevitable in the sorting out of goals—whether for foreign or domestic policy. To be effective, we must weigh such obvious trade-offs as increasing economic aid for the LDC’s at the apparent expense of our own citizens or decreasing arms transfers at the possible cost of closing US factories and adding to our own unemployed. There are also opportunities for positive reinforcement of our domestic and diplomatic goals: through creative international initiatives on such problems as our cities, youth unemployment, basic human needs, food, and energy.
