1956 1173 I felt it a little difficult to carry out the instructions with regard to giving him the copy of the press release on the plane incident and the comments with regard thereto and at the same time not letting these talks become a forum for the discussion of the merits. You will see that I tried to carry this out by weaving it in with renunciation in my open­ ing statement rather than giving it any character of a separate item or waiting for him to initiate discussion of it. Incidentally I have been somewhat surprised at their willingness to fall in with the UK channel on this. Is this not unprecedented on a matter of this kind? Incidentally I also thought the Department’s August 31 statement was a real mas­ terpiece of balance and objectivity. It was a very refreshing change from the way similar cases have sometimes been handled in the past. It was also very refreshing not to have Defense and every Lieutenant in the Navy leaking views and news, and not to have Drew Pearson announc­ ing the plane was on a dangerous and secret mission. As I mentioned in my comment telegram Dave is staying here to be on hand if and when they come out with their public statement rather than going up to Prague with me as we had previously planned. If there is sufficient time after their statement before the next meeting he and Helenka may drive up themselves. Thank Ralph very much for his letter of August 31 and all its news. I had three nice days in the sun down at Santa Margarita. The first time I have really been warm this summer. I know that is not a complaint you can make in Washington. Regards to all. Sincerely, U. Alexis Johnson American Ambassador 711. Letter from Johnson to McConaughy1 Prague, September 12, 1956 Dear Walter: I have just received a telegram from Geneva saying that Senator Mansfield wants to see me in Geneva on September 20 or 21. I have 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Confidential; Official–­Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
