950 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX On military issues, he had not heard a report yet on the Vice President’s meeting with Harold Brown. He knows that it has always been the Egyptian attitude that the Gearing class destroyers might not be adequate. In Alexandria, he had proposed that the Egyptians take a cruiser, but they had said no. If they decide they want small, more modern ships, and no Gearings, then he will honor what Harold Brown recommends. There are increasing difficulties with the reduction of our F–4s. There is a feeling that the F–4 level is now minimal for us to have adequate reserves. He will wait for Harold Brown’s assessment before responding. On peace, President Sadat has been heroic. The Vice President should tell him that the President appreciates his good wishes. We will continue to work with Sadat in harmony. It is important that Egypt and the U.S. be close in the talks. We need to know Egypt’s negotiating attitude, so we can honor the desires of Sadat. Sometimes it is difficult for him to be more forceful—as in protecting Palestinian rights, promoting the autonomy talks, preventing settlements—than is Sadat. It is hard when we take a strong position, and Sadat is more accommodating. We need to keep in touch, and keep our attitudes in a common approach. If Sadat is too sensitive about upsetting Begin, and expects him (the President) to be the only tough negotiator, then that is difficult for him (the President). Secretary Vance said that he had talked with Ezer Weizman about Lebanon,8 who said that Sadat had not taken a strong position. Vice President Mubarak said that Sadat did talk about this to the Israelis. The President said that speaking about it, and being forceful, are different. On several occasions—concerning settlements, Lebanon, and the talks—he has tried to be forceful, but Israel says that the U.S. is being tougher than Egypt. He knows the need for good Sadat-Begin relations, but we also need to carry out Camp David. Begin is stubborn and courageous. He will say no if he means no; he will say yes if he means yes. On several occasions, we have been more forceful in carrying out the Camp David Accords than has Egypt. Israel takes advantage of the weaker country. Therefore, there is a need for us and Egypt to work more closely together. Vice President Mubarak said that Sadat does not want the U.S. to be in an awkward position. The President said that he does do it. We need to know beforehand if Sadat wants us both to be soft. It is no good for Sadat to be soft, and expect him (the President) to be hard. We need to deal with difficult 8 See Document 292.
