Human Rights
103
35.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to President
Carter1
Washington, April 15, 1977
SUBJECT
International Financial Institutions Authorization Bill
Summary
The Senate Foreign Relations Committee will mark-up the interna-
tional financial institutions (“IFI’s”) authorization bill on April 19. The
issue for your decision is whether we should (a) vigorously support the
human rights language reported by Senator Humphrey’s Subcom-
mittee on Foreign Assistance and (b) oppose the Badillo Amendment
which requires the U.S. to vote against any loan to countries where
human rights are violated. I recommend that we do so, and make your
views known through a letter to Humphrey (draft at Tab 1).2 The rec-
ommended approach has been approved by Humphrey.
Background
On April 2, 1977, you wrote Congressman Henry Reuss a letter ap-
plauding his Committee’s action in adding a human rights title to legis-
lation authorizing U.S. participation in the IFI’s.3 As you will recall, the
Reuss approach provided broader discretion than the restrictive
Harkin Amendment. On April 4 the House adopted two Badillo
Amendments (Tab 2)4 to the Committee language. The first (Section 601
(e)) severely restricts U.S. discretion by requiring that we vote against
any loan to a country where human rights are violated unless such
assistance is directed specifically to programs which serve the basic
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of
Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 7, Memoranda to the Secretary—1977.
No classification marking. A handwritten notation on the memorandum reads: “The final
version.”
2 Not attached. A copy of the draft letter to Humphrey is attached to an undated
draft Presidential form letter, along with an undated paper outlining the administration’s
position on the Badillo and Humphrey human rights amendments and a copy of an April
2 letter to Reuss, in which Carter expressed his hope that “H.R. 5262 will be passed by the
House of Representatives as soon as possible.” These materials were collated in D in ad-
vance of an April 14 interagency meeting on human rights. (National Archives, RG 59,
Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113,
Box 17, Human Rights Interagency Group I)
3 The President’s April 2 letter to Reuss is attached to an April 13 memorandum
from Lamb to Christopher transmitting materials for the April 14 interagency meeting. In
his letter, Carter communicated his support for Reuss’ bill and the flexibility it embodied.
(Ibid.)
4 Not found attached. See Document 33 and footnotes 2 and 5 thereto.
