788 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX defense attache in Washington, Col Vuckovic, could accompany the experts to help get the new process underway. The Secretary said that when General Cemalovic4 meets with General Fish5 in Washington on 17 October, we will discuss various candidate systems in which General Cemalovic expressed interest—air defense systems, air-ground anti-tank weapons, and other Air Force systems. General Ljubicic interjected that the aircraft engine would also probably be discussed, to which Secretary Brown agreed. The Secretary said that certain weapons are consistent with Yugoslav interests and with our new arms transfer policy concerning sensitive technology. He pointed out examples, specifically Harpoon, in which the US said “No” not only to Yugoslavia but also to others who were either friendly but not Allies, or were Allies, and cited Kuwait, Bahrain, United Arab Emirates, the Philippines, and the Republic of China. He said that we want to be clear that we are not singling out Yugoslavia for negative treatment. Secretary Brown said that the definition of sensitive technology depends upon time. In some cases our policy prevents transfer now. In those cases, SecDef proposed that we would first discuss Yugoslav needs and when those needs must be filled, and then discuss alternatives, since some alternatives may not be sensitive enough to prevent their future release. The Secretary assessed overall US-Yugoslav relations as improving in economic, political, cultural, and in military areas since the Mondale visit. He described the purpose of his visit as beginning and advancing the consultation process in order to advance military relations as progress is made in other areas. He completed his statement by expressing the hope that he has cleared up any misunderstandings, but noting that the US is still unable to transfer all systems desired by the Yugoslavs. General Ljubicic thanked SecDef for his information. He recognized the impossibility of much progress in an initial meeting. He stated that if the US offered many things now, Yugoslavia probably could not absorb them all. However, he considered that the list could contain more equipment that it did. General Ljubicic stated that the Yugoslavs understand US regulations and our organization and will try to adapt to us. He continued that one responsible for the Defense of his country must consider why it is impossible to acquire necessary equipment. Certain time is required, and patience will be required. He 4 Colonel General Enver Cemalovic was commander of the Yugoslav Air Force and Air Defense Forces. 5 Lieutenant General Howard M. Fish was Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs) for Security Assistance and Director of the Defense Security Assistance Agency until March 1978.
