888  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
for the Saturn missile will take about three years and will be quite expen­
sive. The building of a booster puts a “hump” in what would otherwise 
be a steady or level curve. The President said that the field of payloads 
is not an entirely new one. He did not think that we have to carry on 
expensive testing of Atlas, Titan, etc., just to hit the moon since these are 
being well checked out by the military forces. Dr. Glennan said he has 
one more immediate space shot in view—an attempt to orbit the moon 
using an Atlas-­Able missile. Beyond this all others are scientific shots, for 
the study, exploration and investigation of space phenomena.
The President then spoke of his desire to see our country put on 
a sound fiscal basis. Sputnik gave a surge to defense spending from 
which we have not recovered. He said that if he has to approve another 
unbalanced budget he would be obliged to regard his Administration 
as discredited. He thought the key to our space program was the Saturn 
or the big booster. The job from now on is to develop it at a carefully 
determined speed, to decide what kind of instrumentation we would 
like for it to have, to consider how much of this has already been devel­
oped and what else is needed. He would concentrate on these tasks.
Referring again to the question of reorganization, Dr. Glennan said 
his proposal involves certain changes in the law including the elimina­
tion of the Space Council, the setting up of a NASA General Advisory 
Council, and the establishment of a Military Applications Committee, 
wholly within Defense, in lieu of the existing civilian military liaison 
committee.
The President recalled that Congress had wanted to put the respon­
sibility directly on the President for deciding what would go into NASA 
and what into Defense. This part of our job is very much behind us, and 
it would seem that there is less need for the Space Council and for this 
activity of the President. He asked Dr. Glennan to try to work the mat­
ter out with the Secretary of Defense, and if the latter agreed get the 
proposal published and on the record.
The President told Dr. Glennan there is one thing he would like 
very much to see and that would be for Dr. Glennan to put his face 
sternly against the working of Parkinson’s law, to hold his staff strictly 
limited to essentials. Dr. Glennan said this is difficult in the case of the 
ABMA since the Von Braun group increased about 1000 in the last year. 
He doubted that he could cut it back this year but would do so next year 
through not putting work there. Finally, Dr. Glennan said he would like 
to have a new name for the ABMA center. There are not many names of 
people famous in space activity. He asked whether the President would 
be favorable to naming it the George C. Marshall Center. The President 
said that he would, even though there was not much logical connec­
tion. Dr. Glennan said the matter would be studied further.
A.J. Goodpaster
Brigadier General, USA
