3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 514 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI When Dobrynin asked for names of the Soviet security advisers the Acting Secretary mentioned Sergey Bakhturin. 5. Dobrynin said he had no details on the matter, only what he had heard on the radio. He promised to report the demarche immediately to Moscow. He expressed his deep condolences not only as a fellow ambassador but as someone who had known Ambassador Dubs personally, especially when he was office director for Soviet Affairs and Charge in Moscow. He said he was sure the Ministry echoed these sentiments. The Acting Secretary replied that this made the matter all the more perplexing to us. 6. For Moscow: You should not make any further representations to the Soviets on this matter for now. We will be advising you further. Christopher 172. Message From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev1 Washington, February 17, 1979 Dear Mr. President: We have learned that forces of the People’s Republic of China today crossed into North Vietnam. The United States strongly supports the principle of non-use of force to settle international disputes. The Chinese action today, together with the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea, represents a serious breach of that principle. Accordingly, we have informed the Government of the People’s Republic of China that we object to the military steps they have taken and urge the immediate withdrawal of their forces from Vietnam, the same position we have taken regarding the Vietnam forces in Kampuchea. The United States seeks a stable and peaceful structure of independent states in Asia. The Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea in recent months severely weakened that structure and led directly to the 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109, Box 4, MDS/Dobrynin, 1/31/79. Secret; Sensitive. Sent under a covering memorandum from Brzezinski to Vance. Message was sent via Molink (Moscow–Washington direct communications link). Brzezinski wrote in the upper right-hand corner of the message, “OK to send out. ZB.”
