National Security Policy 1045 Arbitrary Reference Designation Initial Opera­ tional Capability Dateb Maximum Range (NM) Operational accuracy (CEP) Maximum Warhead (Lbs. and Type)c Cruise Speed (Mach No.) Guidance Remarks AS–­3 f g 1961 100 150 feet against ships. 1 nm against coastal targets. 3,000 HE or Nuclear. 1.1 Beam riding with semi-­ active radar homing. Primarily antiship missile. Beam riding only against coastal targets. Decoys The USSR is probably developing and may now have operational air launched decoys to simulate medium or heavy bombers. a We evaluate this program as “probable” with varying degrees of confidence concerning detailed characteristics. Each missile listed will probably go through various stages of development which are not necessarily reflected in this table. [All footnotes are in the original.] b The date at which one or more series produced missiles could have been placed in the hands of trained personnel in one operational unit. c Warhead includes the explosive device and its associated fusing and firing mechanism. d The BADGER is believed to be the carrier aircraft for the AS–­1. Launch altitude is about 15,000 feet. The BADGER’s radius is 1,250 nm when carrying one missile, 1,000 nm with two. This radius can be increased by about 35 percent by a single prestrike aerial refueling. e The AS–­2 will probably be compatible with the BEAR and BISON, and possibly with the BADGER. The AS–­2 will probably weigh 9,000 to 10,000 pounds; two could be carried by both the BEAR and BISON. The BADGER could carry one and possibly two. A range degradation of 8–10 percent for these aircraft when carrying one missile, and 15–20 percent when currying two is estimated. f The BADGER probably would be used as the carrier aircraft for the AS–­3. Launch altitude is about 35,000 feet. The BADGER’s radius would be about the same as with AS–­1. g The Assistant Chief of Naval Operations for Intelligence, Department of the Navy, believes that the AS–­3 warhead weight should be 1,000 pounds, and that guidance should be inertial with active radar homing and a provision for command override of the inertial guidance system.
