228 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement CH–5. Despatch from the Chargé in Chile (Belton) to the Department of State1  Santiago, May 20, 1958. No. 1142. SUBJECT U. S. Policy Toward Chile Because Vice President Nixon’s South American trip2 did not include Chile, the following synthesis of attitudes of friendly Chileans toward U.S.–Latin American policy, combined with the Embassy’s analysis and suggestions for possible modifications, may be helpful in the current re-­examination of that policy. The Embassy believes Chilean views are of particular interest because the Chilean free press, combined with Chile’s traditionally democratic governmental processes and outlook, provide a better basis for local understanding of the U.S. than is available in almost any other country south of the border. Much criticism of U.S. policy has recently developed here. It gradually rose above what might be called the normal level as the Chilean economic situation deteriorated due to low copper prices. It reached flood stage with the Department of Interior press release of April 11 on copper tariffs, and it overflowed on all sides as evidence of criticism in other South American countries accumulated with the progress of the Vice President’s trip. In considering this problem, the Embassy believes it important to bear in mind that a basically friendly feeling toward the U.S. exists among the majority of Chileans. Much of the criticism, and certainly the most constructive aspect of it, comes from people who recognize, accept, and want a continuation of the U.S. as the predominant foreign influence in this country. It is also highly important to remember that Chileans are adept in seeing the mote in our eye and not the beam in their own, and that the missing elements for which they criticize us are often missing because of our conditioning their supply on Chilean performance, which has been faulty. Nonetheless, if we want Chile to be a 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.25/5–2058. Confidential. Information on the source text indicated that this despatch was “Written with the advice, counsel and assistance of:” Robert H. S. Eakens, Counselor for Economic Affairs, Donovan Q. Zook, First Secretary-Counselor, and Robert J. Door, First Secretary; Oliver L. Sause, Jr., Deputy Director, USOM, Nicholas A. Luongo, and Harold Robinson of the USOM; George Butler and Hewson A. Ryan of the USIA mission; and Col. Leland R. Drake, Army Attaché. 2 Reference is to the Vice President’s good-­will tour of eight South American countries, April 27–May 15, 1958. For documentation concerning the trip, see Documents BL–5–9, 12; CH–5; CO–9; EC–3–7; NI–4, 7; PA–1; PE–5–6, 8–11; UR–2–3
