684 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII of super-power involvement in a region that stretches from Morocco to the Indian subcontinent remains the vital question informing the posture and policies of the nations in the region. On balance, we tend to disagree with the argument that ascribes the USSR’s Third World involvement and its involvement in Afghanistan largely to Soviet feelings of insecurity. We would argue that such behavior is more the product of confidence in a potentially enduring shift in the balance of power—a stronger sense of being a superpower and being perceived by others as such. This status and self-image has become an important determinant of Soviet behavior; a superpower would not let an “allied” regime in a bordering country go down the drain. At the same time, from the Soviet point of view, Afghanistan probably appeared an extremely low risk venture precisely because it was preceded by numerous ventures which, though they did not involve the direct use of large-scale Soviet forces, did involve an active Soviet military presence in countries remote from the borders of the Soviet Union, and located well within traditional Western spheres of influence. The Soviet ability to carry out these ventures without incurring drastic costs enhanced Moscow’s confidence that it could intervene with relative impunity in Afghanistan. Perhaps to Moscow’s surprise, this intervention did finally precipitate the sort of Western reaction that the Kremlin may well have feared, but tended to discount in view of the relatively passive reaction to its earlier involvements elsewhere. Even if those who see the invasion as an aberration were completely correct in their explanation, there would be grounds for skepticism about the policy implications they often tend to draw: namely, that if the USSR can terminate its Afghan adventure in relatively short order and without an undue loss of face, it is unlikely to try to expand its influence elsewhere in Southwest Asia or to challenge Western Third World interests militarily. However, unlike the symptomists, we do not take it to be an almost foregone conclusion that the invasion of Afghanistan will be followed by comparable acts of Soviet military self-assertiveness. Like the aberrationists, we consider it possible that the termination of the Afghan adventure will leave the Soviet Union willing and eager to resume the process of detente. However, as was true before the invasion, the Soviets will continue to interpret detente as permitting active military and quasi-military challenges to Western Third World interests. The real issue of this discussion—whether the Afghanistan invasion represents an aberration or a trend in Soviet policy—is the degree of restraint which has governed Soviet policy toward opportunities in the Third World, the nature and sources of that restraint, and changes in it. Some would acknowledge that while Soviet policies since the mid-1970’s have been more assertive and probing, such policies also
