718  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
161.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, November 7, 1979
SUBJECT
Telecommunications Policy
I am submitting for your signature a directive on telecommunica-
tions policy. It is greatly needed for two reasons:
First, you have sent a message to the Hill supporting deregulation 
of the telecommunications industry. If deregulation is written into law, 
the requirements for the Defense and other agencies in the National 
Communications System (NCS) to prescribe national security criteria 
to common carriers will increase significantly. They will also need the 
authority in new legislation to develop and ensure national security 
and emergency preparedness capabilities. The directive proposed by 
the NCS and Harold Brown provides a combination of long-­term objec-
tives and specific operating principles for dealing with common carri-
ers to achieve the C3I capabilities we need.
Second, the National Communications System (the Secretary of 
Defense is the Executive Agent), which integrates all national security 
communications systems, has relied almost exclusively on AT&T for 
voluntary hardening interoperatibility, and creating a sufficiently dense 
network to make it impossible for the Soviets to prevent “connectivity” 
for SIOP purposes. A recent SAC connectivity study and some Defense 
studies2 have thrown doubt on the survivability of the AT&T system 
under stress today. By deregulating and forcing Defense to give more 
guidance to industry, we shall be taking Defense from under AT&T’s 
protective wing and making its analysts determine more precisely what 
capability we have and what we may need to add or relinquish.
The absence of national objectives and guidance has allowed the 
C3I concerns to become fragmented and unfocussed. The directive at 
Tab A3 will not cause major improvements at once, but it will place 
responsibility more precisely and provide directions which are neces-
sary for improvements.
Harold Brown, as Executive Agent of the NCS (his memo is at 
Tab B),4 supports this directive. Its substance has been staffed through 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General 
Odom File, Box 50, Telecommunications: 11–12/79. Secret. Sent for action.
2 Not further identified.
3 Not found attached. The directive is printed as Document 165.
4 Not found attached.
