International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
753
would prepare an informal paper describing ways in which this issue
might be addressed, and the pros and cons of doing so. I have asked the
State Department to prepare such a paper, drawing, among other
things, on the substance of the discussions that Ambassador Gerard
Smith had in late 1979 with British, French, German, and Japanese
representatives
about
changes
in
present
nuclear
fuel
supply
arrangements.
4. Energy. At the afternoon meeting on December 10, the Ottawa
Summit energy agenda was discussed.
(a) Monitoring. All agreed that the Ottawa Summit should monitor
fulfillment of energy commitments made at the Venice Summit. This
will include monitoring of Venice agreements regarding international
cooperation to develop new technologies, as well of individual coun-
tries’ national actions to achieve the agreed Venice energy production
and conservation goals. The seven nation High Level Group, estab-
lished at Venice to undertake this monitoring in cooperation with IEA
head Lantzke, will prepare a preliminary report for the Personal Repre-
sentatives by early March, and a final report in May or June. The French
suggested that this Group might also consider whether the production
and conservation targets agreed at Venice should be changed, since
they believe that these targets rest on over-optimistic assumptions re-
garding future OPEC production. The Japanese and others demurred,
but seemed mildly pacified when the French indicated that they would
only raise the need for change in targets if the High Level Group re-
ported that large changes were required by new developments.
(b) Relation to World Bank. It was agreed that the Ottawa Summit
might give a further push to the World Bank’s creation of an affiliate,
largely financed by the private market, to help the LDCs produce more
energy, as discussed at Venice, and that this should be a second item on
the Ottawa Summit’s energy agenda.
(c) Oil Bank. The French and Italian Personal Representatives
pushed for Summit discussion of proposals that their Energy Ministers
have made for new agreements regarding creation of an allied oil stock-
pile and drawing rights on that stockpile. It was agreed that each
Summit Personal Representative would advise the Canadians in two
weeks as to whether he would object to the High Level Group exam-
ining these proposals. Since then the British have objected, suggesting
that these issues should be considered, instead, in the International En-
ergy Agency and the European Community. The Japanese and
Germans have also indicated some reservations, but are prepared to go
along with a consensus in favor of considering these issues. The other
Personal Representatives agreed that the French and Italian gov-
ernments were entitled to consideration of their proposals in the course
