916
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
348.
Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 29, 1980
SUBJECT
Alternative Option for Iran
Stan Turner’s memo (attached)2 is not, in my view, particularly
perceptive or accurate in portraying our existing action policy toward
Iran, in projecting the likely course of events, or in identifying the
nature of the options which we are likely to face. His memo ignores
the covert action strategy developed in June3 and formally approved
by the President. [10 lines not declassified]
[5 paragraphs (48 lines) not declassified]
I do not believe that the attached memo spells out the present policy
or our options in sufficiently complete form to permit a productive
discussion at the Cabinet level. Instead, I would recommend that you
discuss with Turner the possibility of a prior meeting of David’s [Aaron]
Special Intelligence Group (Carlucci, Newsom, Komer, Pustay) which
has previously examined covert action options prior to consideration
by the SCC. I would anticipate that David’s group could sharpen the
focus of the CIA proposal and flesh out a set of operationally feasible
options which could then be taken up by principals. Alternatively,
David’s group might determine that no further action by principals
was required.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box
87, For President or Brzezinski Only File, Iran Sensitive 5/80–10/80. Secret; Sensitive.
2 Attached but not printed. Turner’s memorandum transmitted a August 27 paper
prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency, “Policy re Iran: Alternative Option,” which
discussed the current policy and its weaknesses, [text not declassified]. The paper ques-
tioned whether the collapse of the Khomeini regime would work to advance U.S. interests
since that might bring the left to power and inflame regional insurgencies. Some analysts
believed a clerical state would be anti-American but also strongly anti-Soviet.
3 See Document 293.
