Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 among consuming countries. A major objective for this Administration must be substantial progress in energy conservation at home and abroad and an increase and diversification in sources of supply, with particular attention to safe development of nuclear technology. At the same time we will aim at limiting further major price increases by the OPEC states and at strengthening the coordination within the IEA to deal with any new embargo or restraints on production by the oil producers. The priorities of energy must not obscure concern for the environment. Domestic and diplomatic efforts must and can be mutually reenforcing to help assure clean air and clean water. International conferences on clean water and desert control this year are setting priorities for the next decade and more in these areas.5 A “law of the sea” will also serve that end, as well as open new access to new resources.6 Our goal should be to get the kind of LOS treaty which will meet our real national interests, however, and not one which limits and restricts our access to the seabed resources. —New Relationship with the Third World. The UN system is increasingly the focus of our dialogue with the developing countries. We are trying to strengthen the effectiveness of the UN and its related agencies. There is some risk of domestic hostility in this effort, and we must work with Congress and the public to avert erosion of the US role in the UN and other multilateral institutions. We may want to fashion new forums for constructive discussion of shared concerns in finance, investment, energy, economic development, trade and commodities—lest discourse lapse into polemic at the General Assembly. We particularly want to negotiate agreements to stabilize prices of key commodities, possibly linked by a common fund.7 pp. 656–662. Two days later, the President delivered an address before a joint session of Congress. In it, he asserted that the Executive and Legislative branches must “work together even more closely to deal with the greatest domestic challenge that our Nation will face in our lifetime. We must act now—together—to devise and to implement a comprehensive national energy plan to cope with a crisis that otherwise could overwhelm us.” Carter referenced the seven goals—designed to reduce energy consumption and to increase the uses of alternative sources of power—outlined in his televised address and recommended that Congress “adopt these goals by joint resolution as a demonstration of our mutual commitment to achieve them.” (Ibid., pp. 663–664) The full text of Carter’s address, as well as a fact sheet on the energy program, are ibid., pp. 663–688.
