Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
203
among consuming countries. A major objective for this Administration
must be substantial progress in energy conservation at home and abroad and
an increase and diversification in sources of supply, with particular atten-
tion to safe development of nuclear technology. At the same time we
will aim at limiting further major price increases by the OPEC states
and at strengthening the coordination within the IEA to deal with any
new embargo or restraints on production by the oil producers.
The priorities of energy must not obscure concern for the environ-
ment. Domestic and diplomatic efforts must and can be mutually reen-
forcing to help assure clean air and clean water. International confer-
ences on clean water and desert control this year are setting priorities
for the next decade and more in these areas.5 A “law of the sea” will
also serve that end, as well as open new access to new resources.6 Our
goal should be to get the kind of LOS treaty which will meet our real na-
tional interests, however, and not one which limits and restricts our
access to the seabed resources.
—New Relationship with the Third World. The UN system is increas-
ingly the focus of our dialogue with the developing countries. We are
trying to strengthen the effectiveness of the UN and its related
agencies. There is some risk of domestic hostility in this effort, and we
must work with Congress and the public to avert erosion of the US role in
the UN and other multilateral institutions. We may want to fashion new
forums for constructive discussion of shared concerns in finance, invest-
ment, energy, economic development, trade and commodities—lest
discourse lapse into polemic at the General Assembly. We particularly
want to negotiate agreements to stabilize prices of key commodities,
possibly linked by a common fund.7
pp. 656–662. Two days later, the President delivered an address before a joint session of
Congress. In it, he asserted that the Executive and Legislative branches must “work to-
gether even more closely to deal with the greatest domestic challenge that our Nation will
face in our lifetime. We must act now—together—to devise and to implement a compre-
hensive national energy plan to cope with a crisis that otherwise could overwhelm us.”
Carter referenced the seven goals—designed to reduce energy consumption and to in-
crease the uses of alternative sources of power—outlined in his televised address and rec-
ommended that Congress “adopt these goals by joint resolution as a demonstration of
our mutual commitment to achieve them.” (Ibid., pp. 663–664) The full text of Carter’s
address, as well as a fact sheet on the energy program, are ibid., pp. 663–688.
5 The UN Water Conference took place in Mar del Plata, Argentina, March 14–25.
The UN Conference on Desertification was scheduled to take place in Nairobi, Kenya,
August 29–September 9.
6 See footnote 5, Document 24.
7 Presumable reference to commodity proposals introduced at the fourth UNCTAD
conference, held in Nairobi, Kenya, May 3–28, 1976. Delegates adopted an Integrated
Program for Commodities (IPC), with an objective of stabilizing commodity prices. The
final resolution also called for a conference to develop a Common Fund for Commodities
(CFC). For additional information on UNCTAD IV, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol.
XXXI, Foreign Economic Policy, 1973–1976, Documents 301, 304–310.
