Non-Proliferation
865
President I inherited a moratorium on the export of nuclear fuel which
was imposed by my predecessor.2 I know this concerned all of you.
I want to work with you to find ways of stopping proliferation and
the possible use of nuclear fuel for explosives in order to export fuels
which will be used for nuclear power. There are a number of different
degrees of status among nations on this issue. Some NPT signatories
produce weapons, other do not. Other have vowed never to produce
weapons. We must cooperatively address this question. I know of the
national sensitivities which are involved. I want you to know that I
plan to expand US enrichment production capabilities. I want to insure
that if we can find means of improving accountability, treatment of
waste products and proper safe guards we will insure fuels for nations
who want to produce electricity and are willing to comply with these
safeguards. We believe it is necessary to assess the future of the pluto-
nium economy and especially the fast breeder reactor, although we be-
lieve this technology won’t be needed for 20–25 years.
We built two reprocessing plants in the US before I became Presi-
dent. They have been shut down because they did not work. They did
not help on waste disposal, but instead generated by-products. We
have also decided to cancel construction of our next reprocessing plant
and we won’t build the breeder, although we will not prevent others
from building it if they wish. As I said, we don’t think a breeder will be
needed for 25 years. Some of you have different opinions. And I can un-
derstand your reluctance to rely totally on us for uranium.
But it is difficult for me to get our people to support shipments of
uranium supplies unless there is some assurance that the uranium will
not be used for weapons. I suggest therefore that we set up a group of
technicians to examine this issue and report back to us. This can pro-
vide an analysis of the problem so that we can understand what the
needs are. I cannot control people’s views on the export of raw mate-
rials unless I can give them answers on the issue of explosives. I would
rather take action along with you than action which might be ill ad-
vised. We should be concerned with the complete fuel cycle including
the availability of uranium reserves around the world and the inten-
tions of suppliers to increase enrichment facilities. We should define
the possible constraints to be placed on consumers before they receive
supplies. This should be done on a multilateral basis. We should also
look at the breeder from a common vantage point and look at how to
resolve the issue of nuclear waste disposal. I know that I have already
aggravated leaders here because of my hesitation to change my prede-
cessor’s decisions on fuel exports.
2 See footnote 2, Document 317.
