840 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 202. Briefing Note for October 1 NSC Meeting1 Washington, September 29, 1959 MOBILIZATION BASE Our first item, Mr. President, is a new mobilization base paragraph for the basic national security policy. When the Council wound up its basic policy discussions in July, this was one of the two paragraphs left in their old form for further work by the agencies. The other one con­ cerned stockpiling, and the PB hopes to be able to present a revision of that paragraph to the Council soon. In reading this revision of the mobilization base paragraph, you may have noticed that it has been changed considerably in form. It is now divided into two sections, one on what is called the “military logis­ tics base” and one on what is called the “civilian readiness base.” This change in form reflects, I believe, the fact that the term “mobilization base” no longer means what it used to. Before the Korean War, the term referred to a foundation on which expansion could take place after gen­ eral war began. Accordingly, “mobilization base” still suggests all kind of World War II thinking. The PB considered this semantic problem, but decided not to propose a new term at this time. Turning to the substance of the paper, I should first like to highlight for you the changes in subparagraph a, the military section. The first one is the abandonment of the M-­plus-­6-­months concept. This is the second time in the last 2½ years that mobilization base thinking has under­ gone a drastic change, with all that such a change means for procure­ ment, reserves, industrial planning and so forth. In early 1957 we went from a concept of M-­plus-­36-­months to one of M-­plus-­6. This substan­ tial step was reflected in our 1957 Basic National Security Policy state­ ment. Defense now feels that planning should not envisage a 6-­month mobilization, but rather one of smaller proportions. For that reason, the old M-­plus-­6 language has been dropped, and the more flexible lan­ guage in 3(c) at the top of page 3 substituted. Paragraph 64–­f also has been appropriately revised. The second change in the military section involved the insertion of the sentence on nuclear damage just above the middle of page 3. Although this represents a change in the basic policy paragraph, it is not new policy since it reflects the President’s decision made last December (Action 2019–­b). A third change does not clearly come through in the text. It consists of Defense’s intention to make separate analyses of general war needs and local war needs. You may know that it has always been assumed in the past that preparation 1 Source: Mobilization base paragraph of NSC 5906. Top Secret. 3 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
