1310 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —State should do a contingency paper laying out possible scenarios, risks, alternative regimes and their impact, and possible courses of U.S. action (precautionary and reactive); —we should compare notes with our key allies who have some involvement in Syria, about the situation and possible course of events (UK, France, FRG, Italy, Japan); —we should go now to both Jordan and Saudi Arabia, along similar lines, but seeking to draw on their particular knowledge and concerns about Syria. With the Saudis, we should also stress the Soviet angle; —we should also have lower key discussions with the Egyptians and Israelis on the issue—at some point stressing with the latter the need for caution during any transition beyond Assad; —at some point later, there might be value in discussions with the Soviets on the seriousness of our concerns. This would be premature, however, until we know a lot more about the situation. (S) When we get the results of these soundings, we will be in a better position to chart our course intelligently. This exercise would also get other countries sensitized to the serious risks involved, and could thus reduce the problems of ill-considered reaction to a change of regime in Damascus. (S) Tab I Alert Memorandum for the National Security Council Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency4 Washington, July 11, 1980. SUBJECT Syria Although not imminent, Syrian President Assad’s assassination or overthrow is significantly more likely today than it was before the 26 June assassination attempt. I believe that US policymakers need to focus sooner rather than later on the potential adverse regional consequences of Assad’s removal from the scene. The attached Alert Memorandum outlines briefly some of these regional implications. [handling restriction not declassified] Frank C. Carlucci 4 Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. Brzezinski added a handwritten notation to Hunter, Sick, Odom, and Ermarth, dated July 15, in the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum: “Pl[ea]se get together and discuss—give me your recom[mendation]s. ZB.”
