National Security Policy 137 in their basements. Secretary Dulles disagreed with Secretary McElroy on this point. General Cutler next called for the views of the Director of the ­Budget. Mr. Stans stated that the Budget Bureau believed it undesirable to pro­ ceed at this time with any more than a small part of the program recom­ mended by the Interdepartmental Committee in NSC 5807. The financial problems were, of course, obvious, but Mr. Stans could perceive other objections as well. He believed that if we undertook the prototype shel­ ter construction program, recommended in NSC 5807, we would be inevitably committed to a full-­scale shelter program. Moreover, under­ taking a shelter program would interfere seriously with vital programs for strengthening the active defenses of the United States. But above all other objections was the fact, attested to by both the Interdepartmental Committee and the Planning Board, that many “unresolved problems” existed with respect to the shelter program. Therefore, before we invest substantial sums in any shelter construction program, the Bureau of the Budget feels that further studies, such as those recommended by the Planning Board, should be undertaken. In illustration of his point, Mr. Stans cited the value of studies on human tolerance of radiation. In summary, concluded Mr. Stans, the Budget Bureau favored only the following recommendations of the Interdepartmental Committee: (1) research on weapons effects; (2) research on the human tolerance level of radiation; (3) a very limited program of public education; and (4) studies as to what protection now actually exists throughout the United States. Mr. Stans added his belief that all these measures should be undertaken at a cost of no more than $25 million a year for two years, assuming some financial help from the States and the municipalities. In reply to Mr. Stans, the President said that we could talk all we wanted about money, but if we know that shelter programs will save the lives of millions of people, money won’t matter much in the final decision. Dr. Killian expressed the view that the primary task of the United States was to concentrate on developing our active defenses in order to keep the nuclear bombs away. These should have priority over passive defense measures. Secondly, said Dr. Killian, if the Government were to embark on the kind of program of public education recommended by the Interdepartmental Committee, it was quite likely that we would find ourselves obliged to go on to undertake a much larger shelter pro­ gram. Thirdly, and with respect to the Planning Board recommenda­ tions for three additional studies over and above those recommended by the Interdepartmental Committee, Dr. Killian expressed doubt that any of these studies would actually bring us to as definite conclusions as the Planning Board hoped to achieve. Nevertheless, Dr. Killian advocated proceeding with the studies recommended by the Planning
