Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 611 . . . if these steps are not taken, we will take additional measures which we have not taken thus far . . . the NSC meeting had been held . . . and the President will make an appropriate announcement tomorrow. CV said it would be a mistake to refer to it. They were not able to produce in the past. This could create another credibility problem for us. JP said we need some basis for it. CV suggested saying that the Revolutionary Council had met for 5½ hours, we have information that Bani Sadr will make a statement at noon their time and that the President will make a statement. HB thought we should hold off for today, but if the decision is bad it will hurt us. HJ said we will take a beating tonight if we do not go ahead. We can’t make Bani-Sadr’s statement for him. They say we are giving them no reason to make a statement. JP noted that we had asked them for more assurance. ZB suggested saying that the President met with the NSC to review the situation and that an appropriate statement will be made tomorrow. If we say what we are going to do, we give Bani-Sadr an excuse to back out. LC said if we make a statement we should start with the gist of what we told Bani-Sadr, that there has been a meeting of the Revolutionary Council, we have no report, that we will wait until we hear the speech tomorrow. We cannot make a speech without referring to the confusion over the messages. The Pres said that would be demeaning. We could indicate that reports from Iran say . . . ZB said anything could happen today. The Pres could go on the tube tomorrow. The Pres said we need to be able to tide over until tomorrow. HJ suggested saying that we have reports from Iran that the Revolutionary Council has met and made decisions concerning the transfer of the hostages. We are also informed that Bani-Sadr will make a speech tomorrow, so the President will make an appropriate statement to the U.S. people tomorrow. ZB wondered why we should say that. It will be disappointing if the results are not good. Why do we want to put out the story? HJ said we would take a beating overnight. DA suggested saying the NSC met to review reports . . . HJ said if we do not announce our actions, we need to give the reason. The reason is that we have reports that the hostage question will be addressed by the Revolutionary Council tomorrow. HB wondered about the so-called message to Khomeini?
