Comprehensive Test Ban
347
9. (S) The Executive Summary overemphasizes the probabilities
that the leadership of the Soviet Union would be unwilling to conduct
an evasion program. In the past, the United States has officially notified
the Soviet Union of 21 violations of the LTBT, but all charges have been
denied by the Soviet Union. There is also some question by experts in
the United States about two Soviet detonations which may have ex-
ceeded the 150 kt limit in the informal understanding regarding the
TTBT. It is recognized that these instances may be considered by some
as of a different nature than a violation of a CTB. However, it must still
be pointed out [3 lines not declassified] that even when clear evidence
of a violation exists, any charges against the Soviet Union may be
meaningless.
10. (S) In view of the above, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that a
CTB is not in the best interests of the United States at this time because
of:
a. The potential adverse effect on military capabilities caused by
US inability to develop military systems required to respond to current
and future threats, US inability to maintain a nuclear weapons tech-
nology base, and US inability to insure continued nuclear systems
reliability.
b. The known limits on US verification capabilities.
c. [2 lines not declassified]
d. [2½ lines not declassified]
11. (S) If a decision is made to proceed with negotiations for a CTB,
the Joint Chiefs of Staff consider the following points to be pertinent:
a. An unverified or unilateral moratorium should be avoided.
b. Nuclear testing should continue during CTB negotiations, and
the effective date of a CTB should be selected so as to permit the com-
pletion of testing for key systems. Although some systems now under
development might be placed in the stockpile without further planned
testing, it would be at the cost of significantly reduced effectiveness
and reliability. It should be noted that testing [4 lines not declassified]
c. [1½ lines not declassified]
d. PNEs should not be permitted in a CTB environment. Despite a
lengthy exploration in the PRM–16 response to find ways of accommo-
dating PNEs in a CTB with minimum risk to national security, there ap-
pears to be no feasible way to prevent military advantages accruing
from the conduct of PNEs.
e. All nuclear powers should eventually be signatory to a CTB. In
the short term, only the Soviet Union threatens US security. However,
long-term advances by the PRC or other countries also could become a
factor. Therefore, any cessation of testing must allow for periodic re-
view and a clear opportunity to renew testing if all nuclear weapon
states do not adhere within a reasonable period of time.
f. The TTBT and Peaceful Nuclear Explosions Treaty should be ra-
tified as soon as possible.
