282 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV larger possible attacks starting after longer periods of mobilization, based on our analysis of Warsaw Pact force readiness and logistic constraints behind the inter-German border. Our objective now is to be able to cope not just with an attack occurring after one particular mobilization time (and thus of one particular size on D-Day), but rather with an attack varying appropriately in size and occurring after any mobilization time from the 4-­day minimum onward.13 This change has had major ramifications in our planning. With 23 days to prepare before the fighting breaks out, we could do a lot with mobility forces (particularly with airlift) to move divisions to Europe and reinforce NATO for the coming attack. But when the problem gets down to much less than a week’s warning, there is really only one practical solution: we must preposition equipment in Europe. We have the passenger airlift to move the troops quickly (especially by commandeering our vast commercial fleets under the CRAF program), but there is no practical way to move their heavy equipment in that short a time. (This does not mean that cargo airlift has no further utility. It is still just as important for deployments in non-NATO contingencies, for inter-­ theater lift, possibly even for intra-­theater lift, and it is still needed for a NATO war, though we cannot count on it for our early requirements.) The CG thus lays plans for prepositioning equipment for all the active combat divisions planned for deployment to Europe except for two very light divisions (the 82nd airborne and the 101st Air Assault) and the 2nd Division after its withdrawal from Korea.14 This is an ambitious program, and thus it is still in the tentative stage. We need further analysis of where in Europe we are going to store all that equipment; we need to make sure it’s not vulnerable;15 we need to make sure our tentative plan to get all this done by FY84 is practical. Thus, what we have so far is the outline of a plan that is subject to change. But I hasten to add that this is a serious plan, and one of the key elements in improving our contribution to the alliance. Consequently in the Fiscal Guidance to the Services, I have diverted funds from the Navy and the Air Force to the Army to pay for this prepositioning.16 If later analysis indicates that the scope or timing of this tentative plan is too ambitious, I will return an appropriate amount of funding to the Navy and Air 13 Carter underlined “attack” and “after any mobilization time from the 4-­day minimum onward” in this sentence, and drew an arrow in the left margin pointing to it. 14 Carter underlined “prepositioning,” “all,” “except,” and “two very light divisions” in this sentence, and drew an arrow in the left margin pointing to it. 15 Carter underlined “vulnerable” and drew an arrow in the left margin pointing to it. 16 Carter underlined “diverted funds from the Navy” and “for this prepositioning” in this sentence.
