18
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
The world is different now. The old postwar monopolies of eco-
nomic resource and industrial power have been swept aside and re-
placed by new structures. The Common Market countries and others
like Japan, Mexico, Brazil, and Iran are strong and self-sufficient.
We have learned that we cannot and should not try to intervene
militarily in the internal affairs of other countries unless our own na-
tion is endangered.
Over 100 new nations have come into being in the past 30 years. A
few have wealth, but most exist in bitter poverty. In many, independ-
ence has set loose long-suppressed emotions and antagonisms. In
Uganda and Angola, Bangladesh and Lebanon—and recently in the
United Nations—we have seen what can happen when nationalist and
racial passions, or tribal or religious hatreds, are left to run their course.
We cannot isolate ourselves from the forces loose in the world. The
question is not whether we take an interest in foreign affairs, but how
we do it and why we do it.
In the last few years, I have traveled in foreign lands, and met with
many of their leaders. I have served on international bodies, such as the
Trilateral Commission, which makes recommendations on some of
these problems. I have given thought to the structure of what our for-
eign policy should be.
There are certain basic principles I believe should guide whatever
is done in foreign lands in the name of the United States of America.
First, our policies should be as open and honest and decent and
compassionate as the American people themselves are. Our policies
should be shaped with the participation of Congress, from the outset,
on a bipartisan basis. And they should emerge from broad and
well-informed public debate and participation.
Second, our policies should treat the people of other nations as in-
dividuals, with the same dignity and respect as we demand for our-
selves. No matter where they live, no matter who they are, the people
of other lands are just as concerned with the struggles of daily life as
you and I. They work hard, they have families whom they love, and
they have hopes and dreams, and a great deal of pride. And they want
to live in peace. Their basic personal motives are the same as ours.
Support Humanitarian Aspirations
Third, it must be the responsibility of the President to restore the
moral authority of this country in its conduct of foreign policy. We
should work for peace and the control of arms in everything we do. We
should support the humanitarian aspirations of the world’s people.
Policies that strengthen dictators or create refugees, policies that pro-
long suffering or postpone racial justice, weaken that authority. Policies
that encourage economic progress and social justice promote it. In an
