Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
83
peal. It will have great psychological impact. I would like to restore our
position in Southern Africa. Dr. Kissinger was making good progress
until the election took away his authority.”
REPRESENTATIVE LONG said, half of the House has supported a
resolution on a nuclear test ban treaty.11 He asked how good a friend of
ours President Sadat is. “I think that Sadat launched the most bloody
war in the history of the Middle East, and we are building up a man
who will start another war in the Middle East.”
SECRETARY VANCE. There is no question Sadat is still a major
figure and the man we should deal with in Egypt. I talked with Henry
Kissinger and he told me Sadat was helpful and he considered him
useful. I will have a better chance to answer your question after I talk
with him.
ZBIGNIEW BRZEZINSKI. The question is how trustworthy is
Sadat compared to others. We are dealing with a political reality, for
the first time in 22 years Egypt’s foreign policy is not based on playing
the Russians off against us. Egypt is susceptible to an accommodation
with Israel and has moved away from Arab socialism. The long range
problem is radicalization of the country and it is a perilous race. A
weak economy can produce political instability and bring a radical re-
gime to power that will take a more extreme view.
REPRESENTATIVE HAMILTON talked of the need to deny and
delay arms sales to Israel and the Middle East in general including
F–18’s to Iran and F–16’s to Saudi Arabia.
SECRETARY VANCE said, “we will sink the peninsula if we keep
selling arms.”
REPRESENTATIVE ZABLOCKI discussed his bill dealing with
nuclear non-proliferation and the Arab boycott. He talked about di-
viding the package to deal with the boycott earlier and then nuclear
non-proliferation.
SECRETARY VANCE said work on the boycott provision will
have been completed when he returns from the Middle East and then I
will testify.
circumventing UN trade sanctions instituted in 1966 against Southern Rhodesia.
(Congress and the Nation, vol. V, 1977–1980, p. 47)
11 Presumable reference to House Resolution 209, introduced by Representative
Hamilton Fish, Jr. (R-New York) in the House of Representatives on January 31, which
supported the President’s intentions to pursue a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty,
seek ratification of SALT II, and pursue an agreement with the Soviet Union for major re-
ductions in atomic weapons. Representative Richard Ottinger (D-New York) introduced
10 identical versions of House Resolution 209, with different cosponsors, on January 31
and February 1. All resolutions were referred to the House International Relations
Committee.
