Chile 237 we will have to acquiesce to such a downgrading. I also understand that the large loophole in existing controls created by the downgrading of copper wire of under 6 mm has already resulted in a substantial movement of free-­world copper to the bloc in the form of wire and that it is doubtful whether the downgrading of other copper would lead to a significant charge in the supply availabilities of the bloc. I further understand that the chances of our obtaining agreement within COCOM to upgrading the controls on less than 6 mm copper are negligible. It is pertinent to recall that for some time the communists in Chile argued that Chile’s economy was suffering from U.S. objections to Chilean trade in nitrates with Communist China and that there would be a significant improvement in Chile’s balance-­of-­payments position and in the position of the ailing nitrate industry if Chile could only take advantage of the “tremendous” potential market that existed in communist China for Chilean nitrates. In 1954, the Chilean Government finally consulted with us on this point and was informed that we did not object to Chilean sales of nitrates to Communist China. Since that date, to our knowledge, not one pound of Chilean nitrates has been sold to Communist China and an effective communist propaganda argument has been eliminated. I understand that information available to the departmental officers concerned with strategic controls indicates that continuation of existing international controls on exports of copper to the bloc will not have a significant impact on Soviet military capabilities so long as copper in the form of wire is available to the Block. In these circumstances U.S. initiative in agreeing at this time to the elimination of these controls would remove an issue damaging to our relations with Chile and with other copper-­producing and trading countries, could help to forestall the possibility that a pro-­Soviet administration might be elected in an important country of the Western Hemisphere, and thereby could make a contribution to U.S. security interests more substantial than maintenance of controls which apparently no longer serve a significant purpose. Recommendation: Accordingly, I recommend that the Department: 1. After appropriate consultation with other agencies, agree to remove copper from the embargo list in the forthcoming Consultative Group negotiations. 2. Give prompt notification to Chile of the Consultative Group decision in order to obtain maximum advantage in U.S. Chilean relations.
