Chile  237
we will have to acquiesce to such a downgrading. I also understand that 
the large loophole in existing controls created by the downgrading of 
copper wire of under 6 mm has already resulted in a substantial move-
ment of free-­world copper to the bloc in the form of wire and that it is 
doubtful whether the downgrading of other copper would lead to a sig-
nificant charge in the supply availabilities of the bloc. I further under-
stand that the chances of our obtaining agreement within COCOM to 
upgrading the controls on less than 6 mm copper are negligible.
It is pertinent to recall that for some time the communists in Chile 
argued that Chile’s economy was suffering from U.S. objections to 
Chilean trade in nitrates with Communist China and that there would 
be a significant improvement in Chile’s balance-­of-­payments position 
and in the position of the ailing nitrate industry if Chile could only take 
advantage of the “tremendous” potential market that existed in com-
munist China for Chilean nitrates. In 1954, the Chilean Government 
finally consulted with us on this point and was informed that we did 
not object to Chilean sales of nitrates to Communist China. Since that 
date, to our knowledge, not one pound of Chilean nitrates has been sold 
to Communist China and an effective communist propaganda argu-
ment has been eliminated.
I understand that information available to the departmental officers 
concerned with strategic controls indicates that continuation of existing 
international controls on exports of copper to the bloc will not have a 
significant impact on Soviet military capabilities so long as copper in the 
form of wire is available to the Block. In these circumstances U.S. initia-
tive in agreeing at this time to the elimination of these controls would 
remove an issue damaging to our relations with Chile and with other 
copper-­producing and trading countries, could help to forestall the pos-
sibility that a pro-­Soviet administration might be elected in an important 
country of the Western Hemisphere, and thereby could make a contri-
bution to U.S. security interests more substantial than maintenance of 
controls which apparently no longer serve a significant purpose.
Recommendation:
Accordingly, I recommend that the Department:
1. After appropriate consultation with other agencies, agree to 
remove copper from the embargo list in the forthcoming Consultative 
Group negotiations.
2. Give prompt notification to Chile of the Consultative Group deci-
sion in order to obtain maximum advantage in U.S. Chilean relations.
