Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1179
9. Each Party shall have the right to conduct close-out inspections 
to confirm that the elimination of facilities has been completed.
10. Each Party shall have the right to conduct formerly declared 
facility inspections to confirm that facilities, notification of the elimi-
nation of which has been provided in accordance with paragraph 3 of 
Section I of the Notification Protocol, are not being used for purposes 
inconsistent with this Treaty.
11. Each Party shall conduct technical characteristics exhibitions, 
and shall have the right during such exhibitions by the other Party to 
conduct inspections of an ICBM and an SLBM of each type, and each 
variant thereof, and of a mobile launcher of ICBMs and each version of 
such launcher for each type of ICBM for mobile launchers of ICBMs. 
The purpose of such exhibitions shall be to permit the inspecting Party 
to confirm that technical characteristics correspond to the data speci-
fied for these items.
12. Each Party shall conduct distinguishability exhibitions for 
heavy bombers, former heavy bombers, and long-range nuclear 
ALCMs, and shall have the right during such exhibitions by the other 
Party to conduct inspections, of:
(a) heavy bombers equipped for long-range nuclear ALCMs. The 
purpose of such exhibitions shall be to permit the inspecting Party to 
confirm that the technical characteristics of each type and each vari-
ant of such heavy bombers correspond to the data specified for these 
items in Annex G to the Memorandum of Understanding; to demon-
strate the maximum number of long-range nuclear ALCMs for which a 
heavy bomber of each type and each variant is actually equipped; and 
to demonstrate that this number does not exceed the number provided 
for in paragraph 20 or 21 of Article V of this Treaty, as applicable;
(b) for each type of heavy bomber from any one of which a long-
range nuclear ALCM has been flight-tested, heavy bombers equipped 
for nuclear armaments other than long-range nuclear ALCMs, heavy 
bombers equipped for non-nuclear armaments, training heavy bomb-
ers, and former heavy bombers. If, for such a type of heavy bomber, 
there are no heavy bombers equipped for long-range nuclear ALCMs, 
a test heavy bomber from which a long-range nuclear ALCM has been 
flight-tested shall be exhibited. The purpose of such exhibitions shall 
be to demonstrate to the inspecting Party that, for each exhibited type 
of heavy bomber, each variant of heavy bombers equipped for nuclear 
armaments other than long-range nuclear ALCMs, each variant of 
heavy bombers equipped for non-nuclear armaments, each variant of 
training heavy bombers, and a former heavy bomber are distinguish-
able from one another and from each variant of heavy bombers of the 
same type equipped for long-range nuclear ALCMs; and
