514 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX apt to continue and escalate in the future as we all know, thus creating a most unfavorable atmosphere. On the other hand, we find the provision of paragraph 5 of the same article extremely difficult to accept. Like that of paragraph 2, it is both harmful and unnecessary. It gives rise to future controversy and contention.39 As you certainly know, we proposed a solution to the problem which the Israelis raised with respect to the conflict of obligations. Following your conversation with Vice President Mubarak on November 15,40 I instructed our delegation to prepare a new draft41 which was submitted to Secretary Vance and subsequently discussed with Defense Minister Weizman before being forwarded to the Israeli Cabinet. We proposed deleting paragraph 5 and amending paragraph 4 to read as follows:42 —“The parties undertake not to enter into any obligation or take any action in conflict with this treaty.”43 I trust that you agree with me that this formula meets the concerns of the Israelis if they are genuine. It covers all obligations so long as the parties are undertaking not to take any action which is inconsistent with their obligations under the treaty. Why should Israel insist on the present offensive language? Is it not significant that they reversed their acceptance of certain provisions and concepts after they had secured certain benefits in return for their acceptance? A case in point is their sudden reversal of their position on the sub-phases of the interim withdrawal. This was done 26 days after informing both of us of their willingness to withdraw from El-Arish in two months and from the oil fields area on the Gulf of Suez in 4 months. This was also done after obtaining your support for their request of exchanging ambassadors within one month from the completion of the interim withdrawal. When you met with our delegates on October 17,44 you used two arguments in order to persuade us to accept such a demand. The first was that Israel accepted to reduce the time for completing the interim withdrawal from nine to six months. The second argument was that Israel has offered to withdraw from El-Arish within two months. In other words, their previous position was used to extract some benefits for them. By legal norms, a 39 Vance underlined this paragraph. 40 Presumably, a mistaken reference to Document 140. 41 Not found. 42 Vance underlined and highlighted the last two sentences of this paragraph. He wrote in the right-hand margin: “Rejected by Israelis.” 43 Vance underlined this sentence. 44 See Document 89.
