National Security Policy  23
guidance building. The redundant guidance stations can control either 
of the two launch complexes. In the lower left is a typical horizontal 
launcher with the missile in place and the environmental cover par­
tially withdrawn. In this position, the missile is in a readiness state of 
something greater than 15 minutes but less than two hours. In the lower 
right, the missile is shown in the erected position ready for launch. This 
represents a readiness state of something in the order of 15 minutes.
CHART 8
TITAN. The Martin factory at Denver was completed on sched­
ule. A design engineering inspection of the complete TITAN missile 
was held in March. This was the first time the using agencies were 
able to thoroughly examine a TITAN configuration. Design criteria 
were established for the TITAN operational hard base. The Aerojet 
General Corporation delivered the first TITAN production engine to 
Martin. The first complete radio inertial guidance system was deliv­
ered in the spring.
CHART 9
This is the squadron configuration of the TITAN hard base. The 
missile will be stored in a hardened site designed to withstand 100 psi 
over-­pressure. The silo-­type launch facilities are grouped around a cen­
tral launch control facility resulting in a very compact unit.
As we near our initial operational dates, the areas of logistics and 
operational training assume greater priority and importance. In this 
respect the Air Force’s Air Materiel Command established a ballistic 
missile logistics system designed to react instantly to resupply. This has 
been accomplished through an electronic data processing system for 
the control of spare parts for the land-­based ballistic missile program.
Another significant event occurred at the close of 1957 when the 
Strategic Air Command assumed responsibility for the initial oper­
ational capability for Air Force ballistic missiles. This is the step that 
had been planned from the beginning and comes at a time when max­
imum benefit can be realized by the operational command. The added 
strength of the Strategic Air Command to the program will accelerate 
planning, training, and strategic-operational capabilities.
CHART 10
Now, Mr. President, I would like to present the current plans for 
the build-­up of our ballistic missile forces. The first in the series is the 
land-­based 1500 mile IRBM’s bearing a 1500 pound thermonuclear 
warhead in the excess of 1 megaton yield. These missiles have been 
designed against conservative operational characteristics and perfor­
mance criteria in order to insure their earliest possible deployment and
