International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 291 (c) U.S. Our ability to press other governments to follow sensible economic policies will depend partly on how well we do at home ourselves. As you know, I feel that a plausible and effective antiinflationary program in 1978 will be the key to sustained growth. I also believe that such a program is most likely to come about if it is placed in the hands of a politically savvy person who does nothing else but manage and negotiate its implementation with the interest groups concerned—like Bob Strauss in the trade field. This would have the added advantage of dramatizing your interest, at home and abroad. 2. International Indebtedness The new IMF Witteveen facility foreshadowed at the Summit is being established, to help countries meet external deficits while they work out long-term domestic adjustments. The task in 1978 will be to get this agreement through the Congress without crippling changes. 3. Trade At the start of 1977, few people expected trade negotiations to have progressed as far as they have. A lot of the credit goes to Bob Strauss; he is the first to say that the Summit commitments you persuaded your London colleagues to accept and your post-Summit support were essential to his success. There are large obstacles ahead: We will have to keep the heat on foreign governments (especially France) to ensure that we get not only deep tariff cuts but also extensive non-tariff agreements in time to go to the Hill in early 1979 with a sufficiently balanced and comprehensive agreement to head-off protectionism. This issue will come to a head at the 1978 Summit, when the trade negotiations will be reaching their climax. 4. Energy Your decision to make energy the centerpiece of your policy in 1977 was a wise and necessary one which should pay off over the longer term. (a) Conventional Energy. The recent OPEC oil price freeze that you helped to secure3 gives us more time to seek the increased energy production and reduced energy consumption agreed at the Summit. If the heads of government whom you visit on your forthcoming trip4 can be persuaded to speak publicly about the need for an effective U.S. energy program, this may help to give your energy proposals a push when you return to the U.S. U.S. action would set the stage for pressing other 3 See footnote 2, Document 83. Documentation on the U.S. efforts to forestall increased oil prices is in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXVII, Energy Crisis, 1974–1980. 4 Carter visited Poland, Iran, India, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, France, and Belgium December 29, 1977–January 6, 1978.
