Chapter 8, June–August 1991 1113 4. Perhaps a brief snapshot of where we stand with the major pieces of the treaty would be useful: — The treaty text proper has about 50 sets of brackets remaining. This should not be a major problem, and we will probably clear these away in one or two ambassadorial-level sessions next week. The major problem here as elsewhere is the slow Soviet response time. — The definitions annex is in good shape with only a handful of problems remaining. — There are now 17 agreed statements fully agreed, with several more in the works. — Letters to be exchanged continue to proliferate at an alarming rate, but should not be a problem. The current count is about 20. — We currently have 14 formal statements for the record, to be recited at a closing plenary July 26 or 27. — The conversion or elimination protocol is fully agreed and printed on treaty paper, although it may be reopened for minor fixes. — The MOU on data exchange appears to be on schedule, although troublesome conforming issues which ripple through many pages continue to arise. Our latest proposal on the confidentiality of geographic coordinates, which has been a real headache recently, has been accepted ad ref by the Soviets. The 30-day grace period for the exchange of site diagrams has removed for the time being what could have been a real disaster. — The inspection protocol remains the greatest source of problems for both sides. Frantic work is going on and people believe that the 175 pages of the protocol proper will be ready. The 10 annexes, however, may be another story. A couple of these contain crucial general procedures for conducting inspections and they should get high priority in the next few days. Others, in particular the detailed listing of equipment desired by OSIA, could be dropped into the JCIC if not completed by the summit. Fortunately, imperfections in the inspection protocol and its annexes can be fixed by the JCIC later without resorting to the amendment process. 5. The new treaty article and protocol dealing with telemetry have now been drafted and, cross your fingers, should be readily accepted by the Soviets. Much work apparently remains in the area of HB/ ALCM issues. It was a big mistake to allow all of these issues, many of which were quite trivial, to remain until the end. However, good people are working hard on this area and one assumes it will turn out satisfactorily. 6. My personal bottom line on all of this is that the President will have the full treaty ready for signature in Moscow. Whether all of your loyal negotiators will survive the process is another question. Continued statements by the President and the Secretary that we do not need to dot every i and cross every t are puzzling to both sides here. I assume we are just prudently laying down markers that some things will be deferred to the JCIC. We understand that there is an opening in the President’s schedule on August 2 after his visit to Kiev. My advice
