220 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV A. Europe Whether for this or for some other reason, the Warsaw Pact maintains and continues to improve its capability to launch a major attack on Western Europe. Such an attack could be nuclear or non-­nuclear. It might occur after some days or weeks of mobilization and deployment by the Warsaw Pact, but we cannot rule out the possibility that the powerful Pact forces already positioned in Eastern Europe would attack without reinforcement, and with little tactical warning, in the midst of a major East-West crisis. The United States will do its share to ensure that NATO has the capabilities—­conventional as well as nuclear—­to maintain the independence and territorial integrity of Western Europe. We are determined to help stop any of these possible Pact attacks with a minimum loss of allied territory, and ensure the prompt restoration of prewar boundaries. Our policy is in complete agreement with current NATO guidance in its emphasis on a flexible response and on the need for conventional as well as for tactical and strategic nuclear forces in the posture of the Alliance. We also agree with our allies that, owing to the strengthening of Soviet forces in Eastern Europe, NATO (including the United States) must make major improvements in the conventional capabilities of the Alliance including: —­the deployed forward defense forces in Europe and their positioning; —­the initial combat capabilities of these forward defense forces, and particularly their antitank capabilities; —­and allied rapid reinforcing capabilities. I have already instituted a number of U.S. programs in these areas. We are substantially enhancing the readiness of the United States general purpose forces and improving our ability to provide rapid reinforcements to NATO. Currently, within 10 days, we could augment our 5 2⁄3 divisions and 28 tactical air squadrons in Europe by little more than one division and 40 squadrons. We plan, by 1983, to be able to add five divisions and 60 tactical air squadrons in the same amount of time. Along with the allies, we are building up our anti-­armor capabilities and adding to our war reserve stocks. During the next five years, the United States alone plans to increase its “heavied up” divisions to 11 of the total of 16 regular Army divisions, acquire about 5,000 tanks and 18,000 anti-­tank guided missiles for the Army, and purchase more than 2,000 tactical aircraft for the Air Force. Our allies, in the coming year alone, will add almost 2,000 anti-­tank guided missile launchers and 14,000 anti-­tank missiles to their capability in Central Europe.
