which will come from larger operation has been the logical conclusion of
Congress in its previous enactments, and is also supported by the best
opinion in the country. Such consolidation will assure not only a greater
element of competition as to service, but it will afford, economy in
operation, greater stability in railway earnings, and more economical
financing. It opens large possibilities of better equalization of rates between
different classes of traffic so as to relieve undue: burdens upon agricultural
products and raw materials generally, which are now not possible without
ruin to small units owing to the lack of diversity of traffic. It would also
tend to equalize earnings in such fashion as to reduce the importance of
section 15A, at which criticism, often misapplied, has been directed. A
smaller number of units would offer less difficulties in labor adjustments
and would, contribute much to the solution of terminal difficulties.
The consolidations need to be carried out with due regard to public interest
and to the rights and established life of various communities in our country.
It does not seem to me necessary that we endeavor to anticipate any final
plan or adhere to any artificial and unchangeable project which shall
stipulate a fixed number of systems, but rather we ought to approach the
problem with such a latitude of action that it can be worked out step by step
in accordance with a comprehensive consideration of public interest.
Whether the number of ultimate systems shall be more or less seems to me
can only be determined by time and actual experience in the development
of such consolidations.
Those portions of the present law contemplating consolidations are not
sufficiently effective in producing expeditious action and need
amplification of the authority of the Interstate Commerce Commission,
particularly in affording a period for voluntary proposals to the commission
and in supplying Government pressure to secure action after the expiration
of such a period.
There are other proposals before Congress for amending the transportation
acts. One of these contemplates a revision of the method of valuation for
rate-making purposes to be followed by a renewed valuation of the
railways. The valuations instituted by the Interstate Commerce Commission
10 years ago have not yet been completed. They have cost the Government
