512
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
tween countries and the multiplicity of factors that affect our national
interest.
Do our Actions Constitute “Sanctions?”
A decision to alter assistance programs, to consider our votes in
the IFI’s and to administer government-supported investment and ex-
port programs in light of human rights policy objectives, among other
foreign policy interests, is not a “sanctions” approach.
We are not obligated to support the transfer of public resources or to ex-
tend U.S. government assistance to investments or exports to every country in
the world. We have a sovereign right and limited funds to condition our
assistance on policy judgments which conform to our statutes and in-
ternational standards of conduct. To do so openly, based largely on in-
ternational obligations to promote human rights—including the
freedom to participate in government (Article 21, Universal Declara-
tion; Article 25, International Convenant, Article 23, American Conven-
tion)—is a far cry from seeking to prevent a democratically elected
President from taking office or of adopting a covert policy of
“destabilization”.
While it is true that Nixon also denied CCC and Ex-Im credits and
worked in the IFIs to deny loans,4 we also went far beyond these ac-
tions by interfering with private commercial credit and conducting
extensive covert political activities within Chile, including massive
subsidization of the political opposition. Moreover, the anti-Allende
program was conducted in secret while we were maintaining a public
posture of correct relations; in contrast, our current policy toward Chile
is open and scrupulously above board.
In addition there is an internal inconsistency in the S/P memo on
this issue. S/P argues on page four that we should channel programs of
bilateral assistance to countries with a good or improving human rights
record, and, therefore, presumably away from countries with a bad
record. If this is proper, then what difference is created when the pro-
gram involves bilateral export credits which also contain concessional
elements and whose availability is limited? This inconsistency is high-
lighted by the fact that Ex-Im and CCC are the upper-tier LDCs’ equiv-
alent of bilateral economic assistance, from which they are being
graduated.5
4 An unknown hand placed an open bracket before the word “Ex-Im.”
5 An unknown hand placed a close bracket after the word “graduated.”
