1128
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
diplomatic efforts are still worth pursuing and how and when to make
this matter public.3
Peter Tarnoff
Executive Secretary
3 On November 5, Brzezinski replied “The President desires a public statement on
this matter in the near future, focusing on the sensitivity of the Swiss heavy water tech-
nology transfer to Argentina and the differences between the safeguard requirements at-
tached to that transfer and those sought by Canada. I would appreciate it if the State De-
partment would release a factual and analytical public statement, cleared by the NSC
staff, by November 9.” (Memorandum from Brzezinski to Vance, November 5; Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South, Pastor Country File, Box 1,
Argentina: 8–12/79)
458.
Memorandum From Jerry Oplinger of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 20, 1979
SUBJECT
Argentine Safeguards: Hoist on our own Petard? (C)
Behind our last minute efforts to persuade the Swiss and Germans
to impose full-scope safeguards on Argentina may lurk a nasty di-
lemma for the U.S. (S)
Unlike Canada, we do not normally require “NPT-type full-scope
safeguards; we require “de facto full-scope.” The difference is simply
that Canada requires an indefinite commitment to keep everything
safeguarded in the future; we only require that everything in country
now be under safeguards. The theory behind our looser requirement is
that the recipient’s need for continued enriched fuel supply will nor-
mally deter subsequent acquisition on unsafeguarded facilities. (C)
But this theory breaks down in the Argentine case; their program
is based on heavy water reactors which use unenriched fuel. They have
their own uranium, and lack only the capability to produce heavy
water in large quantities to reach potential independence from outside
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South,
Pastor Country File, Box 1, Argentina: 8–12/79. Secret. Sent for information.
