602 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Akhromeyev had said the next step was for the subject to be reviewed by the Ministers. Bartholomew shared this viewpoint: intervention by Ministers was essential. They should consult on this problem. In his view, Bartholomew said, we needed to find a way back to the Moscow elements of common ground and to the sentence in the joint statement that clearly stated that all ALCM issues were resolved except for range. We also had to get back to the SLCM deal, which said that the sides agreed to parallel, politically-­binding declarations. This was necessary so that we could move ahead on the basis of the Moscow meeting and deal with the three issues remaining from Moscow. Bartholomew concluded his report by noting that, in order to stay on track on other questions, Ambassadors Burt and Nazarkin had been asked to meet on non-­circumvention, mobile ICBM verification and other technical questions. The Secretary said that when he and Shevardnadze had talked the previous night, they had recognized a serious problem here and, at the very least, an extraordinary, major misunderstanding. He would be pleased to discuss with the Foreign Minister and any of his associates the record from the Moscow ministerial. He was aware of the elements of common ground, the joint statement and what was in the record of previous discussions with the same faces sitting across the table. But he did not know what else to say or how to move forward. We had a major problem, which was particularly serious when the Presidents had called for resolution of remaining substantive issues by the summit. He was sorry to say it, but he agreed with Ambassador Bartholomew that not only had we accomplished no progress in the last twenty-­four hours, but perhaps we had taken a significant large step backward. The Secretary noted that he had thought we had a clear understanding on ALCMs; there was only one issue—­range. But when he looked at the elements of common ground from Moscow, he saw a flat contradiction in what the Soviet side was now saying. Referring to the memcon of the final Moscow small group meeting on arms control, the Secretary recalled how the sides had discussed ALCMs: Shevardnadze had asked for a recess from 9:30–9:35 and conferred with his experts; then Shevardnadze had said that on seven points the sides had taken an agreed position and on one point—­range—­they still had differences; the sides could thus say that all issues except range had been agreed, which was reflected in the joint statement. The Secretary continued that he could show the same with regard to SLCMs. For the Soviet side to suggest that it needed legally-­binding limits instead of politically-­binding declarations at this stage gave the U.S. side—­to put it mildly—­a large case of heartburn. He could go through and point out other examples, but beyond that, he did not know what to say.
