1058
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
because of peace with Egypt. He will be a little happier with that
border. He hopes and prays there will be no war. The economic meas-
ures are tough. Pilots have taken a 20% cut in salary.
The President said that this is important symbolism.
Minister Weizman said exactly. With the military budget, he will try
to get a voluntary 5% reduction in salaries in the armed forces. 100%
inflation is terrible. He prays that within the next five years he will be
able to cut their aid request by $500 million.
The President (laughing) asked what role the Minister would be in
at that time.
Minister Weizman (laughing) said he hopes he will be defense min-
ister. He asked to come here as Defense Minister and as a member of
the Cabinet, to ask whether a way can be found on aid. He knows U.S.
problems and the President’s desire for a balanced budget. Israel wants
him to succeed.
The President said there is no way he can get a balanced budget,
though he would like to.
Minister Weizman said that, without going into facts and figures,
there is U.S. inflation and reduction in the value of the dollar. M–60 A–3
tanks now cost $1.4 million each, and we are talking about 200 of them.
He has no problems with Harold, and none with Cy either. Israel’s mili-
tary forces are going down, but there are heavy burdens. Their oil is
gone, and will cost $2 billion a year. They have not gone to rationing,
but have put the price up. They could go to rationing, but he doesn’t
think so. For the first time, the Cabinet has asked Israelis to tighten their
belts. In parallel with this, and in parallel with the peace process, if a
little more U.S. aid could be provided . . . He was asked in Israel if he
could get $3.6 billion. He said the answer was obviously “no.” He re-
peated on Israel Television that between Haifa and Tel Aviv there is a
half-way point. He is making no suggestions to the President, only
asking. He had a lot of misgivings in coming here. For Israel, an in-
crease in aid would help them through a difficult period, and would
keep the army in good shape. There is no argument about 600 planes (?)
and 10 divisions. There was discussion before about 260 F–16s and 14
divisions, but Harold Brown and he had cut this down. Therefore, he
asks whether there is anything the US can do. It would be a great help if
the US did give something, especially understanding the situation.
Egypt and Israel are trying to be steady. This is not political or military,
but economic. He is sure Israel’s economic measures are right. For 2 to 4
months more, inflation will go up; then it will level off; and then he
hopes it will start to go down. They will produce, work, and export
more.
(The President left the Oval Office from 12:28 to 12:33 to speak on
the phone with Italian Prime Minister Cossiga).
