National Security Policy  951
understanding of what we are trying to do before making any deci­
sions. Secretary Gates said it was desirable to make decisions regarding 
MATS as early as possible because of the need for testimony on MATS 
before Congressional Committees. The President wondered whether 
the Defense report had appeared not because he had requested it, but 
because Congress was conducting an investigation.
Mr. Gray then called attention to Paragraph 18 of NSC 5919 pro­
viding that if legislation is proposed which would, through purchase 
loan guarantees, encourage the acquisition of uncompromised cargo air­
craft it should contain provisions to ensure the immediate availability 
of these cargo aircraft to meet military mobilization requirements. Mr. 
Stans said the large airlines insisted that they could develop an uncom­
promised cargo aircraft if they could obtain some of the business now 
carried by MATS, but the small airlines wanted guaranteed loans. There 
was thus a difference of opinion in the industry as to whether guaran­
teed loans were needed. The President said that in the absence of pur­
chase loan guarantees, the business would go entirely to the big airlines. 
Mr. Dougles believed that the Department of Defense could produce an 
uncompromised cargo airplane for about $80 million in development 
costs. Mr. Stans felt strongly that if the Department of Defense devel­
oped an uncompromised cargo airplane, the plane should be turned over 
to the airlines under a royalty arrangement which would provide for 
reimbursement of development costs to the Department of Defense. Mr. 
Dougles said the only reason for Defense development of an uncompro­
mised cargo aircraft was because such an aircraft was needed. General 
Quesada then expressed the strong conviction that an uncompromised 
cargo aircraft could be built without cost to the Government. He felt the 
air transport industry was dynamic and well-­financed, and that free 
enterprise would see to it that an uncompromised airplane was built 
without cost to the Government, provided the airlines were assured of 
MATS business. The President said he was almost convinced, but did not 
wish to adopt a provision which would result in the large airlines obtain­
ing all the business. Perhaps the Small Business Administration could 
make a small business loan to the smaller companies. Secretary Mueller 
said the maximum small business loan was $250,000 which was a small 
amount in the airline industry, although it might allow a small company 
to make a start. Mr. Douglas felt that most airlines receiving contracts 
meet the definition of small business.
General Quesada said he was convinced the air cargo industry had 
a great potential. Two hundred uncompromised aircraft could reduce 
the cost of carrying cargo by air by one-­half or perhaps even more. At 
the present time only 4/100 of 1 per cent of the total freight carried was 
carried by air.
