1020
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ment ministries and organizations such as education, agriculture, and
health in population control activities.
Subsections cover the role of AID, donors receiving AID support
(including the UNFPA), other donors, and the host government in the
national program (including the percentage of the national budget des-
ignated for family planning activities).
IV. Financial Inputs, Impact, and Cost-Effectiveness
Section IV consists of three subsections:
A. Annual per capita funding from 1965–70, and subsequent years
through 1976, by the category of donors and the host government. Total
funding, per capita, and the percentage of financial input by each to the
overall national program are summarized. Details are reflected in Ap-
pendix B.7
It is recognized that measuring resource allocations to family plan-
ning (FP) programs by the host government is difficult, because re-
sources come from both direct and indirect allocation of funds and in
the form of infrastructure support. National budgets do not reflect ac-
tual expenditures for FP in many cases. In addition, the quantity of re-
sources expended on FP activities does not always reflect the quality of
the services. Changes in the pattern of a host government’s resource al-
locations can be attributed to a number of factors which will differ be-
tween countries, such as demographic factors, availability of domestic
financial resources and external donor support, level of development of
the health and social service infrastructure, existence of government
policy, and the perceived necessity by the government for direct FP
activity.
Any conclusions on host government resource support are in most
cases tentative, and cross-country comparisons, while necessary,
should be made only with extreme caution. It is hoped that AID will be
able to improve on the uniformity and reliability of the data in the
future.
B. The impact of the program is measured in part by prevalence of
use—the percentage of married women of reproductive age (MWRA)
or couples using a reliable method of contraception; the percentage of
MWRA/couples with reasonable knowledge of a reliable method of
contraception; and the percentage of MWRA/couples with reasonable
access to contraceptive services.
Data on the above indicators were compiled by a number of the
AID Missions last December for the AID Worldwide Population Of-
7 Attached but not printed is the undated “Annual and per capita funding per year
(in thousands of dollars)” table.
