National Security Policy 793 184. Memorandum of Conference with the President1 Washington, July 27, 1959 OTHERS PRESENT General Twining General Goodpaster The President greeted General Twining warmly, told him how delighted he is that he is making a good recovery, and welcomed him back to duty. He asked to what extent General Twining had found it possible to keep up with developments while convalescing. General Twining said he had kept up fairly well, having talked frequently with Mr. McElroy and General Picher. The President said that one matter now current that concerns him very much is a question over basic military concept under discussion in the national security policy paper. It seems that the Army and the Navy want to divert money from our “big deterrent” to small war forces. He recalled that we had had a thorough study of this in 1953, culminating in the so-­called “new look”. He did not think that we had gone too far in the direction suggested by that study, but Army and Navy seemed to think we had. He said he had developed language which seemed to him to express the position correctly, and there was agreement on this language. Mr. McElroy, however, wants to say that the new language does not in any way change the policy that has been in effect in the Department of Defense, and to this statement the Army and the Navy seemed to be opposed. General Twining said that the State Department also has asked for substantial increases in conventional forces. The President commented that the State Department has now accepted the language of which he was speaking. On another subject, the President recalled that, in connection with his reorganization plan of last year, a new procedure for three-­ and four-­star officers had been instituted. He now thought that perhaps there is reason not to apply this procedure to officers who have a purely single service function, such as the Chiefs of Bureaus in the Navy and of Technical Services in the Army. He does not want to put work before the JCS that is simply time consuming or pro forma—on which they have no judgment to contribute. He asked General Twining to give some thought to this matter. 1 Source: Basic national security policy; Department of Defense reorganization; Net Evaluation Subcommittee. Secret. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries.
