ART. 6. The notification and information prescribed in Articles 4 and 5 are to
be addressed to diplomatic or consular representatives in the capital of the
infected country, and to the Pan American Sanitary Bureau at Washington,
which shall immediately transmit the information to all countries
concerned.
ART. 7. The notification and the information prescribed in Articles 3, 4, 5,
and 6 are to be followed by further communications in order to keep other
Governments informed as to the progress of the disease or diseases. These
communications will be made at least once weekly, and will be as complete
as possible, indicating in detail the measures employed to prevent the
extension of the disease. The telegraph, the cable, and the radio will be
employed for this purpose, except in those instances in which the data may
be transmitted rapidly by mail. Reports by telegraph, cable or radio will be
confirmed by letter. Neighboring countries will endeavor to make special
arrangements for the solution of local problems that do not involve
widespread international interest.
ART. 8. The signatory Governments agree that in the event of the appearance
of any of the following diseases, namely: cholera, yellow fever, plague,
typhus fever or other pestilential diseases in severe epidemic form, in their
territory, they will immediately put in force appropriate sanitary measures
for the prevention of the international carriage of any of the said diseases
therefrom by passengers, crew, cargo and vessels, and mosquitoes, rats and
vermin that may be carried thereon, and will promptly notify each of the
other signatory Governments and the Pan American Sanitary Bureau as to
the nature and extent of the sanitary measures which they have applied for
the accomplishment of the requirements of this article.
SECTION 2. PUBLICATION OF PRESCRIBED MEASURES
ART. 9. Information of the first non-imported case of plague, cholera, or
yellow fever justifies the application of sanitary measures against an area
where said disease may have appeared.
ART. 10. The Government of each country obligates itself to publish
immediately the preventive measures which will be considered necessary to
be taken by vessels or other means of transport, passengers and crew at any
