February 1951–February 1952 113 likely that these tactics will induce Iran to accept a compromise settlement. 3. US oil companies apparently are not planning to come to Iran’s assistance but, like the UK oil companies, are planning readjustments to provide alternate sources of supply for markets previously satisfied by Iranian oil. The US has set up a Foreign Petroleum Supply Committee, representing 19 major US companies operating abroad, for this purpose. The activities of this and similar bodies in the UK and Western Europe would make it difficult for Iran to find tankers to transport, and customers to buy, its oil even if it obtained individual technicians from various countries to maintain production. The flow of oil from Iran might be maintained to some extent, but it would probably be a small proportion of the flow maintained by AIOC and would probably provide Iran with less of an income than it received from AIOC. If the Iranian oil industry were shut down completely for any length of time, Iran would find it almost impossible to recapture its former markets. Iran’s crude oil could be replaced almost immediately by expansion in other fields and its refined products after about six months by building other refineries in Western Europe. 4. If Iran cannot sell its oil to the Western world, it might turn to the USSR for assistance. Because of transportation difficulties, the USSR could probably not for some time use more than a small proportion of Iran’s potential production. However, with Russian technicians in the southern oilfields, Iran would be lost to the West; and the consolidation of Iran as a Soviet Satellite would be only a matter of time. 5. The current US policy2 of supporting the Shah, extending military, economic, and technical assistance, and bringing our influence to bear on Iran and the UK in the oil controversy appears hardly adequate to the situation. If Iran’s stability (and therefore its vulnerability to Communist pressure) depends on the continued flow of its oil to the West, US policy-makers are confronted with the following critical questions: (a) Can we afford to let the British abandon Iran and permit the oil industry to close down knowing that even under ideal circumstances it will take several months to revive it and that in the meantime Iran may be forced to turn to the USSR for assistance or may collapse internally? (b) If, as now seems probable, the British leave Iran, how long can we permit Mossadeq to “stew in his own juice” before coming to his assistance? 2 NSC 107/2. [Footnote is in the original. NSC 107/2 is Document 35.]
