North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980
1101
sition to the text.” The two principles, according to a draft telegram at-
tached to Cooper’s memorandum to Muskie, were that “the US cannot
agree to negotiate all issues in the New York conference” and “that the
integrity of specialized agencies must be protected; the conference in
New York cannot reopen, or renegotiate agreements reached in the
specialized fora.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat
Staff, Records of the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs,
Richard Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot 81 D 134, Box 7, E—Memoranda of
Conversations, Jan. 1980–June 1980) No record was found that the draft
telegram was sent.
In a September 12 memorandum for the record, the President’s As-
sistant for National Security Affairs, Zbigniew Brzezinski, noted that at
that morning’s foreign affairs breakfast meeting, Carter indicated that
he was “not prepared to permit the international financial and special-
ized institutions to be subordinated to the UN, and the proposed UN
language does not protect our interest, and we must hold the line
firmly.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 93, Foreign Affairs
Breakfast: 1977–1981) Later that day, Carter spoke to Waldheim by tele-
phone from 8:11 until 8:30 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials,
President’s Daily Diary) A record of their conversation notes: “The
President and Waldheim discussed IMF and World Bank loans to third
world countries. The President believes the IMF and World Bank
should not be subjected to political pressures or UN pressures to make
loans. Waldheim and Ambassador McHenry disagree with the Presi-
dent’s position. Ambassador McHenry will, of course, follow the Presi-
dent’s instructions. The President feels strongly about this. He will talk
to Cooper (Treasury) about this in the morning, but the President will
not change his mind.” (Paper entitled “Gist of President Carter–
Secretary General Waldheim Conversation,” September 12; Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box
38, Memcons: President: 8–11/80) After his telephone conversation
with Waldheim, Carter spoke with Cooper by telephone from 8:44 until
8:50 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily
Diary) No memorandum of conversation of this discussion was found;
nor was any record of a September 13 conversation between Carter and
Cooper found.
On September 12, at Muskie’s request, Cooper prepared a memo-
randum on textual revisions suggested by Waldheim “to break the cur-
rent deadlock” and on the implications of a collapse of the negotiations.
On the latter issue, Cooper asserted that “[i]f the Special Session ‘breaks
down’ over inability to reach a procedural text on global negotiations,
there would be some international fallout in terms of souring the atmo-
sphere in the UN and in other North-South fora. However, impact on
