230 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement 5) Apparent use by U.S. of expediency rather than policy in granting aid throughout the world, waiting until things are in a truly dangerous mess before coming to the rescue. Many Chileans feel that a serious Communist menace close at hand is the best guarantee of U.S. support, irrespective of the virtues of the recipient. The Embassy would add the following additional factors which it believes have an appreciable effect on attitudes here, even though they have not recently been given special publicity: 6) The U.S., still the world’s most liberal and democratic country, has let itself be forced into an appearance of economic and political conservatism. Such a posture has no appeal to the average Latin, who is excited by notions and dramatic examples of idealism. Our greatest triumph here in recent years was our action against France and England re Suez, but it has been overshadowed by too many smaller things with opposite influence.3 7) Our policy toward cultural and non-­strategic trade contact between Chileans and the Soviet bloc gives an impression of blind fear which harms us and has had no productive results to our knowledge. In most instances it is more rigid than our policy for U. S. -Soviet contacts, and it does not jibe with our own standards of intellectual freedom and freedom of inquiry and of commerce. We have not lived down the harm McCarthyism did us here and will not until we relax and let the Chileans know we recognize they are as politically sophisticated as we are. When we do, our approaches on problems of strategic trade and other Communist contacts of similar significance will carry far more weight. 8) Chileans are not convinced that the use of force to accomplish our objectives has been completely discarded. They are convinced we intervened in Guatemala, and they view with serious concern the recent sending of paratroopers toward Venezuela. They worry that if they do not get enough development assistance to raise their standard of living appreciably, Communism will get a firm foothold and the U. S., against its will and principles, will have to intervene by force, starting the era Pax Romana a la U.S.A. 9) We have failed to convey to Chileans the fact that the battle we are fighting against the USSR is their battle, and that the money we spend in Europe and Asia is not spent because we like Greeks or Iranians better than Chileans, but because those are the places the line is most in danger of breaking. Chileans are essentially isolationist, so 3 For documentation on the subject, see Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, vol. VII, American Republics: Central and South America, Chapter 7.
