818
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
JC: I’ll tell them to prepare for either day and you can let me know,
through normal diplomatic channels, which day.
(JC) You are correct in identifying Santa Catarina as special to Pres-
ident Sadat’s heart. He has mentioned it before to me. This is a very fine
step. He also discussed this long ago with Mr. Peres.
MB: On November 19th. Very symbolic. Will do our best to
transfer on November 18.
I also want to tell you how proud each of us will be to be with you
on December 9th in Oslo, for the Nobel Peace Prize.
JC: (Laughing) . . . Your remarks are both very generous and pre-
sumptuous. All the credit goes to you and President Sadat.
MB: (Mentions a cable) . . . As I said, it was history-making and you
did it. President Sadat and I absolutely concur.
JC: Thank you. I would like to say for future reference, no matter
what time of the day or night it is, do not hesitate to call me. I get up
very early most mornings, and was up at 5:00 this morning.
MB: Thank you. I won’t abuse it; but will, if necessary, use it.
JC: I hope you all will explore every possibility of small gestures of
generosity and cooperation above and beyond the treaty agreements.
MB: . . . President Sadat and I discussed the release of prisoners.
This will take a few weeks. We will also take out the military head-
quarters from Gaza City. You gave him a letter,6 but he appreciated
hearing it from me.
JC: I am very grateful, and want to express my congratulations and
appreciation.
MB: Thank you. My wife and I send our best wishes equally to
Rosalynn, Amy, and to your mother.
JC: My mother will never forget your embracing her first after the
signing ceremony.
MB: All the time she was sending kisses to me in the air! The eve-
ning in the tent was beautiful.
JC: Hamilton Jordan may have expressed our feelings when he
said, “Begin for President!”
MB: Hamilton. Hamilton is a wonderful man. He likes to make
jokes. He is a wonderful man.
JC: Not all a joke.
(Ending pleasantries from both Heads of State)
6 Not further identified.
