3. Minister for Foreign Affairs first proposed we should adjust our differences with the Japanese before asking further attention to the matter on the part of the Chinese. I told him I saw no prospect of a satisfactory adjustment until the Chinese gave our interests the locus standi to which they were entitled by the terms of their contracts. 4. He then suggested that the Chinese might propose to the two conflicting national interests some basis of accommodation. I pointed out that no such proposal could well be fair to us so long as we occupied a merely theoretical position while the Japanese had a station actually functioning. [Paraphrase] 5. Information from a source considered reliable has come to representatives of the Federal Telegraph Company that this matter was taken up today by the Minister for Foreign Affairs with Tuan Chi-jui, emphasizing that we are not at present negotiating with the Japanese and under existing conditions do not foresee possibility of reaching a satisfactory understanding with them. It is reported that Tuan has said that the Chinese Government would take up the question with the Japanese if the Americans and Japanese could not come to an agreement. 6. If this proves to be true we will be confronted by a clear disregard of our contract rights and there will be little if any likelihood of obtaining a reconsideration … It may be necessary in that case to decide whether to induce the Chinese to submit proposals to the Radio Corporation and Mitsui Company for the accommodation of their conflicting interests or to authorize the Radio Corporation to negotiate directly with the Mitsui Company for arrangements on a business basis. Arrangements of this nature would not recognize any monopoly and would include the setting up of an independent American-Chinese circuit. 7. Possibly the Chinese Minister at Washington might be persuaded to telegraph his Government and to point out the seriousness of subordinating valid American rights to the veto of Japan. 8. Repeated as No. 72 to Tokyo. MACMURRAY
