January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1331
Sadat concluded the letter by urging Begin to “take the remedial
action which is necessary for the removal of the obstacles which have
been placed on the road to peace in the past few months. I leave it to
you to choose the appropriate ways and means for achieving that.” The
same day, August 4, Egyptian Foreign Minister Kamal Hassan Ali pro-
vided U.S. Ambassador to Egypt Alfred L. Atherton, Jr. a copy of the
letter, which Atherton sent to Washington from Cairo in telegram
16922, August 4. A copy of the telegram, bearing President Jimmy
Carter’s handwritten comment, “The situation is discouraging. Well
worded, very good message. C.,” is in the Carter Library, National Se-
curity Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 20, Egypt: 8/80.
Sadat’s letter began series of exchanges between the two leaders
over the next three weeks. On August 4, Begin replied to Sadat’s letter,
taking issue with a number of points. Begin asserted that Sadat had
misrepresented the discussion between them at El-Arish on the subject
of water for Israel, that the principles of “good faith, goodwill, mutual
understanding, and promoting peace and cooperation” had been un-
dermined by Egyptian Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Boutros
Boutros Ghali’s influencing African governments to withhold re-
newing diplomatic relations with Israel, votes cast for “hostile,”
anti-Israeli resolutions by the Egyptian delegation at the United Na-
tions, as well as Egyptian public statements inconsistent with the Camp
David Accords. Begin also restated the Israeli position on Jerusalem
and stated a desire to bring Palestinians and King Hussein of Jordan
into the negotiations. Begin concluded by pointing out that Egypt had
unilaterally suspended the autonomy talks on four different occasions
and urged Sadat to “dispense with further unilateral suspensions. Let
us renew our negotiations.” Israeli Ambassador to the United States
Ephraim Evron provided President Jimmy Carter a copy of Begin’s
letter on August 6. This copy, attached to an August 7 memorandum
from the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Zbig-
niew Brzezinski to Carter in which Brzezinski evaluated the letter as
“not as bad or as ‘door closing’ as Israeli leaks had led us to expect,” is
in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle
East, Subject File, Box 6, Autonomy Talks: Senior Level 8/11/80
Meeting: 8/80.
Sadat followed up with Begin on August 14. While arguing that “it
is not my intention to get involved into a verbal or rhetorical exchange
which is not likely to serve the interests of any of us, not to mention the
interest of peace,” Sadat provided a lengthy rebuttal of many of the
points raised in Begin’s letter. At the end of the letter, however, Sadat
suggested the convening of a “summit conference in an attempt to
stem” the “lingering differences” between their two countries “before
they jeopardize our mission.” The Egyptians provided Atherton an ad-
