ARTICLE IV
Any claim by a Norwegian vessel for compensation on the grounds that it
has suffered loss or injury through the improper or unreasonable exercise of
the rights conferred by Article II of this Treaty or on the ground that it has
been given the benefit of Article III shall be referred for the joint
consideration of two persons, one of whom shall be nominated by each of
the High Contracting Parties.
Effect shall be given to the recommendations contained in any such joint
report. If no joint report can be agreed upon, the claim shall be referred to
the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague described in the
Convention for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes, concluded
at The Hague, October 18, 1907. The Arbitral Tribunal shall be constituted
in accordance with Article 87 (Chapter IV) and with Article 59 (Chapter III)
of the said Convention. The proceedings shall be regulated by so much of
Chapter IV of the said Convention and of Chapter III thereof (special regard
being had for Articles 70 and 74, but excepting Articles 53 and 54) as the
Tribunal may consider to be applicable and to be consistent with the
provisions of this agreement. All sums of money which may be awarded by
the Tribunal on account of any claim shall be paid within eighteen months
after the date of the final award without interest and without deduction, save
as hereafter specified. Each Government shall bear its own expenses. The
expenses of the Tribunal shall be defrayed by a ratable deduction of the
amount of the sums awarded by it, at a rate of five per cent, on such sums,
or at such lower rate as may be agreed upon between the two Governments;
the deficiency, if any, shall be defrayed in equal moieties by the two
Governments.
ARTICLE V
This Treaty shall be subject to ratification and shall remain in force for a
period of one year from the date of the exchange of ratifications.
Three months before the expiration of the said period of one year, either of
the High Contracting Parties may give notice of its desire to propose
modifications in the terms of the Treaty.
