122
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—Political Support. Give visible demonstration of our support for
Yugoslavia’s independence via high-level visits and a continuation of
Sixth Fleet port calls. The Secretary’s visit should be rescheduled as
soon as possible, bearing in mind the factors arising from Tito’s death
or prolonged serious incapacitation, and consideration given to an
early stop by a ranking Yugoslav official. A possible brief stop by the
President in Yugoslavia in conjunction with his participation in the
Economic Summit in Venice would be extremely useful. Furthermore,
the implications for Yugoslavia of the Afghanistan invasion give even
greater weight to our recommendation that the President attend the
eventual funeral ceremonies for Tito and that we seek a strong, coordi-
nated allied expression of support for Yugoslavia following Tito’s
death. We will strengthen our effort to deter and punish anti-GOY
terrorism in the U.S. and abroad.
—Economic Relations. Continue to make clear to the European Com-
munity our support for a prompt Yugoslav-EC economic agreement
which strengthens Yugoslavia’s ties with the West but which does not
require Yugoslavia to grant reverse preferences to the Community.11
—Grant the Yugoslav airline (JAT) landing rights in Chicago and
Los Angeles, if a formal request is received.
—Give increased high-level attention to the visit of Foreign Trade
Secretary Rotar in mid-March.
—Consider including Yugoslavia in the PL–480 program.
—Continue to seek additional funding for S&T exchanges in
accordance with our earlier promise to Yugoslavia.
ROMANIA
Apart from an indirect reference by Ceausescu in his speech to the
Romanian Party Congress in November, Romania has issued no public
statement condemning the taking of the American hostages. Media
coverage has been very sparse and limited to factual reporting. On the
other hand, the Foreign Minister has told us that in late November
11 In telegram 12675 from Brussels, July 13, 1979, the Embassy reported the text of
the Haferkamp-Cooper exchange related to the EC/Yugoslavia trade agreement. Wilhelm
Haferkamp, the Commissioner for External Relations and Vice President of the European
Commission, wrote that he noted “with satisfaction that the United States recognizes
the great importance of strengthening Yugoslavia’s relationships with the West and
that you welcome the prospect of an EEC/Yugoslavia economic agreement.” (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790322–0304) In telegram 18781 from
Brussels, October 23, the Embassy reported: “Yugoslavs showed an unexpectedly urgent
desire to conclude new economic cooperation agreement with EC, apparently because
of fear of Soviets and less concern with non-aligned image” during discussions with the
EC negotiating team visiting Belgrade earlier that month. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D790489–0909). The agreement came into force July 1, 1980.
