August 8–September 17, 1978 189 The Secretary agreed to study the Egyptian suggestions. The Egyptians then provided a draft paper, which in effect recasts the American paper. It was agreed that we will go over the paper and provide the Egyptians and the Israelis with a revised draft tomorrow evening. El-Baz contended that since our paper is being revised on the basis of the latest Egyptian-Israeli proposals, we should meet first tomorrow morning with the Egyptians and only afterwards with the Israelis.9 9 Instead of separate bilateral meetings with the Egyptians and Israelis, Carter met with Barak and El-Baz from 8:10 a.m. to 4:53 p.m. and again from 8:05 p.m. to 10:15 p.m., September 13, in order to revise the overall draft Framework. See footnote 52, Document 28. 47. Draft Framework for a Settlement in Sinai Prepared by President Carter1 undated Framework for a Settlement in Sinai In order to achieve peace between them, Israel and Egypt agree to negotiate in good faith with a goal of concluding within three months of the signing of this framework a peace treaty between them. All of the principles of U.N. Resolution 242 will apply in this resolution of the dispute between Israel and Egypt. PEACE TREATY Unless otherwise mutually agreed, terms of this peace treaty will be implemented between two and three years after the peace treaty is signed. In the peace treaty the issues of: a) the full exercise of Egyptian sovereignty up to the internationally recognized border between Egypt and mandated Palestine; b) the time of withdrawal of Israeli personnel from the Sinai; c) the use of airfields near El Arish,2 Eitam,3 Etzion,4 and 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 53, Middle East: Camp David President’s Working Papers, undated. No classification marking. 2 In brackets above this word, Carter wrote “El Arish.” 3 In brackets above this word, Carter wrote “Rafah.” 4 In brackets above this word, Carter wrote “Ras en Naqb.”
