Chile  267
CH–24.	
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge 
of Chilean Affairs (Phillips)1
 
Washington, October 23, 1959.
SUBJECT
Communist Chinese Offer to Buy Copper from Chile
PARTICIPANTS
Assistant Secretary Rubottom, ARA
Chilean Ambassador Walter Muller
Mr. Jorge Burr, Minister-Counselor, Chilean Embassy
Captain Jorge Swett, Naval Attaché, Chilean Embassy
Robert M. Phillips, WST
Mr. Rubottom said we had been greatly concerned to learn from our 
Embassy in Santiago that Chile had received an offer from the Chinese 
Communists to buy 50,000 tons of copper wire and sheets and that the 
Chilean Government was thinking of permitting the sale of as much 
as 30,000 tons. Although the U.S. Government would not make formal 
objection to the proposed transaction, we believed Chile should be con-
cerned with the impression likely to be created in the U.S. and other 
countries by the magnitude of this sale to the Chinese Communists. 
We were particularly disturbed to see Chile become apparently the pri-
mary target of Chinese Communist overtures in Latin America, and 
we considered that this might have serious political implications for 
Chile’s relations with the U.S. and other countries of the hemisphere.
Ambassador Muller said this was the first he had heard of this 
development and that he, too, was concerned over it. Nevertheless, 
he hoped we understood that the Government was facing a difficult 
internal political situation and could not afford to risk criticism that 
it was obstructing commercial transactions for political reasons. The 
Government was very much concerned with developing markets for 
Chile’s exports, and it realized that the presently favorable copper mar-
ket would not last too long. In fact, in recent conversations with the 
New York representatives of the copper companies operating in Chile, 
the Ambassador had been given to understand that world production 
of copper next year would exceed demand by approximately 10%. It 
was for this reason that Chile was particularly interested in finding new 
markets for its copper.
Mr. Phillips said that, following the removal last year of stra-
tegic controls on copper, Communist China had been able to get all 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 825.2542/10–2359. Confidential.
