1980 805 and, if undegraded, will have the potential to inflict considerably higher attrition against US bombers of current types. They will probably have little or no effective capability against in-­flight US short-­range attack missiles (SRAMs) carried by bombers. —The Soviets will gradually develop the capability to defend some key areas against currently programed US cruise missiles. Because of technical and numerical deficiencies, however, their capability to defend against a large force of US cruise missiles will probably remain low. —In addition, precursor missile attacks, defense saturation and suppression, and electronic warfare would degrade the overall effectiveness of Soviet air defenses. —Thus, the actual performance of the defenses against combined attacks involving large numbers of US bombers, SRAMs, and cruise missiles will probably remain low during the period of this Estimate. ABM Defense 62. Soviet R&D activities in ballistic missile defense continue. In our view, these efforts represent hedging against an uncertain future and are aimed at deterring the United States from abrogating the ABM Treaty and developing options for ABM system deployment in the 1980s. There continues to be no evidence to suggest that the Soviets have decided to deploy ABM defenses beyond Moscow. 63. Within the provisions of the ABM Treaty, the Soviets could use the systems they have under development to improve their limited ABM defenses at Moscow. Such improvements could provide better capabilities to defend a few selected targets in the Moscow area, such as command and control facilities, but could not provide more than minimal defense against a large US missile attack. 64. The Soviet ABM R&D program could give the USSR options to deploy additional ABM defenses beginning in the early or middle 1980s. If the ABM Treaty is abrogated, these options would include: further expansion of the Moscow ABM defenses; relatively rapid deployment of an ABM system with aboveground launchers to protect other key area targets; and slower paced deployment of a system with silo launchers for defense of key area targets or for hard point defense of selected military targets. The ABM system available for such deployment in the middle or late 1980s would be able to intercept US missile RVs of all current types, including those accompanied by chaff. The effectiveness of these defenses would depend most importantly on US reactions, such as the deployment of penetration aids and the adaptation of tactics. 65. For the past several years, we have expressed concern that, in addition to ballistic missile early warning (BMEW), the four large radars that are being built along the periphery of the USSR could also have or be given the capability to perform ABM battle management. With such a capability, these radars could constitute long-­leadtime preparations
