Special Session on Disarmament
1239
vate to try to draft a bland compromise final document. This document
never surfaced in committee. The Austrians were moderately active in
an attempt to give credibility to their bid for membership in the new
CD.
14. The Soviets seem to have come prepared to obtain as great an
advantage as they could but finally agreed to join a reasonable con-
sensus. In our judgement they obtained very little i.e. some reflection of
the Brezhnev proposal on a halt in the production of nuclear weapons
and a very lukewarm endorsement of an eventual world disarmament
conference but no mention of the neutron bomb to which they had at-
tached considerable importance. On machinery they negotiated hard to
keep changes to a minimum but showed sufficient flexibility to enable
a deal to be struck on the negotiating body.
15. The Non-Aligned by no means achieved all they wanted but
did not go away angry. They now have a greater stake and a larger role
in international disarmament efforts. Despite the early establishment of
a coordinating group, they had no cohesive leadership and in the end
they fragmented. On some issues such as non-proliferation they were
divided among themselves. Our impression is that there was a behind-
the-scenes struggle between the radicals and the more moderate states.
An example of the radical pressures was the Cuban effort to retain lan-
guage on the dismantling of foreign military bases which was sup-
ported by the more moderate Non-Aligned until it become clear that
the West would not yield. We also found ourselves in protracted bilat-
eral discussions with the Ghanaian and Egyptian delegations on issues
which preoccupied them, (“racist regimes” and Middle East NWFZ), a
further reflection of lack of focus and coordination in the Non-Aligned
group. Pakistan stood alone on many issues and created enormous dif-
ficulties up until the closing moments.
16. The real leadership in the session came from Committee
Chairman Ortiz De Rozas of Argentina with the strong Assistance of
Ambassador Garcia Robles of Mexico who was named “super-
coordinator” in the closing days, and Nigeria’s CCD Ambassador Ade-
niji who was the coordinator for the nuclear section of the program of
action. Their combination of firmness and sensitivity to the real con-
cerns of the key countries in the various groups made consensus
possible.
Leonard
