Panama 891 The Foreign Minister asked Ambassador Arias if he would not like to expand upon the problem involved in imports of merchandise from third countries for sale within the Zone. The Ambassador began by saying that the Panamanians did not question the U.S. interpretation of the 1955 Treaty as being perfectly logical and consistent, from our point of view. However, he said, Panama regarded the matter from a different angle. Panama was a small state which, although having benefited greatly from the Canal, nevertheless felt itself entitled to, and of necessity was obliged to obtain, even greater benefits. With no minerals or other natural resources apart from its geographic position, Panama was obliged to rely very heavily on revenues derived directly and indirectly from the operation of the Canal. He stated that he was absolutely convinced of the correctness of this view, despite the theory advocated by some prominent Panamanians that the country should endeavor to develop other sources of income in order to lessen its dependence upon the Canal. He went on to point out that the Canal had been constructed with United States resources, in Panamanian territory, and was, in his view therefore, an entity which was effectively the concern of our two nations alone. For this reason, he said, the Canal Zone market should be reserved for Panamanian and U.S. suppliers, and the introduction of Australian beef and Ecuadoran rice, for example, encroached on Panama’s right to supply this natural market. Panama’s was a dollar economy, he added, and could not hope to achieve the low-­production costs of such countries as Ecuador. In short, the Ambassador said that frankly what Panama considered itself entitled to was a “captive market”. The Secretary observed that we did not subscribe to this theory with respect to our own domestic market and mentioned the Reciprocal Trade Agreements policy3 as evidence of our attitude. The Foreign Minister replied that nevertheless the United States found it necessary on occasion to take protectionist sentiment into account, citing the recent imposition of quotas on lead and zinc imports as an example.4 In a brief digression, the Foreign Minister and the Ambassador both complimented the Secretary on his decision to announce the lead-­zinc quotas before the recent Washington meeting of Foreign Ministers5 convened, 3 Enacted on June 12, 1934, the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act (48 Stat. 943) empowered the President to lower unilaterally existing tariff schedules by as much as 50 percent for those nations willing to make reciprocal trade concessions. In the Trade Agreements Extension Act of 1958 (Public Law 85–686), enacted on August 20, 1958, Congress granted the President another extension of the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act of 1934. For the text of the Trade Agreements Extension Act of 1958, see 72 Stat. 673. 4 On September 22, 1958, President Eisenhower announced the imposition of quotas on lead and zinc imports into the United States, effective on October 1. For the text of the White House press release containing the President’s announcement, see the Department of State Bulletin, October 13, 1958, p. 579. 5 The Latin American Foreign Ministers met informally in Washington on September 23–24, 1958, and approved measures to promote inter-American economic cooperation, including the establishment of an inter-American economic development institution.
