662
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
259.
Draft National Intelligence Estimate1
Washington, August 12, 1953.
SUBJECT
The Current Outlook in Iran (Staff Draft for Board Consideration)
The Problem
To re-assess the outlook in Iran in the light of developments since
publication of NIE–75/1, “Probable Future Developments in Iran
through 1953.”2
Estimate
Introduction
1. The elements of instability and uncertainty in the Iranian situa-
tion have become more pronounced since the beginning of 1953. While
Mossadeq has managed to retain control of the government and the po-
litical initiative in Iran, he has made no discernable progress toward so-
lution of the serious problems confronting the country and has suffered
a long series of political setbacks. These setbacks have narrowed his
base of political strength, forced him to resort to openly dishonest
methods to retain the initiative, and made his survival more dependent
than ever on his aggressiveness and skill as a political antagonist and
on the irresolution and disunity of his opponents. Most of Mossadeq’s
old colleagues in the National Front, including such leading figures as
Kashani, Baghai, and Makki, now oppose him, leaving only a small
group of faithful supporters. A group of ex-Army officers headed by
General Zahedi is openly committed to his downfall, and such nominal
Mossadeq collaborators as Minister of Court Amini (whose brother
heads the gendarme´rie) appear to be secretly plotting against him. Fol-
lowing Mossadeq’s unsuccessful effort to drive the Shah into exile in
February, the Majlis opposition became so baulky that Mossadeq fi-
nally withdrew his supporters (thus precluding a quorum) and then
called a “referendum” to approve final dissolution of that body pend-
ing new elections. While this vote, just completed, was officially re-
ported as an overwhelming pro-Mossadeq victory, this showing was at
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, NIC Files, Job 79R01012A, Box 32, Folder 3,
(NIE 102) Probable Developments in Iran. Top Secret; Security Information. The draft es-
timate was prepared in the Office of National Estimates. A summary of the estimate was
sent to Dulles by Kent on August 13. (Ibid., Job 79R00904A, Box 1, Folder 4, Memo for
DCI (1953) (Substantive)) For the final text of the NIE, see Document 347.
2 Document 152.
