present time meeting in London. At the invitation of that Committee, this
Government at one time had arranged for a secretary of the Embassy at
London to attend its meetings to keep the Department informed. We have
not, however, been invited to participate in the present meetings.
The most recent Austrian proposal is being referred to the Treasury for
comment.
In case any question is raised by the press, it might be well to state that it is
not correct to say that the United States is holding up the matter. You could
say that you understand Austria desires a loan of $100,000,000; that the
matter is very complicated because of the liens of the relief bonds and the
provisions of the treaty regarding Austrian reparations (whose amount has
not been fixed); that various plans have been discussed for arranging the
loan; and that you have not been advised that the other governments have
accepted any particular plan covering these matters, and that the
Department has not been informed that the Reparation Commission has
taken any action in the matter with reference to the reparation claim against
Austria.
It is my opinion that it would be desirable now to make a proper agreement
covering the relief indebtedness of Austria. I should also like to see an
arrangement made whereby the Executive Branch of our Government
would not have to continue protecting liens which affect Austrian assets and
revenues, since we have no interest in the situation which warrants
maintaining such a degree of control over Austrian finances. Our position
would be the more embarrassing if the other Governments should be willing
to take action to facilitate a further reconstruction loan by Austria, but the
Executive of the United States lacked authority to do so. I think we should
have in mind this possibility, although I see nothing specific to be done
until the situation develops further.
We have not had any inquiries from bankers as to our attitude on the
proposed loan, which obviously is only at the preliminary stage, though J. P.
Morgan and Company have indicated that they are interested in it.
A[RTHUR] N. Y[OUNG]
