1086 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 32. Wang said: Our position with regard Chinese in prison and reason why object Indian Embassy questioning been given previ­ ously and again morning. Don’t think necessary repeat. Don’t think claim Indian Embassy has no dissatisfaction in carrying out functions tells whole story. Indian Embassy asked your government for list all ­Chinese US. Your government so far refused. This not demonstration willingness offer help Embassy. Calling this situation satisfactory at variance with fact. 33. I said: Suggest if agreeable Friday July 6. This exceptional in view July 4 national holiday have to be Prague. Wang said: Previous engagement Friday suggest Tuesday July 10. I agreed. Gowen 670. Letter 39 from Johnson to McConaughy1 Letter No. 39 Geneva, June 28, 1956 Dear Walter: I am not sending any comment telegram this week as I do not have much to add to my summary message, and, in any event you will receive this long before you have to get out the guidance for the next meeting. Things went about as expected this morning. I had not intended to say much on renunciation but listening to his opening statement the mood seized me and I let myself go. It is the type of act that loses its usefulness if put on too often, but after arriving there this morning it seemed to me a good idea. It is also, I feel, much more effective when I do it obviously extemporaneous rather than reading a prepared state­ ment. I tried again to go as far as I felt I could in holding out the “pot of gold” if they would behave themselves. It seems to me this is now and again necessary if I am to do everything possible to assume that we keep going along the present lines. However, it is hard to find new ways to say the same old thing. My present feeling is that with care­ ful handling we can expect to be able to plow this same furrow until November but, depending on what happens then not much beyond 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­ Informal. A handwritten note indicates the letter was received on July 5. The last page of the letter is missing.
