“treatment generally accorded to foreigners”, and he thought the phrase
“subject to reciprocity” might lead the Austrian courts to require reciprocity
to be proved in each instance and that such a tedious legal formality might
defeat the object sought to be attained. This, as just stated, was a matter of
first impressions, and he wanted to think it over. He was inclined to think
that the best way out would be to allow the first paragraph of Article I to
stand as originally drafted, and for the Government of the United States to
submit a memorandum to the Austrian Government embodying a general
statement or resume explaining that such matters come within the
competence of the several states and reciting the general trend of the state
laws so far as the Department is familiar with them. If such a memorandum
could be prepared in the State Department and embodied by me in a note,
the Austrian Government would say in substance, by way of a reply (Dr.
Schüller was giving me the idea and not the phraseology), that having gone
in the situation it was satisfied that reciprocity to all intents and purposes
existed, but that if such reciprocity should be hereafter wiped out, a new
declaration in this respect could be made by either party. This solution
contemplates, it will be perceived, an exchange of notes, but Schüller
seemed to be of the opinion that it would obviate all difficulties and restrain
the Austrian courts from taking the stand that reciprocity should be
judicially proved in each instance when an American should seek to acquire
land in Austria.
To sum up this branch of the discussion, (first), I feel reasonably certain that
Dr. Schüller will not insist upon the insertion of the word “agricultural” in
the first paragraph of Article I. He distinctly said so in the first instance, and
only at a later stage did it occur to him that from his point of view there was
no reason why most favored nation treatment should not be accorded
Austrian nationals in the matter of leasing lands for agricultural purposes as
well as for acquiring and owning land.
(Second), the matter of the acquisition of land can probably be regulated by
an exchange of notes in the way above suggested. This is the only matter
dealt with in the instruction under reference which I regard as really
unsettled. Dr. Schüller said that there was a juridical question involved and
he would want to consult some of his associates before speaking definitely
upon this point. If this solution should prove acceptable, it would have the
