Dominican Republic  523
necessary to drive a stake through his heart to prevent a continuation of his 
crimes. I believe sudden death would be more humane than the solution 
of the Nuncio who once told me he thought he should pray that Trujillo 
would have a long and lingering illness.
I apologize for the length of this letter, but I wanted you to have a 
useful amount of my thinking on the questions you asked me. If there 
is anything I know, it is that I am not infallible. It may, for example, be 
possible for some one to think of a type of approach to Trujillo by a U.S. 
citizen which might induce him to leave. If some such proposal seems 
promising I would suggest you try it out on me since I will be quick to 
say “good” if it looks feasible from this battleground.
With kindest regards,
Very sincerely,
Henry Dearborn
DR–29.	
Memorandum from the Director of Intelligence and 
Research (Cumming) to the Secretary of State1
 
Washington, November 22, 1960.
SUBJECT
Intelligence Note: The Current Situation in the Dominican Republic
General Rafael Leonidas Trujillo Molina has survived many chal-
lenges during his thirty years of completely personal rule but none have 
been as persistent or serious as the current threats he faces. Confronting 
him are internal economic crises and widespread political dissension, 
plus the formal condemnation of the American community of nations. 
Although Trujillo seemingly remains in complete control, the days of 
his regime appear numbered, although the time and manner of his 
overthrow cannot be accurately predicted.
Trujillo’s troubles can be traced directly to the fall of Batista in January 
1959. Suddenly isolated, Trujillo soon bore the full brunt of the revolu-
tionary, libertarian tide inspired by Castro’s success. Trujillo’s reaction 
was to embark on a ruinously expensive campaign of arms procurement, 
and to support openly followers of Batista then exiled in Ciudad Trujillo. 
The resulting economic dislocations soon turned a small but influential 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 739.00/11–2260. Official Use Only.
