1956 1105 2. We have been quite forehanded with your guidance telegram, No. 60 of July 19th which went off last night. I believe it is the first time we have dispatched your guidance a full week before the meeting. The reason is that the Secretary is leaving today for Panama and Judge Phleger for a week in San Francisco. 3. You will see that we are taking a strong line in refusing to dis­ cuss trade controls in the absence of a renunciation of force. It is sub­ stantially the position you took last November, and the position you recommended in your comments on the last meeting. We debated for some time whether we should also state that discussion of trade or any other practical matter would additionally be contingent on full Chinese Communist compliance with the agreed announcement. We somewhat reluctantly decided not to put this in, for tactical reasons. At the same time you will understand that this second condition, although not to be expressed by you at this time, still stands. If they should agree to renounce force, we would then point out that they would have to make good on their commitment of September 10 before we could go on to any other practical matter at issue. 4. Enclosed is a translation of a circular letter to Chinese students in this country, mailed from mainland China. We got this through Intel­ ligence sources. 5. We have heard of one additional Chinese student who has gone insane. His name is [text not declassified] from the University of Minne­ sota. He has been in the mental ward of the University of Minnesota Hospital since ­February. The doctors think his condition is attributable to letters he has received from his family in China. He received letters through the open mail from his family which praised the Communist regime and urged him to return. Later he received smuggled letters which told him the former letters had been written under pressure and that he should disregard them. Although [text not declassified] is an aero­ engineer, apparently he was never on the list of technically trained Chi­ nese who were temporarily restrained from leaving the U. S. Apparently he is not the [text not declassified]. We received this report from the FBI. We have heard nothing from the Minnesota authorities or from [text not declassified] himself. We intend to take no action unless we receive something from those quarters. 6. We are enclosing the latest tabulation of information on ­Americans in prison in Communist China. While you may have all this information it is more accessible in this tabular form. 7. We have just heard from [text not declassified] that her hus­ band, [text not declassified] has apparently been pretty extensively influ­ enced by the Chinese Communist brainwashing efforts. He has been taken on a tour of a number of Chinese cities. He wrote his wife a long letter containing all sorts of panegyrics on the Chinese Communist
