Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Dr. Brzezinski: If there is bad language, it could be construed to legitimate war. The language that you want makes the signing of the treaty almost impossible for Sadat for political reasons. Therefore, it might be better to have no article at all. Prime Minister Begin: I want Sadat to have a good standing in the Arab world, but we cannot sacrifice ourselves on the alter of Sadat’s prestige in the Arab world. Mr. Rosenne: Don’t forget that the preamble already establishes in six different paragraphs a linkage to the Camp David frameworks. The linkage is there. Secretary Vance: We had the concept of “prevailing over”, and it has now been dropped. Each treaty stands on its own feet. That was accepted. It was Foreign Minister Dayan’s statement that caused the added problems. Prime Minister Begin: Prevailing over, supremacy over, all of that is good language. This is the weakest version, but we need at least this. Secretary Vance: Would you be willing to say that this treaty does not prevail over, but stands on its own along with others. Prime Minister Begin: No. It is no equal. The others are hostile to Israel. We need to solve the problem of what happens in the event of conflict. Ambassador Blum: In Europe, it is common in treaties to abrogate principles in previous treaties that are in conflict. We have not insisted upon this. Secretary Vance: You have said that this treaty should prevail over the other treaties. Mr. Rosenne: We gave that language up. Secretary Vance: But Dayan stated it publicly and it has not been retracted. Prime Minister Begin: We gave up the word prevailed. Secretary Vance: But you haven’t said it does not prevail. Mr. Rosenne: The draft at one point was titled “priority of obligations”. Dayan said that only where there was conflict between these obligations and others, then the terms of this treaty should be honored. Egypt’s objections came later. President Carter: We’ll work on this later today. (At the end of the meeting Prime Minister Begin handed Secretary Vance a letter32 on oil.) 32 Not found.
