224
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
1. (Confidential—Entire text)
2. Summary: At ninth (final) plenary meeting, held August 31,
both Delegations gave wrap-up statements. US Del head Fisher out-
lined accomplishments of round, drew attention to issues involved in
drafting work and proposed both sides consider increasing resources
devoted to bilaterals. Soviet Delhead reviewed accomplishments and
made plea for common US–USSR approach to the work of the Com-
mittee on Disarmament in the chemical weapons field. Discussion of
verification issues begun at previous meeting was continued. End
Summary.
3. Ninth (final) plenary meeting was held Friday, August 31, 1979.
Prepared statements were presented by both sides.
4. Statements by US Del head (Amb. A.J. Fisher) contained over-
view of the round.
A. Accomplishments: Fisher said that, overall, the US Delegation
believed that round ten had been successful. He noted that in latter
stages of the round the negotiations had intensified. In Fisher’s view
the most important accomplishments were the initiation of active dis-
cussions of verification issues and initiation of efforts to draft language
for a joint initiative. He noted, on the other hand, that the major unre-
solved issues remained the same.
B. Drafting group issues. Fisher pointed out that, in order to permit
the drafting group to complete its work on the first three elements of a
joint initiative issues in the following areas needed to be resolved:
—Use of munitions for permitted purposes
—Treatment of irritants and herbicides
—Coverage of toxins
—Transfer of super-toxic chemicals to non-states parties
—Scope of the term “precursor”
C. Neglected issues. Fisher expressed disappointment that it had
not been possible to give priority attention to resolving the issues of
declaration of stocks and procedures for challenge inspection. He
pointed out that in the latter case the US had not received a response to
proposals made well over a year ago.
D. Committee on Disarmament. With respect to the Committee on
Disarmament (CD), Fisher said US was studying the Soviet August 15
suggestion that the two sides try to develop a common approach
toward possible CD work on the outline of a CW convention, (as pro-
posed by the Poles). The US hopes to respond well before the next
round begins.
E. Delegation staffing. Fisher pointed out the difficulties experi-
enced in trying to have the same Delegation members cover both the
CD and the CW bilaterals. He proposed that, for next year, both sides
