and the diplomatic representatives as would seriously handicap any
negotiations for the settlement of the case.
3. Such an inquiry is likely to be opposed, however, by the Italian, French
and Belgian Governments whose Ministers consider their prestige and amour
propre compromised by any suggestion for reconsideration of the course
hitherto pursued and who are disposed to disavow any responsibility in
connection with the Shanghai situation if unable to get their way in forcing a
direct issue with the Municipal Council. Italian Minister in the meeting today
went so far as to say that proposed judicial commission would in fact be a
mere agency in behalf of the Governments whose nationals participate in the
Shanghai Municipal Council and that he had already advised his Government
to withdraw its small naval expedition if Shanghai should so be treated as not
in fact an international settlement.
4. In the present querulous temper of the diplomatic body, I am doubtful
whether any progress towards settlement can be made except by agreement
among the American, British and Japanese Governments in the hope that
other Governments, from a viewpoint more dispassionate than other [that?]
of their representatives here, will be persuaded to associate themselves with
the initiative thus taken by the powers actually most interested in the
Shanghai International Settlement.
5. For the reasons indicated, I recommend that our Government accede to the
British proposal with a qualification that the commission of inquiry should
include a Chinese jurist of high standing. The holding of an inquiry without a
Chinese member, or at any rate an offer to admit a Chinese to participate
would, I feel sure, have an adverse effect upon Chinese opinion but I believe
that to hold a judicial investigation in which Chinese had the opportunity to
be represented would be a conciliatory gesture which would favorably
influence Chinese sentiment and react advantageously upon our relations.
6. If such an inquiry were to be held without delay, I do not see how it would
interfere with plans for Special Conference or Commission on
Extraterritoriality. If the inquiry were to coincide with these, it might indeed
tend to create a situation tactically disadvantageous for the negotiation of
tariff and extraterritorial questions in that we would be compelled to deal
with these matters of principle while occupying a defensive position in regard
to concrete issues arising out of Shanghai incident. This, however, seems to
me preferable to having to negotiate in the atmosphere of distrust which
would persist if we were to have taken no adequate measures for the purpose
of reaching an adjustment of the Shanghai affair.
