466 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII Afghanistan.3 He pointed out that we had put together with great care a strong military and economic aid package, and that some of our top officials will be going to Europe in the next week to discuss sharing of the economic and military burden.4 He said that he believed the European leaders were already positively inclined and he would appreciate Agha Shahi’s guidance on the degree to which our efforts in all of these regards should be made public. He noted, of course, that the dimensions of our aid program will have to become public as soon as we present it to Congress. (S) The President reviewed various measures that we have taken to increase our strength on a permanent basis, including the revitalization of NATO, the establishment of important relations with China, and measured development of Diego Garcia, where the British are now more willing to be forthcoming on expansion. He noted, however, that our relations with India have become difficult following the elections. He told Mr. Shahi that he had had a nonsubstantive telephone conversation with Mrs. Gandhi and that he was disconcerted, although not especially surprised by the speech which the Indian Permanent Representative had made on Afghanistan in the UN General Assembly.5 The speech sounded as if it had come from East Germany, Czechoslovakia, or North Vietnam. He told Shahi that we plan to send an emissary to India to attempt to convince Mrs. Gandhi of our attitude towards her country, and to point out that we will be making commitments to Pakistan. (S) The President said we trust that Pakistan is determined to defend its territory. We will report back on matters of concern to you after we have talked to India and our European allies. The Chinese Foreign Minister will soon be visiting Pakistan and I hope you will share with us, to the proper extent, the results of that visit. (S) 3 See Document 159. 4 Christopher visited Brussels, Bonn, Paris, London, and Rome January 14–16. After he met with the North Atlantic Council in Brussels on January 15, he noted that he was “encouraged” by the progress made toward agreeing on the response to the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. (Flora Lewis, “Gains Reported at NATO Parley on Anti- Soviet Steps,” New York Times, January 16, 1980, p. A10) 5 Carter’s phone conversation with Gandhi took place earlier that day. The January 11 statement by the Indian Permanent Representative was relayed in telegram 714 from New Delhi, January 12. The major points of the statement, as reported in the telegram, included the assertion that the Soviet Union was in Afghanistan “at the invitation of the previous Afghan Government and with the agreement of the present government,” that “India has had assurances from the USSR that Soviets will withdraw on request by Afghan Government,” and “discussion in the UN of an issue involving the sovereign rights of the Afghan people would not be helpful.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800020–0906)
