940  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
10. The Panama Canal Company Program to Build More Houses for 
Panamanian Employees in the Zone
The memorandum states the belief that a program of this nature 
fosters loyalty to the United States by such inhabitants. This is undoubt-
edly true but the Defense representatives will be in a better position 
than the Department to judge the feasibility of this project.
11. Modest Pension Increase and Provision of Medical Aid for Elderly 
Retired Former Employees
These are laudable suggestions but again the Defense representa-
tives must provide the answer. It is understood that some pensions are 
in the neighborhood of $40 a month.
12. Next Appointment to the Board of Directors of the Panama Canal 
Company should be a State Department Representative
The memorandum recommends that until there is a vacancy a rep-
resentative of the Department of State should attend the meetings as 
an observer. Mr. Marshant is suggested as State’s representative on the 
Board.
It is believed advisable to have the Department represented on the 
Board where its director would be in a position to influence decisions 
which affect United States relations with Panama. The State member 
would, in effect, be a voting political adviser to the Board. Rather than 
burden the Under Secretary for Political Affairs or the Assistant Secretary 
of State for Inter-American Affaire with this responsibility it is suggested 
that the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs 
might be named. In view of a larger role envisioned for the Ambassador, 
it is not considered appropriate that he serve on the Board.
It is recommended that you support this point of the memorandum.
13. Civilian Governor of the Canal Zone
The memorandum suggests that the next Governor of the Canal 
Zone, to be appointed in May of this year, “be a different man from the 
President of the Panama Canal Company and a civilian selected partly 
for qualities of tact and diplomacy.” He should sit with the Board of 
Directors of the Panama Canal Company, the memorandum [illegible 
in the original].
It is recommended that the Department support this point of the 
­Memorandum. The United States military plays a triple role in the Zone 
and vis-a-vis Panama: it supplies the governor of the Zone, manages 
the Panama Canal Company, and protects the Canal. The Corps of 
Engineers, which has a brilliant record in operating the Canal, has tra-
ditionally furnished the governor, who by statute serves also as ex offi-
cio president of the Company. There seems to be no compelling reason 
today, as opposed to the conditions of 1903, 1917 or 1941, why the Canal 
Zone should be under a military governor. The presence of foreign
