National Security Policy  211
based more on a matter of opinion than on fact and in this connection 
it is pointed out that the bulk of the free world applauded the decision 
of the U.S. intervening in Korea at a time when the prospects of World 
War III were equal to, if not greater than, might be the case today.
2. Reference Para. 4 (See Para. 5., above). It is not made clear just 
what degree of “cleanliness” will not arouse adverse world opinion.
3. With reference to Paras. 6 and 7, it would appear that effective 
and prompt U.S. response to limited military aggression requires facili­
ties and capabilities to a greater extent than that now in existence.
In view of the above comments, it is believed that the first conclu­
sion and the first recommendation are not borne out by the supporting 
comments and recommendations. As pointed out above, it is believed 
that ISA should suspend further action on the document pending the 
receipt of the formal views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff as to their pro­
fessional judgment as to any military capability to conduct limited 
operations.
No detailed comments are made with regard to the “hypothetical 
situations” in view of the comments contained in Para. 8 of the basic 
memorandum and of the earlier comments furnished your office by 
this office.
John S. Guthrie
Brigadier General, USA
Director, European Region
Attachment
Memorandum for the Assistant Secretary of Defense for 
Comptroller, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and 
Engineering, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Supply and 
Logistics, the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Atomic 
Energy, and the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Special 
Operations
Washington, May 29, 1958
SUBJECT
U.S. and Allied Capabilities for Limited Military Operations to 1 July 1961
1. The inclosed study on the above subject, prepared by a State-
Defense-JCS working group is scheduled for transmission to the 
National Secretary Council by the Secretaries of Defense and State on 
or before 16 June 1958.
