North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
905
Having chosen the middle course of including only countries with
seriously questionable human rights records, we determined after
wide consultation within State, AID and Agriculture that, of the agree-
ments which are ready to be negotiated, those with Indonesia, Korea,
Bangladesh and Guinea should include the new language. Negotiating
instructions to our personnel in Indonesia, Korea and Bangladesh have
been sent out, and those for the Guinean agreement will be dispatched
on Monday.6
The instructions state that the negotiation of these agreements
should be given top priority and that every effort should be exerted to
conclude the agreements within ten business days. If it should appear
that efforts to include the new provision will make it impossible to con-
clude the agreement within that period, we will communicate a pos-
sible fallback position to the posts, e.g., a side letter or memorandum of
intent. (We are receiving quite understandable complaints from the
posts and bureaus on this matter, but the problem stems from the
statute itself and our need to implement it with fidelity to our human
rights policy.)
Negotiating instructions were also sent out earlier this week to our
personnel in six other countries—and on Monday will be sent to our
post in a seventh—whose human rights records were not determined
to be seriously questionable: namely, Afghanistan, Israel, Jordan,
Morocco, Pakistan, Egypt and Sri Lanka.7
For technical reasons unrelated to human rights, the remaining 18
agreements are not ready to be negotiated at this time. We are consid-
ering within the Department which of the 18 countries are regarded as
raising serious human rights questions. I am attaching, under Tab 3,8 a
supportive editorial from yesterday’s Washington Post and two earlier
Washington Post stories, apparently inspired by the Department of
Agriculture.
Warren Christopher9
6 November 28. The instructions were not found.
7 Not found.
8 Tab 3, attached but not printed, comprises three clippings from The Washington
Post: a November 23, 1977, article by Dan Morgan entitled “17 Countries Await ‘Human
Rights’ Clearance for Food Aid,” p. A8; a November 24, 1977, editorial entitled “Food for
People,” p. A22; and a November 22, 1977, article by Dan Morgan entitled “U.S. Holds
Back Food Aid in Rights Review,” p. A1.
9 Christopher signed “Warren” above this typed signature.
