March 1952–February 1953
351
Iran should be made to realize that it is responsible for its own bud-
getary position and that the world expects Iran to utilize its great petro-
leum assets. However, Ambassador Henderson should be informed
that if he considers the situation requires immediate financial aid to the
Iranian Government, such money may be available. Furthermore, the
Export-Import Bank will probably be willing to complete arrangements
for a $25 million loan if there is hope of a resumption of oil sales. Iran
might also be able to draw a sizeable sum from the International Mone-
tary Fund before it would be necessary for the United States to provide
grant or other aid.
122.
Memorandum From the Chief of the Iran Branch, Near East
and Africa Division (Leavitt) to the Chief of the Near East
and Africa Division, Directorate of Plans, Central
Intelligence Agency (Roosevelt)1
Washington, September 22, 1952.
SUBJECT
Program to Support the Shah
1. The Objective: The establishment by the Shah of an Iranian Gov-
ernment willing and able to: (a) undertake necessary reforms; (b) effec-
tively oppose Communism and extreme nationalism; (c) collaborate
with the U.S. in such aids as we offer; and (d) accept a reasonable settle-
ment of the oil controversy.
2. The Thornburg Program: Mr. Thornburg has recommended an
early, direct approach to the Shah for the purpose of inducing him to
lead and carry out what in effect would be a military coup.2 The Shah
would be assured by the U.S. and U.K. of full moral support, sufficient
material assistance to tide Iran over until the oil issue was amicably set-
tled, and detailed advice with respect to: (a) the implementation of the
coup; (b) the formation of a new Government; (c) the carrying out of
necessary reforms; and (d) the settlement of the oil controversy.
3. From what we know of the Shah’s character, and particularly in
view of his attitude during the July crisis, it seems to me extremely un-
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Intelligence, Job
80B01676R, Box 41, Folder 20, Shah of Iran Operations. Secret.
2 See Documents 117 and 118.
