Hungary
517
—The well managed and productive agricultural sector.
—The general, popular acceptance of the Hungarian Party’s
leadership.
—The scant politicization of Hungarian labor.
—The absence of links between workers and the small group of
intellectual dissidents.
—The cooperative (to the point of appearing co-opted) role of
Hungarian religious leaders.
—The relatively successful national alliance policies of Kadar’s
regime which have given even non-Communist Hungarians a sense of
national pride and participation in the country’s life.
3. Many Hungarians with whom we have talked look at the Polish
events through a local prism. The prism is small and reflects mostly
economics. Hungarian officials are not confident that events in Poland
have run their course, and that is naturally worrisome. Any argument
picturing what has happened this summer in Poland as being solely
about free trade unions is doubly worrisome because that, standing
alone, could combine political danger and economic ruin. Here they
would rather see Polish events in the context of economic reform, as
a vindication of Kadar and the economic reform program as elaborated
and pursued since 1968.
4. Although Poland in some ways provided the political backdrop
against which Hungarian reform was first made possible, Poland has
been regarded here as a foot-dragger. The importance of the Party and
government keeping its word is often heard and the Polish record of
broken promises to the workers held up in comparison to what is
claimed a perfect Hungarian record of promises kept. Communication
with the workers and keeping faith with them is seen as the foundation
for the Hungarian economic reform model which has at least these six
major components:
(A) A commitment to economic growth, not export led but with a
vigorous East and West export component.
(B) A modernized planning system which is both precise and flexi-
ble and does not fully allocate all resources.
(C) Less centralized control and more authority for local enterprise
management.
(D) An increased role for consumption, being critical not only for
public support, but, of equal importance, for expanding capital
formation.
(E) Allowing initiative to develop at all levels, through the profit
motive and profit sharing.
(F) Allowing the market to play a significant role in resource alloca-
tion and pricing.
