756
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
the partial isolationism of the early 1970s. The many tangible accom-
plishments of your term (Panama, Camp David, China normalization,
etc.) are the consequence of this approach. They demonstrate how re-
sponsible use of American power and influence can contribute to
global peace and human progress.
I believe the above summarizes the themes of your Administra-
tion’s foreign policy, and that in time it will become clear that this was
the proper course for the nation at this time: a building presidency, not
a flamboyant, “fire-fighting” one. However, many of these themes—
and even some specific actions, like the Panama Canal treaties—are
clearly not popular politically. To be sure, there is merit in an “educa-
tional campaign”; but the direct electoral benefits of discussing all the
central themes of your foreign policy are less obvious. “Complexity”
and “change,” for example—however real in today’s world—are a
source of anxiety, not political approbation.
It is possible to group these themes in more politically attractive
ways, however, around two primary themes and two secondary ones:
Primary:
—American strength (defense, economic, energy, alliances); and
—peace.
Secondary:
—morality (human rights, Third World); and
—building for the future (alliances, economic summits, Third
World).11
In my judgment, you are in fact on strong grounds on national
strength—where the Republicans are trying to make you look weak—
and on peace. In the former area, you have reversed nearly a decade’s
(Republican) decline in our spending, are increasing the defense
budget by 3–4% in real terms, buying the right modern weapons, and
creating a capacity to protect (through deterrence, not conflict) Western
vital interests in the Persian Gulf.12 There is the NATO 3% commit-
ment, the Long-Term Defense Program, and the TNF decision. There is
the energy program—for the first time beginning to reduce our na-
tional vulnerability to decisions taken by other countries in this area.
MTN directly helps U.S. businessmen, farmers, workers and con-
sumers. And the economic summits (plus your building efforts in the
U.S. economy) are also contributing directly to U.S. strength in the
world.
11 The President underlined portions of this theme and the previous three themes.
12 The President placed a dash in the right-hand margin next to this sentence.
