January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1279
this avenue should not be pursued and that there is a better one—such
as the U.N., or Geneva, where both the PLO and Israel would be repre-
sented. We went down that road. But the Arab nations could not agree
on how to negotiate, or on the role of the PLO and the Palestinians. We
tried it, with determination, and even got a U.S.-Soviet agreement.10
But we couldn’t get Syrian or PLO agreement. The alternative was a
surprise, but he was grateful for it: Sadat broke the log-jam.
If there is a desire to resolve the issues, and to capture world atten-
tion, to get support and to prevail over Israeli obstructionism, isn’t the
best way to get someone among the Palestinian Arabs to join the nego-
tiations, with the tacit support of the PLO and Jordan? His Majesty says
he cannot negotiate for the Palestinians, but will he support others—for
example, some mayors—if they adhere to their principles—such as
total withdrawal and Jerusalem? Now there is a vacuum; it is difficult
for Egypt to speak for the Palestinians.
He (the President) is convinced that most Israelis want peace, and
will go a long way towards self-determination and withdrawal—ex-
cept from Jerusalem. At Camp David, they had a paragraph on Jeru-
salem that was satisfactory to Israel and to Egyptians who were even
closer to the Palestinians than Sadat. Israel found it difficult to with-
draw from the Sinai, to give up the oil, and abandon its strategic posi-
tion at Sharm-el-Sheikh. It was torture for Begin to have settlers come
out of the Sinai. This was very difficult, but he did it. The reason was
that the Israeli people want a permanent peace that would make them
secure. Israelis still have that feeling. Begin is not popular. He repre-
sents the majority on some issues—for example, the Israelis are terri-
fied about a divided Jerusalem, under which they could not go to the
Western Wall, as when Jordan occupied Jerusalem. Therefore we do
not see the advisability of abandoning Camp David. Another process
would be neither rapid or lead to a peaceful settlement. Jordan and the
PLO are not in the talks. If you would get Palestinians to join, then Is-
rael would be under difficult negotiating circumstances and it would
arouse in the world a belief that there is a desire of Jordan and the Pal-
estinians to resolve the issues. He (the President) has no desire to sup-
port Israeli positions against the Arab world. Sadat will tell His Majesty
that. There is a U.S. and Egyptian position together. He (the President)
would be happy to see Israel out of the West Bank and Gaza, with full
autonomy and preparations for its final status. He would be pleased to
see a total West Bank confederation with Jordan and see the Pales-
tinians support it. This is what he wants. Many Israelis want it, as well,
except for “total” withdrawal—they want some minor modifications.
There is a stalemate now, though we are trying to make progress. His
10 See footnote 3, Document 221.
