International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1079
4. Ranking women officials in other governments should be con-
tacted regarding U.S. concerns on the subject of women presuming
they are somewhat sensitized to the issue.
5. Official U.S. delegations should include more women whenever
possible.
6. More women should be included in the visitors exchange pro-
gram. Women candidates should be nominated as part of mixed
(male-female)
programs,
not
just
as
members
of
all-women
delegations.
323.
Memorandum From Michelle Bova of the Bureau of Human
Rights and Humanitarian Affairs to the Assistant Secretary
of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs
(Derian)1
Washington, January 11, 1979
SUBJECT
Green/Pickering Memos on the Plight of Women in Developing Countries
In response to the memos sent to you by Thomas Pickering and
Marshall Green, respectively (copies attached),2 I met separately with
Ambassador Green, Arvonne Fraser and Luke Lee of Mr. Pickering’s
office. These meetings elicited the following suggestions for how this
Administration and HA, in particular, could take a more active role in
promoting the rights of women and children internationally:
1. HA should create a full time officer position which would deal
with the rights of women and children internationally. Discussion: Luke
Lee has done some impressive work in this area, as attested by the at-
tached sample of writing material which he has produced.3 Now that
Patsy Mink has left OES and Ambassador Green will be leaving, the
1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs,
1979 Human Rights Subject Files, Lot 82D102, SHUM Women 1979. No classification
marking. Derian initialed the memorandum and added a handwritten notation: “I talked
w/Tom Pickering; he’s exploring the idea of transferring the slot. You’re right; if we
don’t get the slot, we won’t be able to manage to improve & enlarge our efforts—Return
to me please. P.D.”
2 Pickering’s and Green’s memoranda to Derian, dated December 11 and No-
vember 30, 1978, respectively, are attached but not printed.
3 Not attached and not found.
