Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 195 “Whether it can be accomplished I don’t know, because the ultimate decision is going to be made, and has to be made, by the parties themselves. You can never have a lasting peace until it’s one agreed upon by the parties. We will feel free, as I have indicated before, to make suggestions to the parties as to what we believe are fair and equitable approaches to these common core issues which we have talked about so many times in the past.” (Department of State Bulletin, July 18, 1977, pages 81–82; brackets in the quotation are in the original) The full text of Vance’s interview is ibid., pages 78–83. The interview was broadcast on television and radio. 46. Memorandum Prepared in the Department of State1 Washington, June 26, 1977 MEMORANDUM ON SOME POSSIBLE MEASURES FOR STABILIZING US-SOVIET RELATIONS Given present strains in US-Soviet relations, the uncertainties involved in current Soviet political changes, and the fundamental limitations of the SALT negotiations, what actions by the United States might have a useful stabilizing effect? Following are some measures for consideration: 1. Brezhnev Meeting: It seems evident that the idea has been of persistent interest to Brezhnev, and, if he would be willing to accept a non-negotiating, “get-acquainted” session not tied to SALT, with as little build-up of advance expectations as possible, it might have intangible but considerable benefits in dispelling misconceptions. It is pos- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Outside the System File, Box 48, Chron: 6/77. Secret. Carter wrote “Cy. J” in the top righthand corner of the first page of the memorandum. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; however, Brzezinski sent it to the President under a June 29 cover memorandum, noting: “Secretary Vance has submitted a memorandum identifying a number of measures which you may want to consider as part of an effort to ‘stabilize’ U.S./Soviet relations.” Brzezinski commented on several of the specific proposals outlined in the memorandum and concluded: “U.S.-Soviet relations are the product of deep and long-term historical forces and we should not become too preoccupied with transitory aspects, some of them deliberately generated by the Soviets in order to exercise psychological and political pressure on us.”
