Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
195
“Whether it can be accomplished I don’t know, because the ulti-
mate decision is going to be made, and has to be made, by the parties
themselves. You can never have a lasting peace until it’s one agreed
upon by the parties. We will feel free, as I have indicated before, to
make suggestions to the parties as to what we believe are fair and equi-
table approaches to these common core issues which we have talked
about so many times in the past.” (Department of State Bulletin, July 18,
1977, pages 81–82; brackets in the quotation are in the original)
The full text of Vance’s interview is ibid., pages 78–83. The inter-
view was broadcast on television and radio.
46.
Memorandum Prepared in the Department of State1
Washington, June 26, 1977
MEMORANDUM ON SOME POSSIBLE MEASURES FOR
STABILIZING US-SOVIET RELATIONS
Given present strains in US-Soviet relations, the uncertainties in-
volved in current Soviet political changes, and the fundamental limita-
tions of the SALT negotiations, what actions by the United States might
have a useful stabilizing effect? Following are some measures for
consideration:
1. Brezhnev Meeting: It seems evident that the idea has been of per-
sistent interest to Brezhnev, and, if he would be willing to accept a
non-negotiating, “get-acquainted” session not tied to SALT, with as
little build-up of advance expectations as possible, it might have intan-
gible but considerable benefits in dispelling misconceptions. It is pos-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Out-
side the System File, Box 48, Chron: 6/77. Secret. Carter wrote “Cy. J” in the top right-
hand corner of the first page of the memorandum. No drafting information appears on
the memorandum; however, Brzezinski sent it to the President under a June 29 cover
memorandum, noting: “Secretary Vance has submitted a memorandum identifying a
number of measures which you may want to consider as part of an effort to ‘stabilize’
U.S./Soviet relations.” Brzezinski commented on several of the specific proposals out-
lined in the memorandum and concluded: “U.S.-Soviet relations are the product of deep
and long-term historical forces and we should not become too preoccupied with transi-
tory aspects, some of them deliberately generated by the Soviets in order to exercise psy-
chological and political pressure on us.”
