National Security Policy 589 fixed equipment. This would provide flexibility and security through the use of relatively simple alternate launching sites which would be diffi­ cult to identify and locate. Our estimate of the Soviet capacity to acquire ICBM operational capabilities, given in the preceding paragraph, applies to either a rail-­transportable system or a system of moderately hardened fixed launching sites, or a combination of the two. 152. Other long-­range ballistic missiles. The Soviets probably consider ballistic missiles of 700 and 1,100 n.m. maximum range as contributing primarily to their capabilities to deliver nuclear payloads on distant, fixed targets in Eurasia and its periphery, although shorter-­range ballis­ tic missiles could also be employed for this purpose within their range. We estimate that nuclear warheads would be provided for virtually all missiles of 700 and 1,100 n.m. range, but we do not exclude the possibil­ ity of CW use in some 700 n.m. missiles. On the basis of available intel­ ligence, we cannot judge the present scale of production and we have not identified any units equipped with these missiles. It is possible that at present the USSR has only a very limited capability to employ them in military operations. But considering such factors as estimated Soviet requirements, nuclear materials availability, and experience in shorter range missiles, we believe that the USSR may now have an operational capability with as many as several hundred ballistic missiles of 700 n.m. range, and with a few 1,100 nm. missiles. 153. The wide availability of medium and light bombers capable of reaching Eurasian targets probably reduces Soviet requirements for missiles of these ranges. Since the 700-­mile missile has probably been operational since 1956, we believe that the Soviets may meet their requirements for this missile early in the period of this estimate. A build-­up in 1,100 n.m. missiles would take longer. Missiles of these types are probably designed for road or rail mobility. They are probably not deployed in Satellite areas at present, but some operational units may exist within the USSR. 154. Missile-­launching submarines. A few conventional submarines have probably been converted for topside stowage and launching of 200 n.m. cruise-­type missiles. The Soviets could convert a large number of existing submarines, but the problems involved lead us to believe that such conversion is not likely to be large-­scale. A total of about 20 long-­range submarines could be converted within 4–6 months of a deci­ sion to do so. The USSR is probably also developing one or more new types of missile-­launching submarines, designed for internal missile stowage. These types will probably include ballistic missile submarines for first operational use in 1961–1963, and possibly cruise-­type missile submarines at an earlier date. If the latter are in fact developed and con­ structed, the USSR may have about 35 submarines, some nuclear and some conventional-­powered, equipped for internal missile stowage by mid-1963.
