478  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
341.	 Letter 17 from Johnson to McConaughy1
Letter No. 17
Geneva, November 4, 1955
Dear Walter:
I have received your letters of October 29 and November 2.
I first want to say that I greatly regret that it was impossible 
to discuss your TEDUL 42, in particular paragraph 2, with the Sec­
retary until just prior to my meeting yesterday morning. The Sec­
retary’s Madrid trip and then the extreme pressure of his other 
appointments here made it impossible even to discuss it Wednesday 
night, so Herman and I were not able to get to him until 8:45 yester­
day morning. We talked for about 30 minutes and then I got off my 
very short 1044 to you before going to the meeting so as to let you 
know as quickly as possible what had happened. I had prepared 
for the meeting on the basis of asking Wang questions, and with 
the shift of emphasis I had no time to prepare anything else and so 
talked entirely extemporaneously. I don’t feel I made any bad slips 
and, on the whole, it was probably more effective than sitting and 
reading a prepared statement.
Our redraft here of the Agreed Announcement is, as you will 
recognize, simply a plagiarized and adapted version of the opening 
statement on the subject, which, however, it seems to me, well lent 
itself to the purpose. It seems to me that all the added “spinach” gives 
us something with much more political sex appeal and much more to 
talk about.
In the meeting yesterday I tried to partially lay the ground for 
introduction of some such draft and, particularly, to try to make the 
point to Wang that they need not sacrifice their position on Taiwan 
being a domestic issue by accepting our formula.
In view of the longer gap now between meetings, I plan to send my 
next summary report by priority rather than niact, and the full report 
by routine. Let me know if this does not work out satisfactorily from 
your standpoint.
You are entirely right that I would be very reluctant to lose Ekvall. 
We are used to working with each other and he does very well at a very 
difficult job, particularly when I start extemporizing and get myself 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/11–455. Secret; Official–­Informal. 
Johnson signed the original “Alex.” A handwritten note by Robertson next to the last 
paragraph about missing military personnel reads: “Walter—Has this been done in any 
way?” An attached handwritten note from Robertson to Sebald reads: “I agree we should 
advise Hammarskjold of our request for accounting [illegible in the original] personnel.”
