236
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
versely, increases in economic assistance ought usually to precede in-
creases in levels of military assistance.
1. Security (Military) Assistance.7
Our military assistance is a matter of great sensitivity both to the
governments that receive it and to those segments of the American
public and the Congress who watch it closely as an index of the priority
we place on human rights objectives in relation to our other foreign
policy concerns. Moreover, under Section 502(B) of the Foreign As-
sistance Act of 1961, as amended, we have a legal obligation to ensure
that our security assistance programs are formulated and conducted in
a manner that will promote and advance human rights and avoid iden-
tification of the U.S. with governments that violate human rights.
Perhaps more than any other single factor, U.S. military assistance
is seen as implying U.S. support for the governments that receive it. To
be perceived as supporting a repressive government inevitably exacts
costs in terms of the consistency and the credibility of our human rights
policy. Moreover, some types of arms we provide, finance or license
can be used by a recipient government to carry out or undergird repres-
sive practices. (Although such use is prohibited by U.S. law, our ability
to prevent it is limited.)
A full discussion of the criteria for providing military assistance is
beyond the scope of this study. However, we should remember that
most countries (certainly including our own) believe strongly in the
right to an adequate defense. A careful evaluation of the interests at
stake, and the potential benefits to be gained, is needed in each case.
Where there are vital national security interests at stake which require a
continuing military relationship between the U.S. and the recipient,
and where the recipient’s human rights record is considered to be ac-
ceptable or improving, we should consider sympathetically approving
arms transfers that are consistent in other respects with the President’s
arms transfer guidelines.8 Conversely, where those factors are not
present, we should view such requests unsympathetically.
Military assistance can be used as a sanction or incentive to pro-
mote human rights by altering the size or functions of our military ad-
visory contingent; by altering the level of training grants; by altering
the quantity of arms transfers; and by altering the types of arms trans-
ferred. Reduction or elimination of military assistance may have little
direct impact on a country’s human rights performance; in many in-
7 Security assistance includes grant material aid, grant military training, FMS and
licensed commercial arms sales and FMS financing of arms sales through credits and loan
guarantees. (Security supporting assistance is discussed in the section on bilateral eco-
nomic assistance below.) [Footnote in the original.]
8 See footnote 3, Document 65.
