January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1131 very important to him; and second by the political exigencies in Israel. Therefore he might act, reluctantly, contrary to his beliefs, and those of his party, because they would be acceptable to Israel and would keep his opponents out of power. These are notable motivations. But until we can convince him— can lead him to understand—that both of them are true without violating his principles too much, then there will be no progress. There was an escape hatch at Camp David for Begin, when he said he couldn’t accept dismantling of the Sinai settlements without approval of the Knesset. This can help put things on the back burner. If the Israeli people see that there is a choice between seeing a breakdown and having no settlements, voting rights for people in East Jerusalem, and the like—and if they vote it down, then so be it. He will have done what he could. His sense now is that the obstacle is not the Israeli people but Begin himself. Last time, they convinced Begin to act. Labor could not have done Camp David. Maybe Peres (with a united party) could have done the Egypt-Israel treaty. So he will give Begin the benefit of the doubt on this. In the upcoming process, he believes that Begin can’t do it—though he (the President) would like to be proved wrong. We need to keep Sadat flexible, and he would appreciate the Ambassador’s advice on how to do it. The President will study this closely, and needs the Ambassador’s thinking on what our position should be. Sadat can be resistant. He sees himself as the inheritor of the Pharaonic crown. He sees himself as a man of destiny and of courage. He takes big gambles, but it can be embarrassing if the gamble does not work. There are constraints on him. If he broke relations with Israel, then Fahd and others—whom he despises—would appear to have been right and Sadat to have been wrong. Sadat and he have a mutual affinity. If the Ambassador says there is an Israeli position we should go with (?), then he can sell it to Sadat. But once Sadat says he will not do something, then he can’t be changed. It is important to keep him on generalities. The Ambassador and he (the President) should reach a firm U.S. position, and try to get some progress in dealing with Begin. There would be a chance to succeed. Ambassador Linowitz said he would clarify the issues, and put in some positions. He thinks that Begin knows he is weak politically (the President agreed). Burg has told the Ambassador, in total confidence, that he has sent emissaries to Peres on early elections and dealing with Labor. Ehrlich is doing the same. Yadin is also playing around a bit. The President said Dayan and Weizman, too. Ambassador Linowitz said that this could crumble, and Begin knows it. In his (the Ambassador’s) judgment, this has brought Begin to tough positions, instead of wanting to be a man of flexibility, in part because of his associates. (The President agreed). But Begin does also want to be
