again others rejected it, giving the strange reason that the unreserved renunciation of aggression would be incompatible with their obligations towards the League of Nations. That, however, did not prevent those same Powers from signing the Pact of Paris without mentioning in the text itself the sacredness of the above mentioned obligations. 4. The facts hereinabove stated afford unquestionable proof that the idea of eliminating wars and armed conflicts from the field of international politics is the predominant idea of the foreign policy of the Soviets. Nevertheless, the originators of the Pact of Paris did not see fit to ask the Soviet Government either to join in the pourparlers which preceded this Pact or in the drawing up of the text of this Pact. Likewise, no invitation was sent to certain Powers really concerned in the maintenance of peace, because, either in the past (Turkey and Afghanistan), or in the present, (the Republic of the great Chinese people) they have been or are attacked. Neither does the invitation, transmitted by the French Government, contain conditions which would make it possible for the Soviet Government to exercise any influence on the text itself of the instrument signed at Paris. Yet, the Soviet Government lays down as a basis the axiom that under no condition whatsoever can it be deprived of the right which has accrued or may hereafter accrue to the governments that have signed the Pact, and standing on that right the Soviet Government must in particular first offer several remarks concerning its attitude towards the Pact. 5. First of all the Soviet Government can not refrain from expressing its most profound regret that there is not in the Pact of Paris any obligation whatsoever concerning disarmament. The Soviet Delegation to the Preparatory Commission of the Disarmament Conference already has had occasion to declare that it is only by joining a pact prohibiting war with the accomplishment of total and general disarmament that the maintenance of universal peace could be effectively guaranteed and that, on the contrary, an international treaty prohibiting war, but not accompanied by even that elementary guarantee offered
