1955  61
Mr. Robertson said some Embassy might conceivably be the 
medium for handling travel funds and making other arrangements for 
the return of those who expressed a wish to go back.
Ambassador Koo remarked that this arrangement would imply no 
official representation of Chinese Communist interests in this country, 
since the Embassy role would be that of a travel expediter.
Ambassador Koo reverted to the subject of a possible conference 
with Communist China at the Foreign Minister level. He said that his 
Government would appreciate a more definite statement or formal 
assurance that no such meeting was contemplated. The Secretary’s 
statement of last week was most welcome and President Eisenhower 
had said that he associated himself with the statement of the Secretary 
of State. But any doubt on this score would adversely affect the psy­
chology of the problem on Taiwan.
Mr. Robertson said the President and the Secretary had stated most 
emphatically that this Government would not discuss, on any level, 
matters affecting the rights of the Government of the Republic of China. 
He felt there could be no objection to bilateral talks aimed at securing 
the freedom of our nationals who are held. If there should be any inter­
national conference on Far Eastern subjects where matters involving 
the rights of the GRC were to be discussed, “your Government would 
have to be there”, or give its concurrence. Nothing could be decided 
“without your presence or your concurrence”.
Ambassador Koo said his Government would appreciate a more 
formal assurance on the lack of any intention of Secretary Dulles to 
meet with Chou En-­lai. He wondered if his Government could obtain a 
memorandum on the subject.
Mr. Robertson said he did not think there was any question of a 
memorandum. Both the President and the Secretary of State have stated 
their position to the American people and to the world. He felt this was 
as explicit and as binding as anyone could wish.
Ambassador Koo said it was true that very satisfactory statements 
had been made, but they were rather informal.
Mr. Robertson observed that they were categorical and were on the 
record. He did not see how they could have more force or more effect. 
He offered to send the Ambassador a copy of the press conference.
The Ambassador said he already had the record of the press con­
ference. He needed something more formal.
Mr. Robertson said he felt that what had been said could not be 
more official. A public affirmation of our position before all the world 
was better than a classified communication. It put the whole world on 
notice what our position was.
