Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 —A five-year interim regime for the West Bank/Gaza; no independent Palestinian state; deferral of negotiations on borders and sovereignty until end of five-year period. —Less than an Israeli commitment to full withdrawal and Palestinian self-determination as guidelines for negotiations.4 —Willingness to negotiate guidelines for West Bank/Gaza even if Hussein does not come in. —Repetition of “no more war” pledge;5 willingness to renew UNEF in October; honoring terms of Sinai II, including commitment to peaceful resolution of differences. —A willingness to negotiate seriously if an agreement on principles is reached. —From Begin: —Acceptance of all the principles of 242, including withdrawal and the “inadmissability of acquisition of territory by war,” as applicable on all fronts. —Modifications in “self-rule” proposal in order to make it sufficiently attractive to moderate Palestinians to bring them in as participants and to increase prospects of their accepting its main features (open borders, some Israeli security presence, some Israeli rights to live in West Bank, self-government) beyond five years. These modifications require6 an Israeli acceptance of the principle of withdrawal; a moratorium on organized settlement activity, in contrast to the rights of individuals to acquire land on a reciprocal basis; a visible termination of the military occupation at the outset of the five-year period; devolution of authority for the new regime from an agreement among Israel, Egypt, and Jordan; and general self-government for the Palestinians. —Flexibility on the remaining issues of settlements and air bases in Sinai. 9. Begin and Sadat are likely to try to shift the discussions to new proposals of their own. Begin may concentrate on details as a diversion from the larger issues. Sadat may try to enlist your support for a bold move on his part which will put Begin in the corner. The risk is that you could lose control of the talks and be diverted from the central issues either by Begin’s legalisms or Sadat’s imprecision. You should keep the focus on the large picture, the strategic choices, and refer new proposals or suggestions for textual language to the Foreign Ministers and Secretary Vance. With Sadat, you will have to hear him out on his new strategy without appearing to collude with him against Begin. 10. Both leaders will constantly be trying to get you to side with them on specific points. They will not hesitate to remind you of what we have said to them in the past. Begin will remember that we called his “self- 4 The President added “Acceptance of” to the beginning of this point.
