Under the Canadian tariff regulations, Canadian investigators have conducted
investigations into the books and records of American manufacturers. This Government
has not objected to such investigations, since it has appeared to it only fair that
American exporters, desiring to enter a foreign market, should comply with the tariff
and other regulations of that market. For this Government to prohibit proper activities
of Canadian investigators would be to injure American exporters by depriving them of
their trade with Canada in those cases where investigation of books is demanded by the
Canadian Customs authorities.
TARIFF COMMISSION REPRESENTATIVES
Your attention is especially directed to the fact that the United States Tariff
Commission is entirely separate from the United States Treasury Department. It was
created by Act of Congress approved September 8, 1916.39 It is not an administrative
department 
of 
this 
Government. 
Its 
duties 
consist 
of 
investigation 
and
recommendations to the President and to the Congress of the United States, as a result
of such investigations. You are referred to the statement of the Commission’s duties
which appears on page 393 of the Congressional Directory dated January, 1925.
Investigations in foreign countries are conducted under Sections 315, 316 and 317 of
the Tariff Act of 1922. The most frequent investigations abroad are to ascertain costs of
production under Section 315. Section 315 provides as follows: (a) That in order to
regulate the foreign commerce of the United States and to put into force and effect the
policy of the Congress by this Act intended, whenever the President, upon investigation
of the differences in costs of production of articles wholly or in part the growth or
product of the United States and of like or similar articles wholly or in part the growth
or product of competing foreign countries, shall find it thereby shown that the duties
fixed in this Act do not equalize the said differences in cost of production in the United
States and the principal competing country he shall, by such investigation, ascertain
said differences and determine and proclaim the changes in classifications or increases
or decreases in any rate of duty provided in this Act shown by said ascertained
differences in such costs of production necessary to equalize the same. Thirty days after
the date of such proclamation or proclamations such changes in classification shall take
effect, and such increased or decreased duties shall be levied, collected, and paid on
such articles when imported from any foreign country into the United States or into any
of its possessions (except the Philippine Islands, the Virgin Islands, and the Islands of
Guam and Tutuila): Provided, That the total increase or decrease of such rates of duty
shall not exceed 50 per centum of the rates specified in Title I of this Act, or in any
amendatory Act.
(b) That in order to regulate the foreign commerce of the United States and to put into
force and effect the policy of the Congress by this Act intended, whenever the
President, upon investigation of the differences in costs of production of articles
