262  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
cooperate in the development of a sound disposal plan for this purpose 
at an appropriate time.
2. The present time, however, does not seem to be an appropriate 
one, and the Department is definitely opposed to undertaking any sales 
of D.P.A. copper at present.
3. Since rumors have had an unsettling effect on markets, there 
is need for a public statement to the effect that the Government is not 
considering the sale of any copper at this time.
4. When the time does come to dispose of the D.P.A. inventories, 
the plan of disposal should be carefully designed to avoid unnecessary 
disturbance of the markets, and in particular it should specify a reason-
able cutoff price below which sales world not be made.
5. As the time for disposal draws near, but before final decisions 
are made, it will be necessary for the State Department to hold mean-
ingful consultations (at least a week to ten days in advance) with cer-
tain governments having a substantial interest in the matter.
Background
About 136,000 long tons of copper are held in D.P.A. inventories 
(not to be confused with the strategic stockpile, where the holdings of 
about 1.0 million tons are close to the maximum stockpile objective). 
Governor Hoegh2 and his Deputy, Mr. Price,3 have been under pres-
sure to dispose of excess Government holdings of various materials, 
and in the past few weeks they have been pressing hard for disposal of 
the D.P.A. copper.
Their aim has been to sell 10,000 tons in the course of the coming 
two months and the balance of 126,000 tons later in the year. Rumors 
have recently been circulating in the major copper markets to the effect 
that the OCDM is about to liquidate the entire D.P.A. inventories of 
copper. The price of copper, which had been strong for several months, 
has dropped rather sharply in the past two weeks, some quotations 
by 6–8 percent. The OCDM has made certain public statements which 
have not been definite enough to reassure the markets.
Some of the domestic copper fabricators and brass manufacturers 
are in favor of Government disposal of the D.P.A. holdings, but the major 
producing companies, led by Anaconda, are opposed. The Interior 
Department is also opposed to the action. A strong group of Senators 
from the mining states, led by Senators Murray4 and Mansfield,5 have 
2 Lee A. Hoegh, Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
3 J. Roy Price.
4 James E. Murray (D-Mont.)
5 Mike Mansfield (D-Mont.)
