March 1952–February 1953
357
124.
Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of
State1
Tehran, September 28, 1952.
1309. 1. Rumors unconfirmed but nevertheless disquieting since
some of them appear fairly circumstantial continue to circulate re
growing cooperation between Kashani and Tudeh. Yesterday after-
noon we were informed by one source that 90 minutes previously long
negotiation between Kashani–Tudeh had come successful conclusion.
Tudeh promised give Kashani full support (perhaps including mone-
tary). Kashani would within near future endeavor by parliamentary
methods to become Primin. In such capacity he would expel US mili-
tary advisers, close US Consulates, and curtail activities of other Amer-
icans at least in North Iran. He would also endeavor organize anti-
western front in Moslem world along lines of “anti-imperialist leagues”
of bygone days in which many prominent Asian leaders, including
Nehru, had participated. This source not thoroughly tested and its info
may be incorrect. Nevertheless in view Kashani’s recent activities and
statements we cannot dismiss this story entirely. We are therefore
seeking confirmation.2
2. Arab Minister told me last night that several days ago Kashani in
presence visiting religious leader from Minister’s country had strongly
defended Tudeh as loyal Moslem organization; Kashani had main-
tained he would not be happy until he had rid Iran and other ME
Moslem countries of westerners who had been interfering too long in
Moslem affairs; and that he had assurances that if necessary he could
obtain aid of thirty million Moslems in Soviet Union to help him in this
work.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 84, Tehran Embassy Files, 1950–1952, classified
general records, Box 42. Secret; Security Information. Drafted by Henderson. Repeated to
London and Karachi. The telegram is the Embassy copy as approved and has no time of
transmission.
2 In telegram TEHE 152 to CIA, September 26, the Station in Tehran reported that
Kashani now planned to attempt the overthrow of Mosadeq and to replace him with
General Fazlullah Zahedi. The Station reported further that “Kashani since return from
Mecca has met frequently with Mossadeq opposition leaders and has been successful in
getting their backing against Mossadeq. Kashani has given certain promises to them that
he will not adopt hostile attitude toward them or Shah. In source opinion, Mossadeq op-
position motivated mainly by desperation and following reasoning. (1) Kashani only
person capable ousting Mossadeq. (2) They can either do business with Kashani or at
least latter would represent force easier to cope with than that of Mossadeq.” The Station
made no mention of the Tudeh until later in the telegram, when it commented that “in
Field opinion that whether or not any secret agreement between Kashani and Tudeh,
latter would not be adverse to Kashanis replacement of Mossadeq. De facto Tudeh sup-
port of Kashani at least until latter in power is strong possibility.” (Central Intelligence
Agency, DDO Files, Job 89–00176R, Box 1, Folder 15, Political Activities—Iran)
