International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1065 is performed as a part-time responsibility. A study by IO/State5 recommends increasing U.S. staff to permit better coordination in Washington and more frequent contacts with WHO headquarters and WHO regional staffs. This is all the more important as WHO is decentralizing its activities to the regions. Working Group II proposes that HEW create Health Attache positions in at least four of the WHO regions. This would work best if HEW would designate an additional three full-time WHO representatives at OIH, and if State would add an additional health officer in IO. V. Intra-Organizational Coordination. In order to implement such a policy and coordination framework, Departments and agencies will have to establish more clearly their focal points for international health responsibility. In HEW and AID this would require significant intraorganizational coordination among functions (assistance, training, research) and responsibilities (other agency missions and international health). In State, ACTION, DoD, Treasury, Commerce, EPA, etc., this will require identification of organizational points of coordination with international health policy and program activity in their own agency and government-wide. In the State Department, for example, it would be helpful to formally designate a focal point at which the relationship between international health and international relations would be clarified and strengthened. Because of State’s role as ultimate manager of all U.S. international relations—thus including international health activities involving other countries or their citizens, it would be most useful if this sort of focal point were to serve as State’s point of liaison for all of its activity regarding international health: representation of international health during formulation and conduct of foreign policy and vice versa; development, promotion and management (but not necessarily conduct) of international health initiatives taken primarily to improve U.S. relations with other countries; leadership in major agreements with other countries on transnational health problems with the environment, safety of goods or services in trade, etc.; and neutral broker for the relationship of international health government-wide with U.S. international policies in other areas. In order to operate such a focal point, State will have to upgrade its organizational capacity and staff in international health. State is currently investigating on their own an appropriate way to improve their ability to meet responsibilities such as those outlined above. 5 Not found and not further identified.
