1979  545
27. In South Asia, the Soviet outlook is somewhat brighter than in 
Latin America. The Soviets are expanding their role in Afghanistan and 
are maintaining close relations with India. India’s current government, 
however, is not as well disposed toward the Soviets as its predecessor 
and has begun seeking to make Indian foreign policy more genuinely 
nonaligned by improving relations with both China and the West and 
by reducing its dependence on the USSR for arms aid.
28. In Southeast Asia, Soviet support to Vietnam—­and the Friend-
ship Treaty of November 1978—­gave Hanoi significant external back-
ing for its invasion of Kampuchea in early 1979. Nonetheless, Hanoi 
remains fiercely independent, and Soviet influence in the region will 
remain largely dependent on Hanoi’s sufferance.
29. In the Middle East, opportunities to expand Soviet influence 
will depend, at least in the near term, mainly on the outcome of the 
Arab-Israeli peace negotiations and the evolution of events in Iran. 
Over the long term, underlying antagonisms toward, and deepening 
suspicions of, Moscow’s motives will qualify Soviet prospects. Soviet 
opportunities could greatly improve, however, if peace negotiations in 
the Middle East fail, raising the likelihood of renewed hostilities. As 
a result of the instability in Iran, the Soviets undoubtedly anticipate 
significant changes there and in the conservative regimes of the Persian 
Gulf area that will lead to opportunities for new Soviet ties with the oil-­
producing states and to further reduction of Western influence.
30. The best opportunities for the USSR will lie in Africa, where 
political instability is commonplace and where conditions that promote 
subversion and insurgencies will remain rife.
31. Preservation of Influence. This will remain the overriding prob-
lem in Soviet efforts to project power and influence in the Third World 
through military means. Even where Soviet influence is strongest, it is 
vulnerable to unpredictable changes in the local political leadership or 
in its attitudes. Nationalist-­minded states will continue to resent the 
arrogant behavior and thinly veiled prejudice often displayed by Soviet 
representatives. Many Third World leaders will remain suspicious of 
Soviet motives and probably would be reluctant clients of the USSR. 
Those who do accept Soviet assistance can be expected to react against 
instances of exploitative military agreements, poor-­quality assistance 
and training, and interference in internal affairs.
32. To preserve Soviet influence in a country where, for example, 
dependence on Soviet military support has diminished or expulsion of 
Soviet personnel is threatened, Moscow has essentially three alterna-
tives beyond the continuation of present policies:
—Use friendly outside forces more extensively to carry out 
­Moscow’s policies.
