1956 885 absence of intent Wang’s government take those simple and fundamen­ tal steps that could lead to improvement our relations. 2. I said I had come here last year with high hopes that two of us could, notwithstanding obvious difficulties, find solutions to more pressing practical problems existing between our two countries and thus open road to mutually satisfactory resolution other matters. Suc­ cess in this could mean much to our two peoples as well as to all other peoples. My hopes had not yet been realized but I felt that issues were too important to permit discouragement or impatience. 3. I said my government proposed and his government agreed first item to be resolved was return of civilians. It was well known when we came here this fundamentally involved from US standpoint question Americans imprisoned in his country or denied exit permits. 4. I said his government had professed concern over question restrictions imposed during Korean war by my government on depar­ ture of some few Chinese students with militarily useful technical training. It was well known that all other Chinese have at all times been free to depart if they desired to do so. As I had told him at outset of these talks removal these restrictions had been completed by that time. No amount vague and unfounded charges concerning Chinese in US or introduction extraneous issues could obscure fact. Third party arrange­ ment he had suggested to confirm Chinese in US desiring return his country were free to do so had in fact confirmed it. 5. I said at very outset these talks I had spoken of importance sat­ isfactory resolution problem of Americans in his country. I had pointed out then, and have continued to point out in every way which I am capable, that early and satisfactory settlement this problem would have provided solid basis for further progress. At time we issued agreed announcement I had pointed out very favorable effects its prompt and faithful execution by his government could have on our relations. I had often pointed out to him here optimism over future our relations that was engendered in my country by issuance announcement and release some Americans effected by his government at that time. These releases were understandably taken as grounds for hoping that there would in fact be full implementation agreement and that this unneces­ sary irritant our relations thereby removed. However, as long months had passed since then, this optimism had, I greatly regretted to say, naturally been replaced by a sense of disillusionment. It simply impos­ sible for my government and people understand why his authorities chose continue flout their pledged word in our agreed announcement of last September 10, if there is serious desire really to improve rela­ tions with my country. They could only interpret attempt obscure this failure by resort to vague charges concerning treatment Chinese in my country, charges which every American and every person familiar
