1252  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Attachment
Semi-­Final Draft Presidential Statement
Washington, March 24, 1958
SEMI-­FINAL DRAFT OF PROPOSED 
PRESIDENTIAL STATEMENT
(To Be Released After Reading at Press Conference)
The United States will demonstrate to other nations the prog­
ress our scientists have achieved in reducing radioactive fallout from 
nuclear explosions.
To this end, we are inviting the United Nations to select fifteen 
qualified scientists to observe at the Eniwetok Proving Grounds in the 
Pacific this summer a large nuclear explosion better than 90% free of 
radioactive fallout. We will also invite a representative group of U.S. 
and foreign news media representatives.
The U.S. has made a long and determined effort to eliminate radio­
active fallout from nuclear explosions, in the belief that a breakthrough 
could be achieved toward basic advances in both the peaceful and mil­
itary uses of nuclear energy.
Such advances by American scientists could have tremendous sig­
nificance in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. When man is able to use 
the stupendous force of a greater radioactive free nuclear explosion, 
waters can be channeled to desert areas, mineral deposits can be more 
readily reached, safe and deep-­draught harbors can be developed, and 
level highways and canals built through mountainous areas.
This scientific progress will also make it possible to limit the effect 
of nuclear weapons to strictly military targets, eliminating the fall­
out hazard to civilians outside the target area. We can all agree that 
an explosion of the magnitude which the observers will see at Eni­
wetok should be used only for peaceful purposes. However, until a 
safeguarded international agreement is reached to control and reduce 
nuclear weapons and other armaments, these scientific advances con­
stitute forward steps toward protecting civilian non-­combatants from 
the horrors of modern war.
The United States has always publicly announced its nuclear test­
ing programs. Open shots for official observers and the press, includ­
ing those from foreign countries, have been held. We hope that other 
nations will be willing to announce their nuclear tests, and, by opening 
significant tests to international observation, will reveal their nuclear 
progress to the peoples of the world.
(Details will be announced later by the responsible departments 
and agencies of our Government.)
