Hungary 479 and agreed with the President’s emphasis on the fact that the return of the Crown was a people-to-people act. The Hungarians were ready to receive it in this spirit. When I broke in to urge him to clear the communique and the letter we had proposed as rapidly as possible, he said that although we both desired quick action, “the Hungarian Government also had its procedures” and therefore it might be early next week before we had an official Hungarian response. (1& . . . 3, 5: Ambassador Bartha told me later in the day that after my meeting with Kadar the latter had phoned the Foreign Ministry to press them on the two documents.) 8. He then asked me to tell President Carter that he appreciated the oral message and had no difficulty in being responsive to it. The Helsinki Accords provided a basis for improved relations among all the signatory countries and the Hungarians had found its provisions compatible with their own historical experience and outlook on life. They mean to continue to implement those provisions in reasonable order. 9. He concluded his remarks by recalling his meeting in Moscow with Governor Harriman in 1963 when the Governor was there to sign the Test Ban Treaty. He remembered in great detail that evening at the sports stadium when Harriman came in with Khrushchev and was introduced to Kadar. He mentioned his discussion with Harriman on the Mindszenty issue and the Hungarian position at the United Nations.5 He spoke warmly of the Governor, stating no man understood East-West relations better than he and asked me to convey his greetings to him. 10. After quipping that I could report that the Governor’s story of that evening in Moscow coincided on every detail with Kadar’s own, I responded to the main points he had raised. 11. I pointed out first of all the significance of the President’s decision on the Crown. It was not only right morally but it was an act of political courage and explained why. I mentioned too that both the President and Secretary Vance had always recognized that the Crown was Hungarian property and that in spite of some domestic opposition felt that the time had come to return it to the Hungarian people. I said that this act reflected the President’s general approach to East-West relations and spelled out the points made in State 292670: That the President was committed “to cooperation and not confrontation,” as evidenced by his determination to reach a SALT Agreement, to pursue MBFR to a successful conclusion and to prevent proliferation of nuclear 5 No record of this conversation was found. See Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. XVI, Eastern Europe; Cyprus; Greece; Turkey, footnote 4, Document 28.
