254  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
1. Given present and prospective Soviet nuclear capability, our 
decision to launch massive retaliation would also be a decision to 
commit national suicide. (The JCS February 1957 statement, “Strategic 
Concept”, attributes to both the US and the USSR “the capability to 
destroy each other even after a surprise attack.”)
2. Our allies, and in time the Communists, will become increas­
ingly doubtful that we would launch massive retaliation unless nuclear 
attack on the US itself had taken place or was imminent.
3. Our allies (and in time perhaps our own people) will also become 
increasingly doubtful that massive retaliation is a rational response to 
anything less than Communist aggression on a scale that clearly threat­
ens major free world areas—­e.g. Western Europe as a whole.
4. Communist aggression is likely to be of an ambiguous nature 
which neither our allies nor our own people would recognize as war­
ranting massive retaliation.
5. Our capability for massive retaliation will continue to be 
improved at the expense of other capabilities with the result that we 
shall become increasingly dependent upon a capability which we shall 
be increasingly inhibited from using.
EUR, while recognizing the force of some of the preceding consid­
erations and sharing the concern of other offices at the growing inflex­
ibility of US capabilities, believe that “a possible revision of the US 
strategic concept requires far more consideration than the Department 
has yet been able to give.” (See Tab G)
II
I believe that continued main reliance on a capability for mas­
sive retaliation entails unacceptable risks to the US. This reliance is 
gradually limiting our freedom of action to two choices: total nuclear 
war with unimaginable death and devastation, or cumulative retreat 
before Communist menace and subversion ending in the isolation of 
the United States and the perversion of “its fundamental values and 
institutions.”
In certain Far Eastern situations we may already be limited to a 
choice between total nuclear war and retreat. You will recall that the 
recent State-Defense study of capabilities for limited military opera­
tions projected immediate US nuclear retaliation in the hypotheti­
cal event of substantial Communist aggression against Quemoy and 
Matsu, Taiwan or the ROK. Nuclear retaliation of the magnitude indi­
cated in the study would, in the opinion of a number of qualified State 
and CIA officers, entail grave risk of nuclear counter-­strikes by the 
Communists which could lead to progressive expansion of the hostil­
ities to general war. The President has directed the preparation of an 
NIE evaluating this risk.
