598 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 economic aid to Iran in FY 1954 and that we will welcome an opportunity to discuss the level and nature of such a program. In addition to the foregoing problems which require urgent decision, there are the following questions which might also receive attention while Ambassador Henderson is in Washington: (F) Should the Department remove policy objections to the Export- Import Bank’s consideration of a $25,000,000 loan to Iran for agricultural and road-building machinery?10 It is GTI’s recommendation that the Export-Import Bank be informed that we consider U.S. policy objectives would be furthered if the Export-Import Bank makes the previously contemplated loan to Iran.11 (G) What funds can the U.S. Government use to subsidize an American airline in affiliation with Iranian Airways, which is at present bankrupt and in great danger of falling under the control of persons favorably inclined toward the Soviet Union?12 It is GTI’s recommendation that a policy decision be taken that it is in the U.S. national interest to subsidize a U.S. airline in affiliation with Iranian Airways (Transocean Airlines has already made the agreement but will need assurances of financial support this month) in order to prevent communist entry into Middle East airlines and to support the Iranian economy without directly strengthening Dr. Mosadeq.13 10 An Export-Import Bank loan of $25,000,000 for agricultural and road-building machinery for Iran had been proposed in mid-1950 but its approval had been delayed. Extensive documentation on the loan proposal is in Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. X, Iran, 1951–1954. In a memorandum to Byroade, June 10, Richards discussed the policy considerations that had contributed to delays in extending the loan to Iran. “The policy considerations mentioned above have been essentially that the aid proposed would strengthen the Mosadeq Government and would reduce some pressure upon Mosadeq to come to a settlement of the oil dispute. On the other hand, the aid will restore some Iranian confidence in American promises and will materially assist in preventing the collapse of Iran’s agricultural economy.” Richards therefore recommended “that the Export-Import Bank be informed that there is no policy objection to their loaning $25,000,000 to Iran for road building and agricultural machinery if the Bank desires to go ahead with it.” (National Archives, RG 59, GTI Files, Lot 57 D 155, Box 41) 11 To the left of this question in the margin is a handwritten note that reads: “Postpone. Mossadegh.” 12 In a memorandum to Byroade, June 11, Richards discussed assisting Transocean Airlines to reach an “affiliation agreement” with Iranian Airways in order to keep Iranian Airways from “falling under control of persons favorably inclined toward the USSR.” According to Richards, the President of Transocean Airlines expected “some financial support from the US Government in order to carry out his proposal.” Richards recommended that the U.S. Government provide assistance through the TCI program. (National Archives, RG 59, GTI Files, Lot 57 D 155, Box 41) 13 To the left of this paragraph in the margin is the handwritten word “Yes.”
