International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
611
211.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, April 25, 1979
SUBJECT
Attitudes of US Businessmen Toward Tokyo Summit (U)
Last Friday2 I had a session with six top business leaders assem-
bled by the Chamber of Commerce to provide suggestions about the
upcoming Summit. You might be interested in their main concerns:
1. Japan. They argued strongly for action to reduce Japan’s current
account surplus and to open Japan’s market more widely to our ex-
ports. Don Kendall3 suggested that the US, as Japan’s biggest trading
partner, should tell Japan that its current account surplus had to be
down to zero by a date certain, and that the US would apply import re-
strictions if this goal was not achieved. I told them of our plans for
using the Ohira visit4 to reach an agreement about Japanese medium-
term economic policy, and this seemed to mollify them somewhat. (C)
2. Energy. Several spoke of the need for Summit agreement on
energy—to reduce consumption and increase production, to try to
work out a common pricing strategy among Summit countries, and
to spur energy R&D. They commended your decontrol decision as
“gutsy.”5 (C)
3. Macro-Economic Policy. Several wanted a Summit call for adop-
tion of tax and other policies by the Summit countries to encourage pri-
vate investment. (C)
4. Follow-Up. James Wolfensohn (Salomon Brothers) observed that
“the President should bring home the Tokyo Economic Summit mes-
sage about energy and macro-economic policy, explain this message to
the American people, and show that he is keying his domestic eco-
nomic policies to these decisions.” Lee Morgan (Caterpillar Tractor)
said that this kind of Tokyo Summit follow-up would produce a favor-
able impact on world currency markets and on business confidence. (C)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
Box 24, President, Far East, 6/23/79–7/1/79: Cables and Memos, 3–5/79. Confidential.
Sent for information.
2 April 20.
3 Donald Kendall was President and Chief Executive Officer of PepsiCo, Inc.
4 Ohira made an official visit to Washington April 30–May 4. See Document 212.
5 On April 5, Carter announced his decision to begin the phased decontrol of oil
prices in June. For the text of his announcement, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the
United States: Jimmy Carter, 1979, Book I, pp. 609–614.
