September 1953–December 1954
749
post in Washington and that Ambassador Saleh had refused to do so.
Mr. Byroade added that in his opinion Saleh now regretted having an-
nounced in such strong terms his allegiance to Mossadeq and opposi-
tion to General Zahedi. In Mr. Byroade’s opinion, Ambassador Saleh’s
press release on the subject was hastily made and made on the basis of
inadequate information from Iran which had caused Mr. Saleh to
under-estimate the degree of popular support for the Shah. Mr. By-
roade stated that the Department probably should have gotten to Am-
bassador Saleh before he made his unfortunate remarks to the press,
but that since these remarks were made it would appear that Ambas-
sador Saleh had burned his bridges behind him. Mr. Byroade believed
that there was absolutely no chance that Saleh would at this point con-
sider remaining as Ambassador to the U.S.
4. With regard to possible black campaigns intended to discredit
Saleh or otherwise neutralize him in Iran, Mr. Byroade felt that we
should proceed with caution since Saleh, given favorable circum-
stances, might later prove helpful to the U.S. Mr. Byroade stated that
the Department had an informal channel of contact with Saleh through
Mr. Engert, former Ambassador to Iran and Ambassador to Afghani-
stan. Through this contact it might be possible to encourage Saleh to
delay his return to Iran. However, Engert had reported recently that
Saleh intended to return straightway to Iran despite real fear and ap-
prehension as to his reception there.
5. Mr. Byroade stated that he was not sure we need worry about fu-
ture opposition activities by Saleh in Iran. Nevertheless, he shared to
some extent CIA’s concern in this regard. Mr. Byroade said he would
like to think about the problem further and he would let CIA know of
any action which the Department felt it should or could take either to
delay Saleh’s return to Iran, or to neutralize him once in Iran.
[name not declassified]
310.
Despatch From the Station in Iran to the Chief of the Near
East and Africa Division, Directorate of Plans, Central
Intelligence Agency (Roosevelt)
Tehran, September 4, 1953.
[Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 80–01701R,
Box 3, Folder 8, TPAJAX. Secret; Security Information. 5 pages not
declassified.]
