474 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement alive as prisoner of war of your side. He was not returned, no report of his death has ever been received, his body has not been returned. I am simply asking that your authorities investigate case and tell us what happened to him. There must be some record of what happened to Corporal Morris after August 1951. There surely can be no objection to informing what that record is so that his family can be informed. In spite of our efforts, we simply have not been able to find out. This is all I am asking. Just as in case of Corporal Morris, I do not see why this cannot be done along with other names. E. This matter is one of deep concern to families of missing men, to all Americans, and to my government. It is clearly matter at issue between our two governments. 62. Wang replied that he had made his position clear at last meet­ ing and could not accept discussion this matter. As all cases enumerated happened in 1951, they happened during Korean War. There is a Military Armistice Commission which specially deals with prisoners and miss­ ing personnel. American side has some men missing and not accounted for. On part of Chinese and Korean side in same manner there are miss­ ing men not accounted for. If he were to ask for information concerning these men, these requests could only be referred to armistic commission in Korea. These matters within scope of Korean War. 63. Wang said as to Americans in China, he had in spirit concili­ ation given me information on all Americans in China. He believed I could have no doubt concerning his good will this regard. Facts in past have borne this out. 64. Wang said he could not accept discussion of matter of miss­ ing personnel in Korean War. Even Secretary of State Dulles stated in August 18 press conference that list of missing personnel must not cause hope any these men still alive. 65. I replied that was correct. I had not alleged these men were alive. I was merely asking that if they have died we be told that. 66. Wang replied he had already informed us of what he knew. What he did not know he could not tell us. If I agreed with Secretary Dulles concerning fate these men and that list must not cause hope that they are alive, he did not see why I raised question non-­existent men. 67. Wang said he sympathized with families these men. They must blame the criminal war. The suffering and losses of Chinese and Korean people were even more severe. 68. I replied that his remarks concerning Korean War were entirely uncalled for but that I did not intend to debate matter. 69. I asked whether his linking of question of our personnel with question of his side’s personnel meant that his authorities did have information that they would under certain circumstances be willing to furnish.
