Chapter 7, January–May 1991  1005
201.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Bush1
Washington, February 18, 1991
SUBJECT
Prospects for Completing the START Treaty
Reg Bartholomew led an interagency team to Geneva last week 
to meet with their Soviet counterparts.2 The objective was to engage 
senior officials from Moscow along with their Geneva negotiating team 
in a major effort to complete START by the end of February. The effort 
was unsuccessful. The talks made virtually no progress in resolving the 
remaining issues. As a result, it is a near certainty that we will not reach 
the goal of finishing START by the end of the month.
Indeed, barring a dramatic change in Moscow’s approach to 
START or our acceptance of Soviet positions on the outstanding issues, 
the prospects for completing START any time over the next few months 
are poor. All of the signs coming out of Moscow indicate that, if any-
thing, Soviet START positions will harden.
Acceptance by the U.S. of Soviet positions would, in many cases, 
modify important substantive and verification provisions in ways that 
could seriously undermine the security value of the START treaty and 
add substantially to the problems of getting it ratified.
Paradoxically, the Soviets seem eager—­even desperate—­to sign 
START, if only to mitigate the strains that arms control problems have 
put on the bilateral relationship and to open the way for your summit 
meeting with Gorbachev. But they are unwilling—­and their internal 
politics may make them unable—­to show any movement on the hard 
issues that remain.
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security 
Council, John A. Gordon Files, Subject Files, OA/ID CF01034–015, START—February 
1991 [1]. Secret. Sent for information. Copied to Quayle and Sununu. Bush wrote in the 
upper right hand corner: “GB 2–21.” A stamped notation indicates Scowcroft saw the 
memorandum. Kanter sent the memorandum to Scowcroft for his signature under cover 
of a February 11 memorandum. (Ibid.)
2 Bartholomew traveled to Geneva on February 7 and returned to Washington on 
February 10. No memoranda of conversation were found. In telegram 1642 from NST 
Geneva, February 11, Burt wrote to Bartholomew: “I want to thank you for taking the 
time and trouble to visit us here in Geneva and to engage in some difficult and sometimes 
frustrating negotiating. I think your presence here has really made a difference. Whatever 
the final result, it was deeply appreciated by all the members of the U.S. delegation. 
We will stay in close touch. By the way, Reg, Obukhov is still wearing the same shirt. 
Cheers, Rick.” (Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, 
D910138–840)
