March–August 1953
677
270.
Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence
Agency1
Tehran, August 17, 1953.
TEHE 710. 1. MilSitRep 15–16 August 53.
A. As of night 13 Aug 52 [53] (as recd) CIA cut out of military prep-
aration by Batmangeliche and Zahedi.
B. Farzanegan was told night 14 August he was not Deputy Chief
Staff. Once Batmangeliche took over control of situation lost.
C. On 14 Aug 53 Zahedi (as recd) made decision to cut in Gen Daf-
tari on final plan to act. This may have been fatal. Riahi was informed
1700 hours 15 Aug that Shah would act that night at 2400 hours.
D. Riahi used 7 hours warning to advantage. By 2300 hours his
commanding officers Parsa, Momtaz, Ashrafi, Sharokh, and Novanry
were all on spot and waiting arrival Zahedi emissaries.
E. Despite that fact Momtaz, Sharokh, Kiani were arrested when
Col Nassiri went into action.
F. Belief that Mossadeq would not accept firman unless forcefully
presented to him proved by events. Nassiri was correct in going di-
rectly to Prime Minister with firman for that is normal channel. But
Nassiri walked into superior force and was arrested after notifying
Mossadeq servant he had personal message for Mossadeq. Firman dis-
missing Mossadeq now probably in Mossadeq’s hands.
G. Meantime Batmangeliche refused to attempt Chief of Staff’s of-
fice when he saw tanks and troops waiting for him at door. Without his
presence in Chief of Staff’s office command radio net could not be used.
H. Zahedi waited for 2 jeeps of troops to escort him to officers club
but of course troops firmly under Riahi’s commanders. Zahedi look for
escort then returned Farzanegan brothers house in Shimran at 0035
August.
I. Troops moving down at 0120 hours from Shimran to Teheran
sounded to Zahedi like Nassiri’s. Troops sent to arrest the alerted Riahi.
This sounded like plan being attempted despite now overwhelming
odds.
J. At that time Zahedi sent Navabi to reconnoitre. Navabi returned
0210 hours. Police and troops stopping all vehicles. Mossadeq’s house
protected from 1130 hours by infantry and tanks.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency. Secret. Transcribed specifically for the For-
eign Relations series from microfilm in the Central Intelligence Agency that no longer
exists. See “Sources” chapter.
