450
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Attachment3
Umm a’Sabaan Island, Bahrain, Persian Gulf, February 10, 1953.
Dear Allen,
I attach no particular importance to the enclosed clipping which
represents the views of a certain Mr. McGaffin of London, but it does
seem to run uncomfortably close to the thinking in Washington, as well
as one can judge by external evidence.4 Because of that apparent paral-
lelism it caught my attention.
According to McGaffin, a “new” development faces us in Persia—
new, that is, in December. During these last weeks in office Dean has
had revealed to him that Mossedegh is now faced with a struggle be-
tween two rival factions—Kashani and Tudeh—as a result of which he
might be replaced with someone even less desirable to the West. Dean
has therefore remained close to his desk and Loy has rushed home to
acquaint Eisenhower (and no doubt Foster) with this disquieting intel-
ligence, and to urge that Mossedegh be supported by us at all costs,
even though this means disregarding British views. “They say” that
Dean told Eisenhower that the next forty days might mean either peace
or war, depending upon events in Tehran.
Accepting this depiction of the good Doctor’s dilemma, what is
“new” about it?
Even after we bow McGaffin out, queasy feeling remains that he
has been recently in Washington and reports what he observes, there as
well as in Tehran, and that Washington has recently discovered the sit-
uation and is prepared to meet it resolutely.
You are quite familiar with my views concerning Persia, but just to
put my mind at ease—and to keep yours from getting that way—I
would like to restate my own appraisal of that situation briefly. You
will recognize it as the same appraisal I expressed in Tehran in 1950, to
Dean in 1951, to David Bruce in 1952, and to many others throughout
that period.
Mossedegh was put into power by the unholy coalition between
Kashani and Tudeh in the summer of 1951 following Razmara’s
murder and Husain Ala’s brief interregnum. His popularity, based
upon the emotional appeal of a skillfully conducted “out-with-all-
foreigners” propaganda campaign, and supported by terrorist control
of the government, made him the logical compromise candidate of the
rival factions, until they were ready to fight it out between themselves.
3 No classification marking.
4 Not attached.
