436
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
prove impossible, whatever we do, to induce Jordan and representative
Palestinians to join the negotiations at the outset. That does not neces-
sarily mean, however, that these negotiations need be stymied. We
need to think in terms of a strategy of beginning the negotiations be-
tween Egypt and Israel while developing in support of those negotia-
tions a network of our own private consultations with Jordan, with
West Bank and Gaza Palestinians, and perhaps with some Americans
of Palestinian origin in order to build confidence in the seriousness of
the negotiations so that we might think of Palestinians either joining
the negotiations at a later stage or at least standing for elections when
they are called. Our ability to engage the Palestinians in this kind of di-
alogue concurrent with the formal Egypt-Israel negotiations, which
could eventually become a kind of once-removed negotiating process
in itself, will depend on the terms of reference we are able to develop on
West Bank/Gaza negotiations between now and when they start.
A Possible Course of Action
In my judgment there is a sufficient amount at stake for U.S. in-
terests to warrant using Sadat’s present posture to attempt to get more
from the Israelis than they are presently offering on West Bank/Gaza
linkage, though by no means all Sadat is asking. We need to calibrate
what we try for under this strategy carefully in order to ensure that the
risks are reasonable. We must obviously stop short of the point that we
believe entails a serious risk of placing the Treaty as a whole in jeop-
ardy. We will also want to keep sensitive antenna out to assess Sadat’s
position, since we cannot be in the position of pressing Israel for things
that the Egyptians themselves are not prepared to insist on.
With these considerations in mind we suggest a course of action
that will achieve something more for Sadat, but far less than he now
seeks, on West Bank/Gaza “linkage,” and will also ask a bit more of
Begin than he has indicated he is willing to give. If this course works,
we will have avoided a protracted delay and probable suspension of
the negotiations. If it does not work, we suggest a fallback we could go
to in an effort to get things moving again when we judge the time is
right. The fallback (see below) could also be viewed as an alternative to
pursue now if we wanted to try for more for Sadat.
The course of action I propose would be composed of the fol-
lowing components:
1. We would press both sides to try to wrap up all work on the
Treaty so that the West Bank/Gaza issue could be isolated as the sole
remaining obstacle before the Treaty can be signed.
2. We would tell the Israelis our understanding of what Sadat is
asking for and then describe what we believe the minimum will be that
we need to achieve if the Treaty process is not to be unreasonably de-
