318  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
with each and every program. It was Mr. Gray’s view that hard choices 
had to be made in assessing the validity of all programs, but that this 
did not mean a personnel cut had to be made in each and every pro­
gram. Mr. Gray thought that if the military and internal security people 
felt as strongly as they did about the clandestine entry problem, it was 
very important that their views be considered. He then related the cost 
of the device program to the very much larger cost of one cruiser or one 
B–52, noting that the clandestine entry program has its role to play in our 
defenses along with such items as the military ones he had cited.
The Acting Secretary of the Treasury inquired what the language 
proposed by the Planning Board would add to the language already 
contained in the policy paper on Continental Defense (NSC 5802/1) 
wherein it was directed that “intensified efforts should be continued 
to develop active and improved passive devices for the detection of 
fissionable material by such means, and to assure their effective use.”
Mr. Gray recalled that this point had been made at the Planning 
Board and that he had asked the experts in attendance if the device 
program were proceeding as rapidly as possible, and he had received a 
negative response. He therefore asked at the Planning Board if a word 
from the President calling for further acceleration of that program 
would result in such acceleration, and the response was in the affirma­
tive. Accordingly, the Planning Board agreed unanimously to recom­
mend that such acceleration be directed.
The Acting Secretary of the Treasury said he assumed that the rec­
ommended language related only to the acceleration of the program as 
it involved the new devices which are coming in, and not to the existing 
devices. Mr. Gray advised that his assumption was correct.
The Acting Secretary of State indicated that the Department of State 
favored the acceleration of the development, procurement, and use of 
the new devices which are coming in. He said that such devices would 
be tremendously helpful from the standpoint of his Department in that 
they would reduce the likelihood of retaliation being taken against 
our pouches going into the Soviet Bloc countries, should we open an 
incoming pouch which contained innocuous radioactive material.
Mr. Gray indicated that there was now before the Planning Board, 
and will soon be before the Council, a paper dealing with the recom­
mended procedures to be followed in connection with incoming diplo­
matic pouches which might contain radioactive materials.
The Acting Secretary of the Treasury indicated that he would have 
no objection to the action proposed by the Planning Board ­so long as 
it was limited to the better devices which were now being developed.
The National Security Council:
a. Noted the report on the status of the internal security programs 
on June 30, 1958, prepared jointly by the Interdepartmental Intelligence
