1046 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III search at NIH and cooperative energy research at DOE. The IDCA might usefully devote some staff time to monitoring and lobbying for such activities within the executive branch. • WCARRD: Preparations are now moving into high gear for the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development next month. Andy Young is slated to head the US delegation. His opening address can set forth US priorities. The delegation’s position papers will stress getting our points across in the Conference resolutions, particularly as regards the necessity for LDCs to pursue domestic policies (such as land reform, adequate credit facilities, and technical extension services) which encourage increased food production and distribution. We do not intend to propose new multilateral programs. We will continue to press the issues of domestic policies in the COW and preparatory work on the IDS. • President’s Commission on World Hunger: The Commission now plans to issue its final report in late August or early September. Our preliminary indications are that the report will emphasize a number of areas in which we are taking initiatives—new crops, research on marginal lands, post-harvest loss prevention, and food aid guarantees. We will try to review preliminary drafts, and help assure that the report gets heavy publicity overseas through our posts and ICA programs. —Technology: Our main actions here still relate to the launching of the ISTC, now scheduled to go into formal operation on October 1, and the UNCSTD, now moving into an advanced stage of preparations. —Trade: We want to obtain as many LDC adherents to the new MTN package as possible. Only Argentina has initialed the package to date. We believe the failure of others to do so largely reflects an effort to maintain G–77 unity going into UNCTAD V. It also relates to the desire of many LDCs to see how the negotiations on a new safeguards code are resolved. They regard the demand by the EC for “unilateral selectivity” as a direct threat to the ability of LDCs to increase their manufactured exports. (“Unilateral selectivity” would allow a country which believes it is suffering injury to an industry because of imports from one or several specific countries to take protectionist measures against the sources of those imports, rather than on an MFN basis, without prior consultations.) Up to now, the US has maintained a neutral position, but shares many of the concerns of the LDCs. Should we move in the EC direction, we may badly undercut our objective of integrating the LDCs more fully into the GATT. Assuming a satisfactory resolution of the safeguard issue, our own legislative trade package may encourage the LDCs to accept the MTN, as the legislation contains several liberalizing measures for GSP which should particularly benefit regional grouping of LDCs such as ASEAN, the Central American Common Market, and the Andean Pact. In addi-
