Arms Control and Disarmament 1273 The seismic system is limited to the determination that a large sub­ surface disturbance has occurred. There is no unique way of identify­ ing with certainty the signature of an underground nuclear explosion. At long range detection distances the individual characteristics of the source of disturbance are very difficult to detect, since the character of the medium through which the wave is propagated plays a predomi­ nant part in determining the character of the recorded signal. The prob­ lem is considerably simplified, however, by the existence of several useful, though not unique indicators of earthquakes or blasts. For example, many large earthquakes persist for many minutes or hours whereas the record from a small underground blast has a maxi­ mum duration of a few seconds to a few minutes. Another useful indi­ cator is the fact that all subsurface blasts produce a compressional first wave, while many earthquakes produce alternate compressional and dilational first waves as one proceeds around the source with a seismic detector. Thus, a dilational first wave is an almost certain indicator of an earthquake. The usefulness of this indicator, however, is limited to the large shots where the first wave can be clearly distinguished from the background fluctuations due to microseismic disturbance. In the yield range below 5 KT, it is doubtful if this criterion would be of much use at long ranges. A few earthquakes occur so far below the surface that the seismograms clearly indicate earthquake origin. However, a very large percentage of earthquakes occur at shallow depths (20 kilometers) and do not give any indication that would be useful in separating them from blasts. Most earthquakes produce large clearly identifiable shear waves, whereas most explosions do not produce shear waves. However, there are earthquakes on record where no detectable shear wave was recorded at long range detection distances and there are blasts on record, for example, Rainier, Wigwam and many of the small Nevada shots that have produced noticeable shear waves. Finally, repeated blasts at the same underground location will produce almost identical wave shapes at the same long range detection station. This might be useful in the event that repeated use were made of the same location for clandestine tests. It is concluded, therefore, that the seismic surveillance for under­ ground tests might detect the presence of an underground explosion but would not uniquely identify the source as nuclear in origin. The ability to detect underground explosions by seismic means has been carefully studied. The limitation in pushing to smaller and smaller yields appears to reside principally in noise generated by storms and man-­ made disturbances in the vicinity of the stations. A general deterioration of capability for the entire net in the wintertime is observed because of the storm activity in the Northern Hemisphere. There are also short periods of relatively poor capability during summertime windstorms. Natural earthquakes and, occasionally, volcanic activity produce additional back­ ground noise which reduces capability for the detection of small yield
