Arms Control and Disarmament 1383 79. The total cost of U.S. participation is estimated at $4,600,000 of which some $3,300,000 will be represented in the construction and oper­ ation of the exhibits. While the exact total of Conference Representa­ tives and Advisors has not been determined, the total number of people scheduled to be in Geneva officially for the United States is about 600, including a number of guides and clerical help to be hired in Geneva. 80. Other Conferences and Exhibits. U.S. scientists will participate at the Fifth International Electronic and Nuclear Exposition and Congress in Rome, Italy, during the latter part of June. There also will be a large U.S. Atoms-­for-­Peace exhibit there. The Commission provided data and mate­ rials, including a small operating training reactor, for nuclear exhibits in the U.S. Pavilion and in the Science Section of the Brussels World Fair. 81. Missions. At the request of the nations involved, the Commis­ sion sent teams to New Zealand in March and to Australia in June, to hold discussions and seminars with a view to assisting the develop­ ment and administration of nuclear energy programs in those coun­ tries. The New Zealand mission was most favorably received but it reported to the Commission that lack of coordination between the Government and the universities is hampering the progress of the New Zealand program. The Australian Mission is still abroad. There are four U.S. experts on the IAEA International Mission which began a South American survey in May. (See paragraph 41.) 82. USAEC Scientific Representatives. In cooperation with the U.S. embassies, the Commission Scientific Representatives in London, Paris, Buenos Aires, Tokyo, and Chalk River, Canada, have continued to ren­ der services in connection with the expanding technical cooperation in the areas under their respective jurisdictions. Their work is proving especially useful in evaluating the technical progress in many countries, assisting and participating in the work of the U.S. delegations such as those at the NATO meeting in Paris in December, the EURATOM and OEEC discussions, the Windscale investigation program, and the vari­ ous Atoms-­for-­Peace missions. 83. Foreign Trade. An interesting development in the foreign trade activities of the U.S. atomic energy industry is the emergence of joint ventures with industrial concerns in other countries, notably in Europe and Japan. These range from cooperative sales arrangements to the for­ mation of separate companies jointly owned by an American and a for­ eign firm. In some cases, they involve reciprocal licensing rights. 84. These cooperative business arrangements appear to offer U.S. industry a good chance for getting its share of international atomic energy business, particularly if the rapid development of nuclear industry in highly industrialized nations diminishes the prospects of U.S. firms, acting independently, selling appreciable numbers of com­ plete nuclear power plants abroad.
