108 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Prague has acted as a proxy for Moscow in propaganda attacks on the West in general and the U.S. in particular, particularly when for tactical reasons the Soviets preferred to be either silent or moderate in their commentaries. In the past, Prague has played a considerable role in Soviet foreign policy strategy by acting as a penetration agent among developing countries, particularly because the Czechoslovaks were more acceptable than the Soviets to these countries. This role has diminished over the past years, in large part because Prague’s economic difficulties at home have made it impossible for it to play such a role and also because other East European regimes have acted as penetration agents in various regions—e.g., East Germany in Africa. Finally, the cautious attitude of the Prague regime in borrowing from the West and also in pursuing cultural contacts have generally resulted in limiting Czechoslovakia’s ties with the West. ALBANIA 41. Albania’s xenophobic, isolationist foreign policy is unique among the communist regimes in Europe. The Tirana regime has refused to countenance any improvement of relations with the U.S. and several other Western countries until all its demands have been realized. It also continues its unrelenting struggle against the “social imperialism” of the USSR and, more recently, against China. 42. Albania has been quite selective in its establishment of diplomatic and trade relations with other countries, particularly in Western Europe. Despite the cessation of economic assistance from China— Tirana’s last benefactor—there are at present no signs that the Albanians intend to modify their intransigent ideological policies. Albania has hinted at its interest in increasing commercial and perhaps other links with some Western and Third World countries. Tirana’s relations with neighboring Greece have improved somewhat since the break with China. But there has been no such improvement with neighboring Yugoslavia, whom the Albanians revile as revisionist and fear as a larger neighbor with a substantial Albanian minority population. The Albanians have also refused multilateral Balkan cooperation endeavors, insisting that such endeavors be conducted on a bilateral basis. 43. The Tirana regime is the most repressive in Eastern Europe, and the Albanian standard of living continues to be the lowest in Europe. Any hopes that it would improve in the near future evaporated with the cessation of Chinese economic assistance. The regime has carried out incessant strident propaganda campaigns which rail against foreign influences, urge the population to greater sacrifice and economic effort, and demand strict ideological conformity with the policies of the leadership.
