482
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
160.
Editorial Note
At noon on December 15, 1977, the Department of State released
the text of the U.S.-Hungarian Joint Communiqué and exchange of
letters setting forth the understanding between the two governments
regarding the return of the Crown of St. Stephen. The day before, while
transmitting the final text agreed in Budapest, the Embassy reported:
“The communique contains the language we wanted on every point
which was discussed” and that the Hungarian Government would
“release the communique, Puja’s text, and the essential points of the
Ambassador’s letter. Reference to Cardinal Lekai’s participation will
be included in these points.” (Telegram 4319 from Budapest, December
14; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770465–
0686)
Three days earlier, on December 12, Representative Mary Rose
Oakar wrote to Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Zbigniew Brzezinski regarding media speculation on the return of
the Crown and complained she had received no reply to her Novem-
ber 29 letter to President Jimmy Carter outlining her conditions for
its return. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
Europe, USSR, and East/West, Hunter Subject File, Box 14, Hungary:
Crown of St Stephen: 12/77) Robert King of the National Security
Council Staff had received Representatives Oakar and Frank Horton on
November 29 and accepted a letter to the President outlining conditions
under which the return of the Crown would be deemed acceptable by
the Hungarian-American community. The two Representatives also
expressed their concern that Congress be informed of any decision
regarding the return of the Crown. King reported his meeting to Brze-
zinski in a November 29 memorandum. (Ibid.)
On December 15, the day of the official announcement of the return
of the Crown, Brzezinski wrote Oakar that the President’s “decision
to return the Crown of St Stephen to the Hungarian people has been
made on the basis that this important historic relic belongs to the
Hungarian nation. In making that decision he is fully aware of its
symbolism.” Brzezinski also outlined the conditions under which the
United States agreed to return the Crown, included in the Joint Commu-
niqué and exchange of letters. (Ibid.)
