212
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
had not been fully developed. He suggested that modest steps (those at
the low end of option 2) might be undertaken to arrest further erosion
of the stockpile. He added that to go binary would send very negative
political signals. Keeny agreed with Christopher, and Jayne did also.
Duncan called into question the notion that in reality option 2 would be
cheaper than option 3 for similar capabilities. Jones agreed. Aaron
questioned whether formulating the question so that only the binary fa-
cility seemed at stake adequately reflected the true scope of the deci-
sion at hand. Duncan added that the U.S. needs a CW capability for de-
terrence and given that, binary was the best way to go. Aaron pointed
out that it was not a question of whether or not to maintain a stockpile
but rather one of which type the U.S. would commit to. He framed the
issue for the President as on the one hand replacing and increasing the
present stockpile with binary munitions versus more modest steps to
improve the effectiveness of the current stockpile with no increase in
deployments to Europe. Christopher added that option 2 needed to be
fleshed out. Jones stated that without a verifiable treaty, we need CW
capability and in the long run, binary is the only way to go. Christopher
noted that before a decision in favor of binaries was made more infor-
mation about Congress and our allies was needed. (S)
Next, Keeny described the proposed changes to the negotiating in-
structions. All agreed that the time period allowed for the destruction
of facilities should be clarified and made independent of the destruc-
tion of stocks. On the conversion of facilities, Keeny said it would only
be offered if the Soviets agreed to the higher on-site verification re-
quirements. Jones commented that because there was so much neces-
sary information about Soviet facilities which we did not have that it
was premature to discuss conversion. Smith asked why the decision
had to be made now. Duncan added that the Soviets are not even pre-
pared to tell us where their facilities are at this point. Christopher asked
if the negotiators would be willing to agree to explore the topic but
agree to nothing. Mikulak responded that up to this point conversion
had been mentioned in the talks only to say that if conversion were al-
lowed more intrusive on-site inspection would be required. Aaron felt
that the Delegation should be limited to exploring the conversion issue
with the Soviet Delegation. All agreed. Jones added that the Soviets
may even prefer destruction because of the on-site inspections associ-
ated with conversion. On the issue of bilateral versus multilateral in-
spection of facilities, Keeny explained that this would be an option
which might be used only if it proved important in reaching agreement
with the Soviets. Jones emphasized that we were seeking a true multi-
lateral convention and that bilateral inspections should not be a part of
such an agreement. Duncan felt that it was important to talk to our
allies about this possibility. Aaron offered a compromise, stating that
