March–August 1953
681
2. State considers your handling of situation exemplary under cir-
cumstances and requests that if in your judgment the situation permits
you should contact Shah again at earliest opportunity and suggest to
him that he issue clear and definitive statement explaining his actions
and
the
along lines of his statement to you yesterday,
viz: “In recent weeks Shah had felt increasingly that he would have to
take action against Mossadeq as the latter became bolder in flouting the
constitution. Therefore he decided to take action within the framework
of his constitutional power
taken not in any sense a coup
d’e´tat. He decided to appoint Zahedi in place of Mossadeq. Three days
ago he sent letter of appointment to Zahedi to capital city with a trusted
emissary. The letter was delivered to Zahedi which empowered him to
take office. When the messenger arrived at Mossadeq’s house to deliver
Shah’s communication he was arrested while trying to carry out Shah’s
order. Shah took this action dismissing Mossadeq and appointing
Zahedi in his place because Mossadeq had continually violated the con-
stitution and because Shah himself had sworn upon ascending the
throne to respect and uphold the constitution. Shah had no choice but
to remove the head of a government acting unconstitutionally. When it
became apparent that Shah’s orders were not being followed he left the
country but he stands ready to return when he can to serve the people
and in the meantime prays for the independence and safety of the
country and that all the patriots will never allow their country to fall
under the control of the illegal identity E. Finally Shah might usefully
give public expression to his view that Mossadeq thinks that he can
form a partnership with Tudeh Party and then outwit it, but in so doing
Mossadeq will become the Doctor Benes of the country.
3. For your information State has seen Arab news agency report of
Shah’s statements which considered helpful but deficient in many re-
spects and inferior to summary statements summarized by you. His
statement intention move to Europe in near future is unfortunate as re-
vealing lack seriousness of purpose.
4. For your further guidance State unwilling in absence of more
hopeful indications as to possible results to authorize you to press Shah
issue an appeal to the army to rise. Shah has not said anything on his
own initiative this regard and State does not wish assume responsi-
bility for urging upon Shah course of action which might well prove
useless and even reckless.
5. For guidance [less than 1 line not declassified] you are not to take
any action with respect to Shah without specific authorization HQS.
Please lend all possible support and assistance to Berry particularly
with respect to prompt servicing his communications.
6. [less than 1 line not declassified] pass paras 1 thru 4 above to MI–6.
