346
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
not an action proposal at this point, although we may wish to take
some preliminary steps to develop such a capability. The following
elements of the paper were discussed:
1. [less than 1 line not declassified] Secretary Brown wondered if this
did not represent a second or third step to follow the political action
program. He noted that we were starting from zero [7 lines not declassi-
fied] Secretary Vance said he wanted to register a major reservation
about the desirability of such operations. He did not think it was
feasible, and the American people’s reaction would be split. [2 lines
not declassified] Dr. Brzezinski said that such action was certainly prema-
ture at this point. [12 lines not declassified] Mr. Aaron agreed that there
was a question of the money and time needed to develop such a
capability. [2 lines not declassified] Secretary Vance said he would not
object to building up our stocks of military and other equipment which
we can provide in support of covert action programs, [1 line not declassi-
fied]. Secretary Brown disagreed; we should start building it up and not
deny ourselves the capability to act at some future stage. Dr. Brzezinski
noted that the alternative to this kind of capability may be direct U.S.
military involvement. We may need this option. The SCC agreed that
the minutes should reflect a unanimous view that the first option in
the paper was premature and that views were divided on [1½ lines not
declassified]. The President would want to reflect on this question. (TS)
2. [less than 1 line not declassified]. Dr. Brzezinski noted that options
2 and 5 could be combined, i.e. that [less than 1 line not declassified]
could be combined with a blockade for maximum effectiveness. Dr.
Brzezinski urged that a plan be developed along these lines. A blockade
would be the last U.S. option short of bloodshed, and this could help
make it more effective. Secretary Vance wondered whether we are
talking here about building up a capability or actually taking a decision
to proceed with this option. Mr. Aaron said that his group had been
tasked to develop options relating to possible military involvement.
Option 2 in this paper was seen as a potential alternative to a direct
U.S. military strike against Iranian targets. Although he agreed that 2
and 5 could be combined, [less than 1 line not declassified] could also be
useful as a means of demonstrating loss of political control, even if
there were no blockade. Mr. Carlucci said that we presently [1½ lines
not declassified]. Our available assets are fully committed to the Delta
operation.7 If we changed their mission and began working toward
this objective, perhaps something could be put together within several
weeks. [1½ lines not declassified] Developing such a capability [less than
1 line not declassified] would be a longer term proposition, and [less than
7 A reference to the plans for a potential hostage rescue mission.
