836
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Naturally, all of these are almost inextricably interrelated; but, at
least from this desk, it seems that different lines radiate to each of these
major segments of the total Iranian problem. The first involves, in
Washington, the NSC and constant in-fighting with FOA and Defense.
The banner of the second is being carried at this moment by Mr.
Hoover. My efforts in regard to meeting the 4th (propaganda) problem
will be dealt with in another letter and involves close coordination with
Clary Thompson of USIA and a host of propaganda experts in other
crannies of Washington.
The third problem listed above has been the subject of much dis-
cussion with John Waller and Don Wilbur. The latter will be able to
give you first-hand reports upon our discussions and our difficulties.
The rest of this letter will be devoted to raising problems with you on
this specific subject.
First of all, as I know you already realize, we have such great admi-
ration for Ambassador Henderson and you that we have not sought to
give you more than general indications of our attitude on political as-
pects of the Iranian situation. For instance, you will note that we have
hardly expressed an opinion upon the question of whether to urge
Zahedi to fill up his rump Majlis or elect a new Majlis. We have such
confidence in the Ambassador that we feel it best to leave to his discre-
tion final judgment upon such tactical problems. Therefore we are in-
clined more to backing you up than to calling the signals.
However, the problem presents a different face to our friends
across the street. Without reflecting any lack of confidence in their sta-
tion, they feel, and I consider it understandable, that they cannot allow
much free-wheeling. They have already (and please treat this in confi-
dence although I would expect you to inform Bill Rountree and the
Ambassador) taken steps to pull in their horns a bit without any en-
couragement on our part, although Arthur and I know that this will
meet with the Ambassador’s approval. They wish to give rather spe-
cific instructions at least so far as objectives are concerned, and they
have asked for our advice.
We very much appreciate their consideration in seeking our advice
but we consider it necessary to ask your views upon the questions
which I shall raise below. Please let me have your informal advice. You
may wish to discuss this with CAS and you are certainly free to explain
the substance of what I have written above. Of course, I would like to
have the Ambassador’s opinion as well as Bill’s.
My basic assumption is that we cannot avoid a responsibility to be-
come involved in Iranian internal affairs. The grave risk we will run is
that we will become known as an intriguing power and lose our impor-
tant moral position as a nation dealing with other independent
members of the free world as equals. On the other hand, I fear that re-
