Chapter 5, May–June 1990  761
be very useful for us here in this context. I hope I sense a receptivity on 
your part to a reference to in-­flight refueling.
— The second form of assurance would be to declare that you 
will not exceed 400 Backfire at any one time. This phrase should be 
familiar to you. We offered it and use in in the SLCM declaration. The 
number 400 we designed not to require any reduction in Backfire. 
The number fits the reality of the number of these aircraft.
You tell me you are ready to say 400 Backfire, but must exclude 
naval Backfire. You say these are excluded because we are not negotiat-
ing on naval arms. By that logic, we could have agreed not to negotiate 
on SLCMs, they are naval arms. Indeed, we could have not negotiated 
on SLBMs, they are naval arms. If I tried to use your argument with 
my political authorities, or with Congress, that would be the answer, if 
they gave me time for an answer before throwing me out of the room. 
I really would be thrown out when I said some count because they 
are air force, some don’t because they are naval. I’d be told that if I 
can decide some are air force and count and some are naval and don’t 
count, there is no limt.
This is further complicated because we know that the Soviet Union 
is resubordinating combat aircraft from Frontal Aviation to the Soviet 
Navy. We know these resubordinated aircraft include light bombers 
and fighter bombers of the Sukhoi type, as well as fighter bombers and 
ground attack aircraft of the Mikoyan type. Soviet resubordination of 
these air units has taken place several times over the past year or two, 
and the total number of aircraft resubordinated is in the hundreds.
This is a vivid illustration of why we are concerned about your 
insistence on telling us you want to exclude land-­based naval aircraft 
from the reductions and limitations of CFE and START. Land-­based 
combat aircraft of exactly the same type as those in the Warsaw Pact 
Frontal Aviation could be excluded by the simple device of changing 
their subordination. At the very same time you are insisting on this 
position in CFE and START, you are in the process of moving large 
numbers, hundreds of combat aircraft into this category that you insist 
be excluded from the limits.
I raise this point only so you can understand why I say telling us 
the 400 would not cover naval Backfire gives us no credible assurance, 
and indeed why the general question of excluding land-­based naval 
combat aircraft is not something that can be credibly presented as limit-
ing land-­based combat aircraft. This is not a matter of naval arms, it is a 
matter of whether we are going to have the assurance we need. This is 
part of the problem of the 400, and is also a problem in the CFE context. 
We can make a start by solving it in the 400 context, simply by saying 
that the 400 includes all TU–22M aircraft, called Backfire in the US.
Let me conclude by asking you once again to look at the draft dec-
laration of policy which I proposed to you, and ask you to accept it. If
