Afghanistan 265 97. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, December 26, 1979 SUBJECT Reflections on Soviet Intervention in Afghanistan I will be sending you separately a proposed agenda for the NSC meeting on Friday, and it will focus on both Afghanistan and Iran.2 In the meantime, you are receiving today’s SCC minutes on both subjects.3 This memorandum is meant merely to provide some stimulus to your thinking on this subject. As I mentioned to you a week or so ago, we are now facing a regional crisis. Both Iran and Afghanistan are in turmoil, and Pakistan is both unstable internally and extremely apprehensive externally.4 If the Soviets succeed in Afghanistan, and if Pakistan acquiesces, the agelong dream of Moscow to have direct access to the Indian Ocean will have been fulfilled. Historically, the British provided the barrier to that drive and Afghanistan was their buffer state. We assumed that role in 1945, but the Iranian crisis has led to the collapse of the balance of power in Southwest Asia, and it could produce Soviet presence right down on the edge of the Arabian and Oman Gulfs. Accordingly, the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan poses for us an extremely grave challenge, both internationally and domestically. While it could become a Soviet Vietnam, the initial effects of the inter- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 4–12/79. Secret. Printed from an uninitialed copy. Prepared for the NSC meeting on December 28; see Document 107. 2 The proposed agenda was not found. 3 See Document 95 for the Summary of Conclusions of the SCC meeting on Afghanistan. The minutes of that meeting were not found. The Summary of Conclusions of the SCC meeting on Iran on that date is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977– 1980, vol. XI, Part 1, Iran: Hostage Crisis, November 1979–September 1980. 4 The implications of the region-wide crisis were examined more fully in a memorandum prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency, December 26, entitled “The Troubles of Southwest Asia.” Characterizing the entire region as in “turmoil, albeit from a variety of causes,” the memorandum argued that this trend constituted a “net gain” for the Soviet Union. The memorandum further argued that both superpowers were being pushed by forces they could not control: for the United States it was the hostage crisis in Iran; for the Soviet Union it was the insurgency in Afghanistan. (Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Office of Support Services, Job 82T00267R: Production Case Files, Box 2, The Troubles in Southwest Asia)
