866 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV deletions made either in the Senate or House. I will also meet with Joe Addabbo and Jack Edwards next Tuesday4 before their Subcommittee begins its markup of the FY 81 Appropriations Bill. I intend to make a particularly strong plea to them against funding the refitting of the NEW JERSEY and the ORISKANY. (U) Rapid Solidification Technology (RST): In November 1978 I sent you a memorandum5 describing the RST metallurgical process and outlining potential military applications for the late 1980s. Since then we have expanded our program and are encouraged by progress in developing new alloys. In addition, both U.S. and foreign industry have begun aggressive in-­house research and development programs. I believe that this emerging U.S. industrial base must be stimulated and encouraged by the government. The DoD program will partially fill this need, but additional government investment in or underwriting of the civil sector would be useful—­and contribute substantially to the overall health of the economy. Under Secretary Bill Perry will work with Frank Press to develop an integrated plan of action. (U) Overseas Medical Research Laboratories: During preparation of the FY 81 budget, OMB directed the closure, or conversion to contract operations, of our eight overseas laboratories. With the assistance of distinguished civilian scientists from industry and academia, we subsequently completed a study that confirms the clear military need for these units. The study6 also documents strong U.S. embassy and host government support for current operations, and the infeasibility of contracting for like services. These efforts are a U.S. activity that brings political benefits (on a smaller scale) like those accruing to Cuba from its provision of teachers and physicians in developing countries. I believe the laboratories provide a unique military, scientific, and political return far in excess of their cost, and have asked Jim McIntyre to reconsider the decision in light of current information. (U) Mobilization and Deployment Exercises: We have now completed an unclassified study of NIFTY NUGGET-78 and REX-78,7 the two ambitious mobilization exercises we held in late 1978. There was substantial media interest in the exercises, and we expect considerable interest in the unclassified study. The study contains some very frank and critical comments on our mobilization capabilities as they existed two years 4 July 22. 5 Not found. 6 Not found. 7 See Office of the Secretary of Defense, An Evaluation Report of Mobilization and Deployment Capability Based on Exercises NIFTY NUGGET-78 and REX-78. (Washington: Department of Defense, 1980)
