608  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
(5) that the large number of valuable MPS aim points and the powerful 
first strike capability of M–X against Soviet ICBMs might reduce Soviet 
incentives to extend the fractionation limits of SALT II beyond 1985 
and into SALT III, (6) and finally, that getting cooperative measures in 
SALT III needed to verify a Soviet MPS may consume U.S. bargaining 
leverage that might otherwise be directed toward reductions. (S)
There was little discussion of Options 3 and 4 beyond the JCS com-
ment that without cooperative measures, Soviet truck mobiles would 
be more difficult to verify than MPS. Harold Brown thought that on 
balance U.S. security improved by a Soviet shift to truck mobile ICBMs 
since there lesser capability would offset verification uncertainties. (S)
The JCS argued that while Option 5, with its improved hard-­target 
capability, would put the Soviets at equal risk, and provide a large 
number of surviving weapons, it did not solve the ICBM vulnerability 
problem. They further argued that Option 5 would have an adverse 
effect on SALT II ratification because it would raise some very conten-
tious issues such as the advisability of putting more capable missiles in 
silos, which is strongly opposed on the Hill. Others noted that (1) given 
the political value of deploying the largest missile possible under SALT 
II, we should look at a variant of Option 5 putting M–X in silos, (2) that 
while putting more capable missiles in silos might decrease crisis sta-
bility, neither side could have more than limited success in any attempt 
at a disarming first strike, and (3) that variants of Option 5 substitut-
ing mobiles for silo deployments should be examined. Finally, several 
principals noted that if a common missile were used for both Navy and 
Air Force deployments, we could change deployment modes later if 
necessary. (S)
In the next PRC meeting, which will take place next week, we 
intend to (1) examine variations of Options 2 and 5—­one variation of 5 
will include truck mobiles, (2) compare the various types of risks inher-
ent in proceeding with these options including the likely Soviet reac-
tion and the impact on SALT bargaining, and (3) look more deeply at 
the question of cooperative measures. (S)
