Chapter 4, February–April 1990  609
Akhromeyev: Those 100 heavy bombers would be outside the 1600 
limit. They would be equipped with non-­nuclear missiles, and there 
would be up to 100 of them. They will be regarded as strategic delivery 
vehicles, but not nuclear.
Burt: One more question. What happens under your approach if 
an aircraft that is not a heavy bomber is equipped with non-­nuclear 
ALCMs? Is such an aircraft excluded from the agreement? Akhromeyev: 
Automatically it becomes a heavy bomber. Burt: The missiles were non-­
nuclear. Akhromeyev: Once an aircraft carries an ALCM over 600 km it 
becomes a strategic delivery vehicle. We don’t want to add more prob-
lems. You keep torturing me.
Burt: We have had our hands burned on this issue and we are being 
cautious. We cannot accept an agreement that counts aircraft with non-­
nuclear ALCMs as a heavy bomber.
Akhromeyev: There are limits to our discussions. We are not about 
to sign an agreement tonight, or find a solution to all Geneva issues. 
I am aware of this issue and invite you to address it with Nazarkin in 
Geneva.
Bartholomew: I need to underscore this for you. We are here to 
solve the ALCM problem, and need to address this issue. We could 
not accept a settlement of the ALCM problem that said if I put a con-
ventional ALCM over the agreed range on a tactical aircraft it counts 
as a heavy bomber. Burt: The definition of a heavy bomber includes a 
bomber tested or deployed with nuclear ALCMs.
Akhromeyev: Once again it was foolhardy of me to try to answer 
this question. I don’t think we should raise this now. We have half a 
year ahead of us. If we raise more and more issues we will not be able 
to find any solutions.
Bartholomew: We came to this Ministerial thinking there was only 
one ALCM issue. We are not looking for trouble. We will have to return 
to this, it is a serious issue and not a detail for the US. And we will not 
be able to say in June we have settled all the important issues with this 
issue outstanding.
Burt: One more question, concerning the proposal for a maximum 
ceiling for the floating limit on ALCM heavy bombers. Do you have a 
number in mind? Akhromeyev: Our concrete proposal is 90–115. We are 
open to your proposal.
Burt: I am not interested in your concept, I just want to know 
your proposal. Bartholomew: Speaking for the US, we don’t accept 
the concept. Akhromeyev: You say you don’t accept the concept. 
Does this mean 90–115 converted heavy bombers or the entire pack-
age? Bartholomew: All I am addressing is whether there is a ceiling on 
ALCM heavy bombers.
