Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  383
— Inspections: work on the inspection protocol has been going 
well. The sides have resolved the issue of monitoring support person-
nel (a key question from last round), and are converging on definition 
of inspection site.
— In MOU, we are restructuring annexes on ICBMs, SLBMs and 
heavy bombers. In the treaty text group, the Soviets proposed an 
approach to limitations on case and cass that could be of interest to us.
— Verification/Stability: Nazarkin and I are focusing on telemetry 
and RV inspections, and the working group has addressed the other 
issues with mixed results.
— Nazarkin said he would drop their requirement to include cruise 
missiles in a telemetry agreement, if we can resolve the duration 
problem. A solution may be in sight, but solving duration could 
be complicated by continued Soviet resistance to extending data 
measurement and broadcast obligations to training launches. Also 
we are getting mixed signals on whether the Soviets still insist on 
defining permitted and prohibited data transmission practices.
— Both of us think there are no insurmountable obstacles to getting 
an RV OSI agreement this round, but we are both waiting on addi-
tional guidance from our capitals necessary to finish an agreement.
— We have agreed to hold the first of the unique identifier brief-
ings this month. In some other areas, most notably early PPCMs, 
we seem to be having difficulty in maintaining momentum. The 
Soviets tabled a proposal on heavy bomber inspections. We think 
that aspects of it could be interesting and will be forwarding rec-
ommendations shortly.
— Other: Nazarkin and I had productive discussions on several 
secondary issues. As a result, we agreed to hold expert level meetings 
to discuss ALCM distinguishability, non-­deployed missiles, and the 
requirement to remove missiles from canisters prior to elimination. It 
is too soon to say what the results will be, but we are laying a good 
groundwork for eventual resolution of these issues.
What Can Washington Do to Help?
7. For the remainder of the round, we will focus our efforts on those 
issues that can be resolved in the next few weeks or that will break log-
jams. Washington can help by working some key issues on a quick turn-­
around basis, while maintaining momentum on other issues. FYI: we 
currently plan to exchange final treaty documents on December 8, which 
implies a cut-­off date for new material NG later than December 1.
— Both Nazarkin and I think we can resolve RV inspections this 
round. The Soviets have agreed with the essence of our proposal, and 
likely will agree to demonstrations for both an ICBM and SLBM. We 
need to be ready to tell the Soviets which of their missiles we want to 
see and when we can start the process. A quick response on the RFG
