Negotiating Channels
387
of our intention to work with you in a responsible way to strengthen
our nation’s interests.
Respectfully,
Birch Bayh
Chairman
Barry Goldwater
Vice Chairman
147.
Editorial Note
On January 13, 1980, the United Nations Security Council voted
on the U.S. draft resolution proposing economic sanctions on Iran
(Resolution S/13735) that the United States believed was required by
Resolution 461 of December 31, 1979. (See Document 128 and footnote
3, Document 131.) The vote was 10 in favor, 2 against (the Federal
Republic of Germany and the Soviet Union), and 2 abstentions (Bangla-
desh and Mexico). China did not participate. The resolution thus failed
due to the Soviet veto.
U.S. Ambassador to the UN Donald McHenry stated that the Soviet
veto was “a cynical and irresponsible exercise of its veto power. The
motive behind it is transparent. The Soviets hope that, by blocking
sanctions, they can divert attention from their subjugation of Afghani-
stan and curry favor with the Government and people of Iran, who
are among those most directly affected by the Afghan invasion.”
McHenry added that the United States “has already instituted
measures designed to exert economic pressure on Iran, as envisaged
in the vetoed resolution,” and that these measures would be applied
“firmly and vigorously” until the hostages were released. McHenry
then urged member states to join the United States in the “application
of meaningful measures against the continued holding of the hostages
in defiance of international law.” The text of the draft resolution and
McHenry’s statement are printed in Department of State Bulletin, Febru-
ary 1980, pages 70–71.
A January 14 White House statement reiterated that the Soviet veto
was an “act of political cynicism.” “The Soviet Union can keep the
Security Council from acting now on Iran—but they cannot block the
determination of members of the international community that terror-
ism and lawlessness must be dealt with firmly. Over the next several
days, we will be working with other nations who uphold the principles
