German Democratic Republic 379 not an interference with detente and we have no intention of misusing this policy. 6. Turning to US–GDR bilateral relations, Asst Sec Derian stated that we have a hopeful feeling and that we share Nier’s expressed views. She noted developments in the cultural field, meetings between Foreign Minister Fischer and Secretary Vance, and the recent meeting between President Carter and Ambassador Grunert. Ms. Derian stated that she is pleased with the progress on divided families, adding we need to speed up the process so that in emergency cases these can be resolved more quickly. 7. Nier expressed thanks for Ms. Derian’s comments. He stated that when the representatives of two governments sit at the same table, they must operate on the basis of principles which govern the relations between governments. One must distinguish in this connection between internal questions and international questions. The Helsinki Final Act constitutes an important basis for these relations: it contains a number of norms which guide relations between nations with different social systems, including respect for the sovereignty of nations and non-interference, including in the matter of human rights. The GDR considers the Final Act as a unified whole, and treats it as such. The aims and results of the Final Act should be to ensure peace and detente and to guarantee security of nations. The Final Act must be treated as a whole and as the basis for bilateral relations. 8. Nier stated that human rights are embodied in the laws and other documents of the GDR. The principal human right is the right to peace. If peace is not secured, then the other rights have no value. Such questions as the right to work, equality of women, minority rights are of course important in daily life. “Some circles,” Nier continued, argue that the US has declared human rights as the only guideline for its foreign policy without taking other factors into consideration. This could result in one country defining what is just and unjust. That is a matter for each nation’s own decision. As soon as it relates to relations between two countries, then the suspicion will be raised that you are attempting to interfere in the internal affairs of other countries, and this is not in the spirit of the Final Act. This could only lead to a situation which would threaten detente. The yardstick for measuring performance must be determined in each country. An essential element of human rights is peaceful coexistence among nations. 9. Nier stated that the GDR’s relations with other countries does not depend on whether there is unemployment in the other country or whether someone has been convicted. That does not mean, he said, that the GDR is indifferent to such problems, only that it is an internal matter and intervention on such matters is inadmissable. The situation is different of course, he continued, in cases where there are massive
