502 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II C. Under the item on torture, prepare a proposal along the lines of that informally discussed with delegations at the last General Assembly for the establishment of an expert group to survey and report upon the problem of torture as it may exist in the world today. D. In the context of the resolution which the UNGA will consider with respect to the report of the Human Rights Commission on its overall analysis of alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights, propose with other co-sponsors a provision authorizing the Human Rights Commission to hold a resumed session in 1979 to be held at UN headquarters, in case the Commission does not complete the overall analysis at its regular 1979 session. This would be an initial step in achieving the President’s aim for more frequent annual sessions of the Commission. In any statement under this item, the U.S. delegation should express our continuing interest in further consideration of the High Commissioner for Human Rights proposal. E. Consult with other delegations in advance of the 33rd UNGA session with a view to identifying possible actions which might be taken at the 33rd UNGA to strengthen and expand the staff of the Human Rights Division, including the New York liaison office. This will require adequate budgetary resources which must be shifted from another part of the overall UN program. F. Consult with other delegations with a view to the formulation of a proposal for the establishment of a panel of experts to be used by the Secretary-General in carrying out a good offices role with respect to human rights problems. The panel would be made up of persons named by member governments. Specific Cases of Human Rights Violations The provisional agenda contains the usual items dealing with violations of human rights in Southern Africa and the Israeli-occupied territories. The question of human rights violations in Chile will be considered under the report of the Economic and Social Council. Other cases involving allegations of serious human rights violations, Democratic Kampuchea, Uganda, and Argentina, are not specifically identified on the agenda but could be subsumed under the report of ECOSOC. A. Southern Africa While our differences with African governments over the advisability of economic sanctions will doubtless be highlighted in the discussion of the item dealing with adverse consequences for the enjoyment of human rights of assistance given to Southern Africa, our stance on Southern African questions need not be negative. We should be pre-
