Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  345
Lucas Fischer (ACDA)
Robert Joseph (OSD)
Eugene Daniel (JCS)
Alan Foley (IC)
Richard Davis (NSC)
Robert Walpole (PM)
Robert Einhorn (S/P)
Jeffrey Starr (NST)
Thomas Foley (T/ART)
Marshall Brown (ACDA/GC)
Eleanor Sutter (EUR/SOV), Notetaker
Deborah Garretson, Interpreter
Galina Tunik, Interpreter
Alan French, Interpreter
Igor Neverov (Embassy)
Aleksandr Zhgutov (Embassy)
Organizational Questions
6. Burt began by asking Nazarkin’s preference as to language and 
organization of the session. Nazarkin said he would speak English, 
since today’s talks would be more specific than those of the previous 
day and it would save time. Nazarkin proposed a general review of 
all questions covered the previous day. He noted that there were two 
problems: first, he suggested a special afternoon meeting of experts on 
telemetry to discuss questions concerning the draft agreement tabled 
by the U.S. side; the questions would be very technical and specific. 
Second, he said the Soviet delegation was not prepared to respond con-
clusively on all issues raised the previous day. Though the meeting had 
been reported to Moscow, because of the time difference a response had 
not yet been received. Nazarkin proposed the sides hold an additional 
session the next day, so the Soviet side could speak more conclusively. 
The sides agreed that telemetry experts would meet that afternoon.
7. Burt suggested that a conforming group meet separately as soon 
as possible to discuss the language in the draft strategic exercise notifi-
cation agreement; Nazarkin agreed.
Verification & Stability Measures: Umbrella Agreement
8. Burt raised the Soviet draft umbrella agreement on verification 
and stability measures, and asked whether the U.S.-­proposed changes 
were acceptable to the Soviet side. Nazarkin said the Soviet team in 
Washington had analyzed the U.S. changes and found them all to be 
improvements; they were all editorial and presented no problems. 
The Soviet side had reported this to Moscow. However, the Soviet side 
would need instructions in order to finalize the agreement, so Nazarkin 
suggested this be done the next day. Burt and Nazarkin agreed to hold 
a conforming meeting on the umbrella agreement the next day.
