Chapter 5, May–June 1990  785
resolution. As Mr. Karpov said, the Soviet side wants to cover any air-
force Backfires in the number. This would mean that the Soviet Union 
could build as many naval Backfires as it wanted or change airforce 
Backfires into naval. We would have no assurance what the politically 
binding declaration would mean. (S)
On non-­circumvention, we feel that we have gone very far to meet 
Soviet concerns. We have a forty year old patent of cooperation with 
Britain that must remain in effect. The Soviet proposal would require 
us to give up that commitment and that fact would affect not only our 
relations with the United Kingdom but with other allies. We cannot 
sign a treaty that does this. (S)
All of the issues above relate to the START joint statement. 
Concerning future negotiations, the question is not whether to speak 
of ICBMs, MIRVed ICBMs, mobile ICBMs—­the question is whether to 
point the direction on any of these. We propose to set the direction by 
using the term elimination because that is the best path to a stable stra-
tegic balance and that is what we both want. (S)
In sum, there is a great deal of work done on START and we have 
already recorded that in a statement but we should add these highly 
visible issues and put them to rest—­heavies, noncircumvention and 
Backfire. If it came out of this meeting that this was done, the impe-
tus to the treaty this year would be great. As to the future negotiations 
statement—­we want to point the negotiations in the direction of elim-
ination. (S)
The President: I am impressed with the progress that I hear and as 
I listen it sounds like we’re not too far apart. The noncircumvention 
issue is difficult because there is an important history there with the 
British. But we sound awfully close on Backfire and on heavies. Maybe 
we could ask Foreign Minister Shevardnadze and Secretary Baker to go 
and work on this. The statement on future negotiations needs to give 
a good forward thrust which would be well received in the context of 
the whole climate of our relationship. Jim, did I leave out anything? (S)
Secretary Baker: You did not, Mr. President. If we assume closure on 
a mobile sublimit, the three other issues—­noncircumvention, Backfire 
and heavies, should be concluded if you and President Gorbachev are 
going to do what you said you would at Malta—­agree on the remaining 
issues of substance. (S)
It is also important as Ambassador Bartholemew said that the 
goals and objectives of future strategic arms be set forth clearly. There is 
a signing ceremony at 5:00 p.m. today. Minister Shevardnadze has said 
the Soviet side wants to initial a statement of agreed elements, goals 
and objectives. We should see if we can reach agreement on this and the 
follow-­on by then. (S)
