1210
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
“Administrative Council” appeared once, then it applied every time.
This was agreed. In the year and a half since Camp David, attempts
have been made to change the document, without the words “Admin-
istrative Council.” He has to return to the document. He showed
Dayan, in a paper at the peace treaty signing, seven deviations from it
(on not including the words “Administrative Council”). We are now at
a stage, in the last year, where we see proposals to change the content
and meaning. Israel wants it clear: if “Administrative Council” is not
there, then Egypt will say it is an assembly. He wants to make clear that
Egypt can’t say this, since it is an administrative council. He does not
want a closet state, or a corridor leading to an independent Palestinian
state. This is crucial. It is another idea, a proposal. He wants to remind
the President that in the joint letter, Egypt and Israel repeated the
words “Administrative Council.” Egypt did not want it, but we re-
peated it. In communiques (of the autonomy talks) it is always there.
Therefore “Administrative Council” means something. It is a most es-
sential point. The basic issue is, what is the self-governing authority?
Everybody has interpreted it—so what is it?
The President said that he does not favor substituting the words
“Administrative Council” for “Self-Governing Authority.” This is fruit-
less semantics. It is better to look at the powers and responsibilities it
will have, not at the name. We put in “Administrative Council” once,
reluctantly. We cannot accept giving up “Self-Governing Authority” in
all references, and use “Administrative Council” in its place.
Prime Minister Begin said that he does not want to give up “Self-
Governing Authority.” He repeats this.
The President said he understands.
Minister Burg said that “Administrative Council” means something.
The President said he knows.
Prime Minister Begin said that these words give an accent: that it is
more administrative than political. Therefore, it gives more or less, but
the words stand per se. What they are asking for all the time, and Am-
bassador Linowitz once agreed—then the Egyptians got cold feet—ei-
ther bring (?) the Israeli model or talk about the three categories. But
Egypt backed out. Therefore, there should either be an accent on “Ad-
ministrative Council,” or use of the three categories. These are two pos-
sibilities, and. . . .
The President said he would prefer to accept the latter.
Minister Burg said that Egypt had not agreed.
The President said that there are good prospects for success.
Problems of semantics are there all the time: Judea and Sumeria vs. the
West Bank; Palestinians vs. Palestinian Arabs—there is always a
problem of definition. He understands that Prime Minister Begin and
