72 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I At the same time the President has asked me to express to you his desire for closest possible consultations on the implementation of the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe— and on looking to the future.5 Both seeking the full implementation of the Helsinki agreement and searching for further ways to improve security and cooperation in Europe are vital to the possibilities for productive discussions at the forthcoming review conference in Belgrade.6 But both depend on Western unity and on the success of our efforts to work together—both in NATO and in other forums—in the months before Belgrade. As President Carter said in his inaugural address: “Because we are free we can never be indifferent to the fate of freedom elsewhere.” The issues that I have discussed so far relate directly to our security in the immediate area covered by the alliance and to the future of our cooperative relations together. Yet while the NATO alliance provides each of our nations with the blessings of peace and security in the North Atlantic, tension and conflict in some other parts of the world involving economic and political as well as military issues can adversely affect our common security. President Carter and Secretary of State Vance are turning early attention to other areas of vital concern: in the Middle East, in southern Africa, in Cyprus, and regarding both the sale of conventional arms and efforts to halt the spread of nuclear weapons. On these issues, the President looks forward to working closely with our friends and allies in Western Europe. Mr. Secretary General, members of the council, we do not live in easy times. But they are hopeful times, as well. This is a period of historic opportunity. All Americans look to the future confident in the belief that—with vision, hard work, and firm unity of purpose—our association of free peoples will continue to provide the security and cooperation vital to us all. This association goes beyond NATO itself. For the strength and vitality of the NATO alliance is only one task facing all of us. As we seek to promote and strengthen our security in the broadest sense, we must also use effectively those other forums we have to resolve the great economic and other issues facing our nations and peoples. And we must 5 See footnote 7, Document 4. 6 Reference is to the Belgrade CSCE Review Conference, scheduled to take place in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, in October 1977.
