72
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
At the same time the President has asked me to express to you his
desire for closest possible consultations on the implementation of the
Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe—
and on looking to the future.5 Both seeking the full implementation of
the Helsinki agreement and searching for further ways to improve se-
curity and cooperation in Europe are vital to the possibilities for pro-
ductive discussions at the forthcoming review conference in Belgrade.6
But both depend on Western unity and on the success of our efforts to
work together—both in NATO and in other forums—in the months be-
fore Belgrade. As President Carter said in his inaugural address: “Be-
cause we are free we can never be indifferent to the fate of freedom
elsewhere.”
The issues that I have discussed so far relate directly to our secu-
rity in the immediate area covered by the alliance and to the future of
our cooperative relations together. Yet while the NATO alliance pro-
vides each of our nations with the blessings of peace and security in the
North Atlantic, tension and conflict in some other parts of the world in-
volving economic and political as well as military issues can adversely
affect our common security.
President Carter and Secretary of State Vance are turning early at-
tention to other areas of vital concern: in the Middle East, in southern
Africa, in Cyprus, and regarding both the sale of conventional arms
and efforts to halt the spread of nuclear weapons. On these issues, the
President looks forward to working closely with our friends and allies
in Western Europe.
Mr. Secretary General, members of the council, we do not live in
easy times. But they are hopeful times, as well. This is a period of his-
toric opportunity. All Americans look to the future confident in the be-
lief that—with vision, hard work, and firm unity of purpose—our asso-
ciation of free peoples will continue to provide the security and
cooperation vital to us all.
This association goes beyond NATO itself. For the strength and vi-
tality of the NATO alliance is only one task facing all of us. As we seek
to promote and strengthen our security in the broadest sense, we must
also use effectively those other forums we have to resolve the great eco-
nomic and other issues facing our nations and peoples. And we must
5 See footnote 7, Document 4.
6 Reference is to the Belgrade CSCE Review Conference, scheduled to take place in
Belgrade, Yugoslavia, in October 1977.
