878
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—about a 50% increase in real terms over the FY 1978 contribu-
tions to the soft-loan windows of the multilateral banks, which is what
the heads of these banks will likely propose;
—about a 100% increase in real terms in bilateral development aid
over FY 1978 levels;
—SSA remaining about where it is now;
—a moderate increase in PL–480 sales.27
Assistance at this level, if carefully programmed, might well in-
duce important policy reforms in some poor countries. In resource
terms, it could have significant impact on LDC growth rates if it were
focused on countries where such reforms were being undertaken.
Under this option, you could more readily carry out the proposal made
to you in a recent report of the National Academy of Sciences for pro-
viding increased support for private and public agricultural research
and development, in the US and the developing countries,28 and you
could provide for increasing technological collaboration with devel-
oping countries in other fields, as well. US aid as a proportion of GNP
would be about the same as now, given the projected increase in GNP.
Other donors would welcome our absolute aid increase, as would the
LDCs. There would, however, continue to be LDC pressure for US con-
cessions in other areas. There would be significant Congressional re-
sistance, mitigated by the fact of the increase being spread over five
years; a large investment of political capital and a close working rela-
tion with the Congress would be required to overcome this resistance.
3. Large Increase in Assistance. Levels of US concessional assistance
(including SSA) in FY 1982 would go up to around $13 billion in 1982
dollars. In constant 1977 dollars, aid levels would range around $10 bil-
lion. This could mean not only the 50% increase in multilateral aid de-
scribed above (which is probably the most that the donor countries
would agree to), but almost a doubling of PL–480 over FY 1978 and a
tripling in real terms and quadrupling in nominal terms of bilateral de-
velopment assistance. If concentrated in a relatively small number of
countries’ with growth potential, this aid level might have a significant
impact on the recipients’ economic growth and their progress in
meeting basic human needs—although here, too, policy reforms would
be more important than the resource transfer. The US would be pro-
viding about the same proportion of GNP as aid as the other OECD
countries. This option would thus place you in a good position to call
for increased international effort by all countries in attacking such
27 Carter wrote “—?” in the margin adjacent to this point.
28 This report, entitled World Food and Nutrition Study: The Potential Contributions of
Research, called for additional spending on nutrition and food production research. See
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Document
212.
