Hungary Deputy Prime Minister Aczel reiterated to Dr. Billy Graham that Hungary wants to put the Crown on public display and added that, if the United States decided to return the Crown, the Hungarians would receive it in whatever way would fit the President’s requirements.5 We believe that we should inform the Hungarian Government before the Belgrade CSCE Conference gets under way of our willingness to return the Crown under appropriate circumstances. Telling the Hungarians that we are taking this important step both because of improved bilateral relations and Hungary’s positive attitude toward CSCE implementation should favorably affect Hungary’s attitude at Belgrade and after. The President’s decision can be conveyed in one of the following manners: —By the President in a bilateral meeting with the Hungarian Foreign Minister at UNGA; —By a Presidential oral message to the Hungarian President, delivered by Ambassador Kaiser; —By the Secretary to the Hungarian Foreign Minister during their UNGA bilateral. A Presidential bilateral with the Hungarians would be so unusual as to provoke undesirable press speculation about the substance of the meeting—and might lead to disclosure of our plans before an acceptable scenario of transfer has been arranged. A Presidential oral message delivered by Ambassador Kaiser could be used to convey our intention right now. Since there is no pressing reason to inform the Hungarians immediately, we prefer using the Secretary’s bilateral with the Hungarian Foreign Minister (tentatively scheduled for October 1). In New York the Secretary will also note that the Hungarian Government has already stated its intention to us to place the Crown on public display in an appropriate place. He will add that Ambassador Kaiser has been asked to work out with the Foreign Minister an appropriate scenario of transfer that would permit the Crown’s return by the end of 1977. At that point we would send Ambassador Kaiser guidance, along the lines of the Secretary’s July 28 memorandum to the President for his scenario talks with the Hungarians. (Tab 2)6 Once we have Hungarian agreement to a suitable scenario, we would consult with key Congressional leaders and inform the Vatican.
