Yugoslavia 863 remain as it is.” There should be no apprehension or misgivings, and Yugoslav defenses should be strengthened. He stressed that arms are not a subject for grant or aid, but for “normal economic relations.” —Deputy Assistant Secretary Siena, the US chairman, responded that the presence of the US delegation reflected a growing beneficial relationship between the two countries, based on mutual interests and respect. He said that the US respected Yugoslavia’s position and recalled SecDef’s remarks to Secretary Ljubicic concerning Yugoslav independence, territorial integrity and national unity. Our efforts in the security field, he said, were directed toward that policy. —In outlining the US view of the Committee, Mr. Siena described it as a forum for regular contacts and a way to avoid the regrettable previous oscillations, but not as a replacement for established procedures. The Committee would review those established procedures to see how they were working. After describing briefly the importance of the US Congress in the matter of arms transfers, Mr. Siena explained that US policies regarding sensitive technology transfer, coproduction and third-country transfers were an effort by President Carter to introduce worldwide some measure of restraint. He said that we were engaged in an effort to reconcile those policies with the US desire to assist Yugoslavia, and that the reconciliation would not always please the Yugoslavs. Mr. Siena asked General Vujatovic to accept that when unfavorable decisions were taken they were not a consequence of suspicion, but rather from trying to balance the relationship with the other policies to which he had referred. —Mr. Siena and General Vujatovic agreed at this early point in the meetings that there were no problems in the substance of the draft MOU, that a working group would be named for further drafting, and that the agreed MOU would be initialed by the two of them in Belgrade, with subsequent formal approval by both governments later. Some items in the MOU were discussed: —Regarding the frequency of the Joint Committee meetings, Mr. Siena said that although the US had suggested meeting twice a year to keep close to the problems, annual sessions and a provision for extraordinary sessions took care of that concern. —Mr. Siena explained that to get USG agreement, the MOU should state explicitly that Committee actions would be governed by national policies, as well as national legislation. General Vujatovic said that his legal people contended that there were no policies not backed by legislation. The problems of finding mutually satisfactory wording was left to the working group. (Comment: The final draft of the MOU used the words “national legislation, regulations and procedures.”)
