886
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
slavia, the otherwise strong Soviet inhibitions against military interven-
tion in Yugoslavia might be overcome. In such a case, the Soviets would
be enticed by the chance to reestablish their direct presence on the
Adriatic and to demonstrate a dramatic pro-Soviet shift in the regional
and international correlation of forces.
20. But even if such a combination of circumstances does not arise,
and Tito’s successors do not have to contend with a serious threat of
Soviet military intervention, they are likely to be subjected to increased
Soviet pressure. As in the past, the Kremlin will attempt to secure
freer Soviet access to Yugoslav naval facilities and regularized Soviet
overflight rights. Along with these military objectives, it will also press
for reduced Yugoslav support for Romanian and other efforts to estab-
lish national autonomy within the Soviet bloc, less active Yugoslav
encouragement of Eurocommunism, diminished Yugoslav criticism of
Soviet foreign policy, and less vigorous Yugoslav pursuit of a China
connection.
21. In pursuing these goals, the Soviets may initially place heavier
reliance on incentives than on pressures or sanctions. Furthermore, in
contemplating sanctions, the Kremlin will doubtless take account of
the possibility that “overkill” could prove counterproductive and drive
Yugoslavia toward the West. In the face of prolonged Tito-like resist-
ance, however, the Kremlin will probably exert stronger pressure on
Tito’s successors than it dared to exert on Tito, with his long record
of defiance and demonstrated ability to rally domestic and foreign
support. Thus, it will be less hesitant to protest strongly and, if neces-
sary, to follow its protests with measured “retaliation” in the form of
stronger Bulgarian demarches on the Macedonian question, larger and
more frequent Warsaw Pact maneuvers on Yugoslavia’s frontiers, and
more active and supportive contacts with antiregime nationalist and
pro-Soviet “Cominformist” groups both within and outside Yugoslavia.
22. Such pressures or sanctions would be even more likely if Tito’s
successors were to display what the Kremlin viewed as excessively
Westernizing tendencies—for example, by obstructing major Soviet
diplomatic initiatives, by tolerating the public expression of anti-Soviet
views, or by sanctioning political pluralism within Yugoslavia. In fact,
if it were reasonably confident that the West was unwilling or unable
to compensate, the Kremlin would probably be prepared to retaliate
against such tendencies by withholding or curtailing scheduled deliver-
ies of arms, petroleum, and other items of which the Soviet Union is
a major Yugoslav supplier.
III. SUCCESSION PROSPECTS
23. To cope with the combined effects of increased economic strin-
gencies, heightened ethnonational tensions, and intensified Soviet pres-
