Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
707
4. Intelligence:
[2 lines not declassified]
141.
Memorandum From Hedley Donovan to President Carter1
Washington, February 20, 1980
Maybe this is already going on somewhere in State or NSC, but if
not, I believe you and the country would be well served by a high-level
study of U.S. foreign policy options and objectives, 1980–85.
I do not have in mind a public Presidential Commission! I was
thinking of a few very good people detached from operational duties
for a few months.2 They should work under the general direction of Cy
or Zbig (or somehow both?) with a firm understanding that this study
is expressly ordered by the President.
The underlying principles and premises of U.S. foreign policy
should be re-examined, clothed in concrete detail, and ranked by
priorities.
There is considerable confusion today, among our Allies, probably
in the Soviet leadership, and certainly in U.S. opinion, about the basic
philosophy of your Administration in foreign policy. The confusion
will be exploited and compounded as the election campaign unfolds.
But there is also genuine and legitimate confusion. It is not simple to
answer the simple question: Has Carter’s foreign policy changed?
What is left of detente? How Allied are our Allies?
Along with these profound questions about the direction of policy,
there are almost equally important questions of the ways and means.
How should our impending military buildup be shaped to give max-
imum support to our long-range strategic objectives in foreign policy?
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Donovan Files, Box 1, Foreign Policy
Study, 1980–85 [CF, O/A 706]. Eyes Only. There is no indication that the President saw
the memorandum. A copy of a subsequent report, which consists of two binders and is
entitled “U.S. Foreign Policy Objectives and Priorities, 1980–85,” is in the National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Director, Records of Anthony
Lake, 1977–1981: Lot 82D298, Box 20.
2 In a 3-page August 12 memorandum from Donovan to the President, contained
within the final report (see footnote 1 above), Donovan indicated that the Department of
State, National Security Council, Department of Defense, Central Intelligence Agency,
and International Communications Agency prepared the 24 chapters constituting the
report.
