1088  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
these along the coast are limited. However, the modern sector of the 
economy centered in the Lima-Callao area is a vigorous one, includ-
ing a growing small-­scale consumer goods industry and one major 
industrial enterprise—­the government-­sponsored iron and steel plant 
at Chimbote—­as well as extensive commercial agriculture, petroleum 
production, fish canning, and mining. About a quarter of Peru’s total 
population is urban, and the proportion is growing.
22. Peru’s economic growth and prosperity depend heavily on for-
eign (especially U.S.) trade and investment. Exports are equivalent to 
about a fifth of GNP, with imports providing for over a quarter of all 
goods absorbed into the economy. The production of U.S. and other 
foreign-­controlled and operated firms accounts for about a quarter of 
GNP and for over half Peru’s foreign exchange receipts. Foreign invest-
ment is concentrated principally in mining, petroleum production, and 
public utilities.
23. The initial postwar decade was one of notable prosperity and 
growth for the Peruvian economy. The general trend in world raw mate-
rial prices was upward, and the relatively diversified nature of Peru’s 
exports9 cushioned the economy against downward fluctuations in 
demand for individual items. Spurred on by a substantial government 
development program (contributing about a quarter of total investment 
for the period) and by a sustained high level of foreign investment 
(amounting to another 15 percent), the level of gross investment rose to 
an estimated 22 percent of GNP in the latter part of the decade. Along 
with advances in mining, manufacturing, and construction, over-­all 
agricultural output increased by about 50 percent—­though per capita 
output of foodstuffs for Peru’s fast-­growing population increased very 
little. Over the decade GNP grew at an average real rate of over five 
percent annually.
24. However, signs of trouble began to appear before the present 
Prado government took office in 1956. The previous Odria regime’s 
ambitious efforts to spur development, to improve social welfare and 
education, and to support the military involved increasing dependence 
on deficit financing. This resulted in inflationary pressures which 
increased prices by about eight percent a year. In 1957, moreover, world 
prices for most Peruvian exports fell and the dollar value of exports 
declined by about 15 percent. At the same time the costs of imports 
increased.
25. Although the government was able to obtain substantial cred-
its from the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the U.S., and private 
9 In order of importance: cotton, sugar, copper, lead, silver, iron and zinc. [Footnote 
is in the source text.]
