pursuant to the American suggestion, accepted in toto, the “A”, “B” and “C” lists. The meeting developed that there still remained 14 reservations in the “C” class, but since 11 items had been transferred out of “D” and “E” there seemed to be substantially a balance and that it was therefore considered that it was in order to report the lists to the subcommittee to levy the Washington surtaxes. Sub-Committee to Draft a Resolution on Levying Washington Surtaxes, Third Meeting, March 8, 1926. At the third meeting of the Sub-committee to Draft a Resolution on Levying the Washington Surtaxes, the chairman stated that Mr. Strawn had been good enough to prepare a composite draft of the resolution embodying the various ideas which had been brought forth at the previous meetings and that with but few changes the Chinese had practically adopted the same wording in their draft, which he proceeded to read to the sub-committee. (See pages 1 and 2 of Minutes of March 8 for revised Chinese draft.) The first three paragraphs were approved without amendment, but the fourth paragraph brought on considerable discussion and several amendments were offered. Dr. Yen suggested that they revert to the original Chinese idea, but both Colonel Peel and Count de Martel warned that it would be useless to attempt again to bring in the 90 million dollar clause. The chairman, however, further along in the discussion stated that the Chinese Delegation thought it would be better to insert this figure in the fourth paragraph and that an oral reservation would be made regarding it. He proceeded to read the fifth paragraph of the preamble and thereafter the first paragraph of the resolution itself. He insisted that the principle of making the duties effective at date of landing instead of date of shipment should be maintained. He explained that it was not so much the amount of money involved as it was a desire to establish a principle that prevailed in practically all other countries. He expressed a desire that the procedure would be so arranged that no injustice or hardship would befall the merchants of countries remote from China. The matter of the effective date brought on considerable discussion and Colonel Peel remarked that as contracts were all based on the date of shipment to enforce the principle of the date of landing would produce a great deal of confusion in the business world as the merchants would suddenly be confronted with a different rate.
