854
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Afghanistan to deal with the matter. Kruglov agreed to a meeting with
Soviet officials later that day. He agreed he would not attempt to make
a bargain for his safety in exchange for withholding military secrets,
and Ober assured him that U.S. insistence on this point was of benefit
to both Kruglov’s well-being and the security of the Embassy. Kruglov
shared that he was considering bargaining for Soviet assurance that
he would be allowed to emigrate from the USSR subsequent to serving
whatever sentence the authorities handed him. Ober counseled that
Kruglov should attempt to publicize whatever assurances he received
for his emigration to ensure they would be met following his sentence.
(Telegram 252721 to Moscow, September 21; Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 84, USSR: 9/80)
Kruglov’s meeting with Soviet officials took place as scheduled,
September 21, in the U.S. Embassy in Kabul. The U.S. side was led
by Chargé Mills, and Ambassador Tabeev led the Soviet side. Before
Kruglov was brought in, the Soviets produced a tape recording of a
woman they claimed was Kruglov’s grandmother, as well as letters
from friends and relatives of Kruglov. Finding nothing objectionable,
Ober approved their presentation to Kruglov. When Kruglov was
brought in, Ambassador Tabeev addressed him: “We are surprised
by your actions. Please tell us what happened.” (Telegram 252736
to Moscow, September 21; Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 84, USSR: 9/80)
Kruglov responded: “What prompted me was the bad relations
between our officers and enlisted men. Before I came into the army I
was convinced by what I had read and seen on the television program
‘Serve the Soviet Union,’ that it would be a wonderful life. It all sounded
good. But it turned out to be difficult in fact. It is difficult for me to
discuss this, but I could tell you lots about the humiliations and indigni-
ties forced upon Soviet troops.” (Ibid.)
Noting that he too served in the military, Tabeev empathized with
Kruglov’s complaints and promised that he could return to the Soviet
Union and resume his academic studies without punishment, on the
basis that he had not actually deserted the army, nor had he sought
asylum. Tabeev further offered to personally correct abuses Kruglov
had suffered while serving in Afghanistan, and both Tabeev and Krug-
lov expressed their appreciation for the U.S. Embassy’s assistance in
allowing the meeting to occur. (Ibid.)
Upon reflection, Kruglov decided that he would leave with the
Soviet officials. Mills asked: “Was the decision made without pressure,
of your own free will?” Kruglov replied affirmatively and committed
his response to a handwritten statement. Following this exchange, Mills
asked Tabeev what could be done about the Afghan Government’s
blockade of the Embassy. Tabeev gave a “double guarantee” of his
