Arms Control and Disarmament 1511 HARDTACK II test series of October 1958. Dr. Killian presented the preliminary report attached as Tab B. Dr. Fisk, in response to a question from Mr. Irwin explained that the new data were considerably more reliable than the Rainier data on which the Experts’ Report had been based and which involved only one underground test. However, there is still a large element of uncer­ tainty, and further testing might produce data which could change present calculations either upward or downward. The Rainier data was not presented last summer in a way which would preclude us from reopening the question of underground detection on the basis of the new data. It was agreed that the new data was such that it required the U.S. to reopen the question. Mr. McCone referred to the letter of December 23 transmitting AEC views on the new data (Tab C) and asked whether the new data indi­ cated that a larger number of smaller underground shots would not be detected than previously thought. Dr. Fisk replied that the number would be somewhat larger than before, but noted that the HARDTACK II data does not indicate much change in detectability of underground nuclear explosions. The significant change in capability relates to identification. Mr. Herter said that from present accounts the Soviet Delegation seems to consider the Geneva Report as definitive and asked Ambas­ sador Wadsworth how he would expect them to react to a reopening of the underground question. Ambassador Wadsworth said he thought that they would initially be suspicious of our motives, but that if approached in the proper manner probably accept our data as accurate. An appro­ priate approach might be to request an informal meeting on Monday, January 5, at which a U.S. scientist could explain the new data and pro­ vide the Soviet Delegation with a summary of our findings. He could then propose that the Conference set up a group of experts to deal with this new information, concurrently with the political negotiations. Mr. McCone expressed concern that this information, which is already known to some newspaper people, might appear publicly prior to its presentation to the Soviet Delegation. Mr. Gray added that not only do we have to worry about the newsmen who are aware of the HARDTACK II data but also we must consider our obligation to the U.S. public who consider the Geneva Report as an authoritative treat­ ment of the question of detecting nuclear tests. Dr. Killian said he felt an announcement should be made very soon, that any statement should be drafted with great care, should be concurred in by the agencies con­ cerned, and should be drawn so as not to damage our negotiating posi­ tion. Mr. Herter said he felt that the information should not be released publicly prior to its presentation to the Soviet Delegation and that to do so would cast doubt upon our motivations.
