Chapter 6, June–December 1990 907 definition of “strategic” in these negotiations. It is also important to note that there are many constraints on non-­nuclear arms in the treaty. Thus, the statement in our guidance that “START is intended to regulate only strategic nuclear weapons, not non-­nuclear systems,” which implies that all these constraints are somehow mistaken or unintended, is off the mark. There is a correct way to describe the situation, which we will need to come back to in preparing for ratification. — Complete agreement at last on the preamble. We got the Soviets to accept a bland, one-­paragraph reference to the NPT, ABM treaty and 1990 summit statement as desired by OSD. The last vestige of offense-­ defense linkage has thus been removed from the treaty text. — Near agreement on non-­circumvention and third country basing—­this is in a special channel and I do not have access to the details. — Good progress on the problem of ICBM launch canisters. The key here will be to control only canisters for ICBMs subject to non-­ deployed limits. There are large numbers of old canisters all over the USSR at collective farms, etc.—­the Soviet government has no idea where they all are. These derelicts will simply be ignored, though we could ask for SSI in suspicious cases. 4. An interesting development you may not be fully aware of concerns exchanges of letters and agreed statements. For years, we maintained that such devices were somehow un-American. Recently, however, there has been an explosion of such documents as awkward issues are solved through these handy pieces of paper outside the treaty text—­perhaps the people who negotiated all those agreed statements in SALT II were not so stupid after all. At latest count, there are approximately 30 of these in play. 5. Another recent development is a formal Soviet offer to have a one-­time OSI of their three sub tunnels before signature. They propose limiting the teams to only five people, with all costs borne by the U.S. The former should be negotiable—­the latter probably is not. 6. We continue to have major problems on the initial accountability of silos—­it seems clear that the Soviets did not intend in the Washington meetings to agree that silos count in the 1600/6000 aggregates at the beginning of excavation. They have now proposed a compromise whereby silos would count then the excavation is complete, but before concrete is poured/installed. We are thinking about how this compares to first launch of a new submarine, which would be the point at which subs would enter the 1600/6000. I would think the key point should be that the time from initial accountability to ability to launch missiles should be about the same for both silos and SLBM launchers. 7. The major issues for the Baker-Shevardnadze meeting seem clear enough. The big three would be PPCM, data denial and heavy
