174  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
make military recommendations to the President. Nuclear weapon 
employment [5 lines not declassified] Joint Chiefs of Staff would be pro-
vided to the President for his consideration and decision. Request for 
employment of nuclear weapons would also come from the theater 
CINC to the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the form of a request for selective 
or conditional nuclear release authority. The Joint Chiefs of Staff would 
pass the request with their advice and recommendations to the NCA 
for decision. In the case of NATO Europe, SACEUR would submit his 
request through US channels concurrent with introducing it into the 
rest of NATO. While theater communications would be somewhat 
degraded it is expected that connectivity would be sufficient to permit 
the NMCC to receive reconnaissance data, strike reports, nuclear det-
onation reports, and maintain continuous interaction with appropriate 
theater CINCs. Based on this information and guidance from the NCA 
and their advisers (i.e., the NSC, and other government agency prin-
cipals) the Joint Chiefs of Staff in coordination with the CINCs would 
develop appropriate options for NCA consideration. Such options 
might include additional force deployments, follow-­on nuclear strikes, 
a review of the SIOP Execution Considerations, and a tentative execu-
tion decision as a precautionary measure should the conflict escalate to 
a higher level. [10 lines not declassified]
(TS) General War. Should the crisis lead to a major nuclear exchange, 
SIOP execution considerations and Joint Chiefs of Staff recommenda-
tions on appropriate SIOP options would be passed to the NCA for 
decision. The decision would then be implemented by Joint Chiefs of 
Staff transmission of emergency actions messages to the SIOP forces. 
First priority following the exchange would be location of the surviving 
NCA and Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, or their successors. [9 lines not 
declassified]
	
Tab D
	
Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense17
Washington, undated
SURVIVABILITY OF US COMMAND AND CONTROL SYSTEMS
(TS) Under either attack with warning or surprise conditions, 
analytical studies show that US C3 systems could suffer severe dam-
age from a major nuclear exchange or a limited exchange aimed at 
17 Top Secret.
