666
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
230.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, January 18, 1980
SUBJECT
Reduction of Disincentives to US Exports (U)
The study of export disincentives pursuant to your September
1978 export policy decision2 has now been underway for a year. This
memorandum summarizes findings and proposed phased decisions,
beginning with interim measures that you might announce next week,
along with good news about exports and the balance of payments. (U)
The study has focused on our trade with non-Communist coun-
tries; issues peculiar to East-West trade were not included in the study
or in the decisions proposed below. (U)
Progress in carrying out this study has been slow, largely because
of the difficulty of securing reliable data. The task force conducting the
study has estimated that all the indentified disincentives may result in
a combined annual export loss of $5–10 billion, but these figures cannot
be supported by firm evidence. (C)
The five major disincentives are:
—ambiguities in the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act3
—overlapping anti-boycott laws and regulations
—foreign policy export controls
—nuclear export controls
—arms export controls. (C)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 92, Export Controls: (National Export Policy): 1–6/80.
Confidential. Sent for action. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Henry. J.” An attached
February 26 memorandum for the record by Denend notes that Owen’s memorandum
“was forwarded to the President for decision prematurely. Thus, the decisions taken
were not implemented. Subsequently, a fully coordinated recommendation (NSC 1137)
was forwarded to the President on this subject which he approved.” The subsequent
memorandum to Carter was not found.
2 See Document 164.
3 On December 20, 1977, Carter signed the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act into law,
noting that the act “makes corrupt payments to foreign officials illegal under United
States law. It requires publicly held corporations to keep accurate books and records and
establish accounting controls to prevent the use of ‘off-the-books’ devices, which have
been used to disguise corporate bribes in the past. The law also requires more extensive
disclosure of ownership of stocks registered with the Securities and Exchange Commis-
sion.” See Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1977, Book II,
p. 2157.
