Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Ljubicic then asked Brown if he thought Yugoslavia could produce a 300 kms cruise missile. Brown said it could be produced in the future easily. Ljubicic (jokingly ?) asked Brown if he would provide assistance to produce such a weapon. Brown said “No.” Then Brown said that it is still not clear whether a cruise missile is a good means to deliver a nuclear weapon. Ljubicic said that he was against a monopoly of any kind. Brown retorted that proliferation is worse. Ljubicic asked what Brown could tell him about the neutron bomb. He said that SALT as it concerns Yugoslavia is a ratio or balance between big powers; that it is concerned with strategic weapons systems and does not contribute to general disarmament in the conventional sphere; that new conventional armament is taking place: new Soviet bombers, tanks, satellite bombs, meteorological warfare. It was in this context that Ljubicic asked about neutron bombs. Brown replied that some of the things that Ljubicic mentioned are ideas and some are more than ideas. Brown said he thought that nuclear weapons should be limited at as low a level as possible but that this level must be balanced. He added that the US can compete in all areas; that the Soviets have concluded that they can compete better in military areas and the US, therefore, must be prepared to respond to this Soviet emphasis by taking appropriate action. Ljubicic said that, when Tito talked to Brezhnev, Tito concluded that Brezhnev was genuinely interested in detente. Brown then went through an explanation of the effects of neutron bombs. He talked about how the blast effect is reduced and how the radiation is increased, making a comparison with an ordinary nuclear weapon. He pointed out that the bombs were designed mainly for use against large tank columns; that the use of such bombs would force tank columns to disperse, thus reducing the effectiveness of large tank formations. Brown said that such weapons would not reduce the threshold of nuclear war and would not be used unless there was an invasion. He emphasized US political control and the impact of the weapon on the prevention of war. Ljubicic agreed that he saw the military justification for such a weapon, but added that if war started such a weapon could be used on small countries. He recalled a conversation of the subject of neutron bombs with the Soviet Minister of Defense, Ustinov, who said that now that the Americans were developing such a weapon system, Ustinov would have to assure development of such a weapon for the Soviet Union. Brown said that use of tactical nuclear weapons is a political question. Each country has to decide for itself whether such weapons increase or decrease the chances of nuclear warfare. Brown said that because of the sensitivity of the Yugoslav-US relations, the demands of the Western press, and presence of many
