conceded that from that date the valuation of commodities will be done according to the laws to be promulgated by the Chinese Government. With that end in view for the interim period, and in harmony with the spirit of the Washington Conference, draft regulations relating to the revision of Chinese tariff schedules were submitted. These regulations (page 3 et seq of Minutes of December 10) go into great detail as to how the interim revisions shall be made and in the preamble, as a basis for the regulations, is quoted Article IV of the Nine-Power Treaty relating to the Chinese Customs Tariff. Colonel Peel proceeded to analyze the regulations and said that the only kind of rules the Delegates were authorized to make under their powers given them by the Washington Treaty were rules for the guidance of an International Commission. He did not consider that they were authorized to make any rules for a purely Chinese Revision Commission. He did say, however, that he would be very glad to recommend to his Government for its consideration the Chinese proposal and to name the reasons that prompted the Chinese to suggest the rules. He asked for information concerning the kind of Commission that the Chinese proposed to institute. Admiral Tsai said that the Chinese Government had both Chinese experts and experts from the foreign staff of the Chinese Customs and as a basis of valuation they also had the prices in Shanghai, Hankow, Canton, Tientsin and Dairen as representing the four geographical centers of the Country. A further explanation was made by Admiral Tsai as to plans for the revision, but it did not appear that the Delegates wished to discuss the question further, whereupon the chairman submitted two documents, one a “Declaration of the Chinese Government Regarding the Levying of Duties and Taxes on Foreigners Residing in China” (see page 11 et seq of the Minutes of December 10, 1925), and the other a “Declaration of the Government of the Republic of China Regarding the Abolition of the Export Duty and Coast Trade Duty on Native Goods not Destined for Exportation to Foreign Countries” (see pages 15 and 16 of Minutes of December 10, 1925.) Regarding the question of the taxation of foreigners, it was pointed out by the Chinese Delegates, in their statement, that in no treaty is there to be found any provision which concedes to foreigners living in or outside the settlements in China an exemption from taxation. However, the practice had grown up of foreigners declining to pay such taxes in the Settlements because they had not received instructions from
