1042
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
industrial countries will have to approach this issue with great caution.
If we get out front, we may drive the G–77 back together (OPEC’s first
instinct will be to try to limit discussion of the issue to intra-LDC
meetings).
—LDCs continued to exhibit strong sensitivity to the use of terms
such as “differentiation,” “graduation,” and “selectivity” by DCs. Their
concern is not so much economic, as that such concepts mask an at-
tempt to divide the G–77 politically.
—Agreement was reached on a resolution concerning protec-
tionism and restructuring, on a special program for the least developed
countries, on institutional reform of UNCTAD, and on work programs
for commodities, trade, and Economic Cooperation among Developing
Countries.
—In spite of the stalemate on some major issues (“global consulta-
tions” and evaluation of the world economy, evaluation of the MTN,
and several monetary/financial questions), UNCTAD V ended on a
quiet note with no strong recriminations on the part of the G–77 (al-
though we are likely to hear such recriminations at the ministerial
meeting of the non-aligned nations in September).4
The dialogue could go in one of two directions in the aftermath of
UNCTAD V. LDC radicals, including some OPEC states, may urge in-
creased militancy as a way to press for further structural reforms of the
international system and as a means to restore G–77 unity. This option
will probably be considered at the non-aligned meeting.
Alternatively, G–77 moderates will argue that the period of decla-
rations, action programs, and general debate may have about run its
course, and further progress for LDCs will depend on tackling specific
issues. We can support this view by:
—Doing everything possible within the Executive Branch and on
the Hill to keep development assistance and food aid at respectable
levels, to fight trade protectionism, and to secure legislation imple-
menting commodity agreements.
—Indicating that genuine progress has been and is being made on
North-South issues (MDB replenishments, the MTN, the Common
Fund, etc.).
—Publicly noting that modest results from UNCTAD V were pri-
marily a result of lack of focus and priorities on specific issues.
—Making clear that we distinguish between the political unity of
the G–77, which the developing countries see as an important counter-
weight to the developed countries’ economic power, and the need for
4 The Non-Aligned Movement met at the Ministerial level in Havana September
3–9.
