World Hunger and Food Policy
677
5) A crucial element in this approach will be the enhanced role of
the LDC’s in global food production, in ways which strengthen the
basic human needs program with the support of an appropriate grain re-
serve program which can serve as “insurance” for those countries
willing to undertake the reforms which a basic human needs approach
will require.
While many of these ideas may already form part of your own
thinking, I offer them simply to encourage you to use the Manila forum
to demonstrate the consistency of U.S. thinking with regard to the
problems of the developing countries and the global system into which
we are seeking to build.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
215.
Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Lake) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, June 17, 1977
Prospects for Expanded Soviet Bloc Role in North-South Problems
Summary and Conclusions
There are two contrasting motives for encouraging the Soviet Bloc
to play a more active role in North-South problems, particularly in
various measures for economic development, as you suggested at
CIEC:2
a) to elicit a genuinely cooperative effort on the part of the Soviet
Union, with the aim of maximizing the positive role they have to play
in Third World development and dampening East-West political com-
petition; or
b) to silhouette Soviet inadequacies in contributing to Third World
needs, with the aim of revealing the gap between Soviet rhetoric and
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Out-
side the System File, Box 48, Chron: 6/77. Confidential. Drafted by Theodore Moran and
Jennone Walker; concurred in by Boeker and Frank and in draft by Martin Kohn (INR/
REC/CER) and Barry. Tarnoff also initialed the memorandum. The President wrote on
the memorandum: “Some good ideas—J.” Vance sent a copy to him under a June 26
memorandum. (Ibid.) The transmittal memorandum is scheduled for publication in For-
eign Relations, 1977–1980, volume I, Foundations of Foreign Policy.
2 See Document 214 and footnote 4 thereto.
