Comprehensive Test Ban
345
148.
Memorandum From the Chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff
(Brown) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, March 1, 1977
SUBJECT
Comprehensive Test Ban Issues (U)
1. (C) The purpose of this memorandum is to transmit the views of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff on the Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB) issues
and to provide a basis for the DOD response to PRM/NSC–16.2
2. (S) After a careful review of the Interagency Working Group’s
response to the PRM,3 the Joint Chiefs of Staff have concluded that, al-
though the facts developed in the response do not support a CTB at this
time, the presentation of the substantive issues in the Executive Sum-
mary could result in misleading conclusions upon which future US se-
curity policy and negotiating strategy may be based. It is, therefore, es-
sential that these issues be clarified. The issues of utmost importance
concern the impact of a CTB or moratorium on US military capabilities
and the adequacy of US intelligence capabilities both to ascertain the
status of Soviet weapons programs and to monitor compliance with a
CTB agreement.
3. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff recognize the longstanding US policy
regarding a comprehensive ban on nuclear testing within the context of
an adequately verified agreement, including the commitments made in
the Limited Test Ban Treaty (LTBT), Non-Proliferation Treaty, and
Threshold Test Ban Treaty (TTBT). It must be pointed out, however,
that this policy was developed at a time when the United States was in
a position of clear strategic superiority. Presumably, a CTB at that time
would have slowed the rate at which the Soviet Union could have im-
proved its strategic forces and would have delayed the point at which it
could have achieved parity. The strategic situation has changed drasti-
cally in the last few years, and, although there are differing opinions as
to the relative military advantages held by either the United States or
the Soviet Union in specific areas, it is generally agreed that the two
powers are now in a state of overall rough equivalence.
1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–80–0017, Box
63, A–400.112 Test Ban (5 Mar 77) 1977. Secret. Copies were sent to the Director of the De-
fense Intelligence Agency (Tighe) and the Director of the Defense Nuclear Agency
(Johnson).
2 See Document 141.
3 See Document 146.
