Chemical and Biological Weapons C. The drafting group sessions have been devoted to extensive question-and-answer exchanges, as each side attempted to clarify the details of the others position. (In several cases, the Soviets have not yet been able to respond to questions about their own proposals or the acceptability of U.S. suggestions.) 4. Generally speaking, during this round there has been relatively little movement toward resolving key issues. A. On the positive side, the Soviets: (1) Have dropped some terms the U.S. had objected to (e.g., singlepurpose, dual-purpose, teratogen, carcinogen), but have retained others (e.g., chemical agent); (2) Have agreed to put precursors under the general purpose criterion and have accepted, in principle, the U.S. proposal for a list of “important” precursors to serve as a focus for verification efforts; (3) May be close to agreeing to accommodate the U.S. interest in protecting the uses of riot control chemicals specified in Executive Order 11850;2 (4) Are apparently willing to specify in the convention the rights and functions of verification personnel carrying out a challenge on-site inspection; (5) Have agreed to several other points proposed by the U.S. (e.g., declarations in connection with destruction activities; inclusion of toxic chemicals of biological origin; prohibition of new production facilities; declaration of types and quantities of highly toxic commercial chemicals produced but they also take the position that each party will determine the form and content of its own declarations.) B. On the negative side, the Soviets: (1) Have dropped the toxicity threshold separating super-toxic lethal chemicals from other chemicals. This greatly complicates our effort to apply more stringent verification arrangements to super-toxic chemicals (e.g., nerve gas) than to less toxic commercial chemicals (e.g., hydrogen cyanide, phosgene); (2) Have put forward positions which are not acceptable to the U.S. in several areas where we previously believed the two sides were fairly close: —Quantities of otherwise prohibited chemicals to be produced or diverted for nonhostile military purposes. We had believed that both sides agreed that a limit should be specified. Now the Soviets would allow each state party to produce whatever it determines it needs.
