Chemical and Biological Weapons
185
C. The drafting group sessions have been devoted to extensive
question-and-answer exchanges, as each side attempted to clarify the
details of the others position. (In several cases, the Soviets have not yet
been able to respond to questions about their own proposals or the ac-
ceptability of U.S. suggestions.)
4. Generally speaking, during this round there has been relatively
little movement toward resolving key issues.
A. On the positive side, the Soviets:
(1) Have dropped some terms the U.S. had objected to (e.g., single-
purpose, dual-purpose, teratogen, carcinogen), but have retained
others (e.g., chemical agent);
(2) Have agreed to put precursors under the general purpose crite-
rion and have accepted, in principle, the U.S. proposal for a list of “im-
portant” precursors to serve as a focus for verification efforts;
(3) May be close to agreeing to accommodate the U.S. interest in
protecting the uses of riot control chemicals specified in Executive
Order 11850;2
(4) Are apparently willing to specify in the convention the rights
and functions of verification personnel carrying out a challenge on-site
inspection;
(5) Have agreed to several other points proposed by the U.S. (e.g.,
declarations in connection with destruction activities; inclusion of toxic
chemicals of biological origin; prohibition of new production facilities;
declaration of types and quantities of highly toxic commercial chem-
icals produced but they also take the position that each party will deter-
mine the form and content of its own declarations.)
B. On the negative side, the Soviets:
(1) Have dropped the toxicity threshold separating super-toxic le-
thal chemicals from other chemicals. This greatly complicates our effort
to apply more stringent verification arrangements to super-toxic chem-
icals (e.g., nerve gas) than to less toxic commercial chemicals (e.g., hy-
drogen cyanide, phosgene);
(2) Have put forward positions which are not acceptable to the U.S.
in several areas where we previously believed the two sides were fairly
close:
—Quantities of otherwise prohibited chemicals to be produced or
diverted for nonhostile military purposes. We had believed that both
sides agreed that a limit should be specified. Now the Soviets would
allow each state party to produce whatever it determines it needs.
2 See footnote 3, Document 81.
