490 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI ALCM issue had been resolved, and we might even make progress on SLCMs, God forbid. The Secretary said he wanted Shevardnadze to know, given all the discussion about telemetry, that the U.S. referred to the church across the street from the new American Embassy as “Our Lady of Telemetry.” Shevardnadze joked that this explained why we had been blessed with success. The Secretary said another name for that building was the “Church of the Immaculate Reception.” (The discussion concluded at 9:54 p.m., at which time the working group chairmen on human rights, bilateral, economic and transnational issues were asked to come and report to Ministers, (see separate memcon)10. The discussions of arms control resumed at 10:50 p.m., focusing on SLCMs.) Bartholomew reported to the Ministers that he, Burt, Karpov and Nazarkin had developed an understanding that was being submitted ad referendum to the Ministers. There were two basic points on which we had reached a meeting of the minds. — First, the U.S. had proposed to extend the period of the declarations of SLCM plans from three years to five years. — Second, the Soviets had proposed that, in the declarations, each side provide information on the types of surface ships and submarines that were capable of deploying SLCMs. We had agreed that such information would be exchanged on a confidential basis. These changes would be reflected in the draft joint statement, Bartholomew explained. The declarations would be issued each year to cover the coming five years for as long as the START agreement remained in effect. Bartholomew said that there was still a difference on three other points. — First, the U.S. declaration would concern only nuclear armed SLCMs. The Soviet side did not specify and appeared to cover both nuclear and conventional. — Second, the U.S. proposed that the number given in the declaration be the number of missiles in a side’s inventory, that is the actual number of missiles stockpiled or deployed on ships. The Soviet side wanted the number to apply only to those deployed on surface ships and submarines. — Third, there was a difference regarding range. The U.S. originally had proposed that the declaration apply to nuclear SLCMs of all ranges, whereas the Soviet side had only covered those above 600 km. The U.S. side now had proposed a Yankee solution: a range threshold of 10 Not found. See Document 75.
