750
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
amount—inviting interpretations that America’s concern for this im-
portant African institution is waning and reversing the steady im-
provement in our relations with Africa under President Carter. There is
also a serious deficiency in funds for the Asian Development Bank.
When we fall short in our contributions to these banks, develop-
ment—and people—suffer. Our influence in the banks suffers. Our
ability to get others to contribute suffers. Ultimately, our diplomacy
suffers. Our contributions to the banks are not simply invented by the
Administration; they are negotiated. The Carter Administration has
been scrupulous about consulting the Congress at every stage of those
negotiations. When the funds are then cut, developing countries lose
help they desperately need. And in the process, other contributors—
our allies and friends—lose confidence in America’s word.
I am not here simply to mourn the fate of a single aid bill, though
in these times that would be cause enough for concern. What concerns
me even more is a pattern. There is no lack of rhetoric calling for more
American leadership in the world—leadership we must continue to
provide. But if we are to continue to lead, then we must be prepared to
pay the costs that leadership requires.
Humanitarian Concerns
If this declining trend in foreign assistance persists, we will con-
tribute to a human tragedy of massive proportions. For we should
always keep in mind that these programs work to help people. Let me
cite just a few examples.
• Between 1966 and 1972, AID helped design 250 clean water
systems in rural villages in Thailand. The program was successful and
continued by the Thai Government. Now 800 villages are served. As a
result, water-borne disease—a major Third World killer—has declined.
At the same time, incomes have climbed and village life is more stable.
• In another case, AID started a credit system in Colombia en-
abling small farmers to take advantage of land reform. In a 15-year
span, almost 35,000 small farms in Colombia have been financed. AID
has sponsored similar programs throughout the Third World.
• An AID program in rural Guatemala has stressed improved
teacher training and better school equipment. Through this program,
the dropout rate in participating rural schools has been cut by over
30%.
Viewed from a distance no single project is dramatic. But for the
people helped, even small projects are transforming lives. And the cu-
mulative global impact is profound.
Impact on U.S. Interests
Let me emphasize that these programs involve far more than our
humanitarian instincts. They bear strongly on our national interests.
