554
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
to facilitate the mobility of employment from declining or obsolete ac-
tivities into growth sectors that are economically promising. This is one
of the major concerns of organized labor, and in some of our heavily
populated geographical sections, a totally legitimate one. Furthermore,
this is one of the early expressed concerns of the Administration that
clearly merits attention without further delay as a natural complement
to any international trade liberalization plan.
C. Major Program for Retraining and Reformation of Personnel
We must anticipate that due to continuing technological advances
and shifts in market demand, we need a reasonably mobile work force.
With today’s accelerated pace of change, this probably means re-
training and preparing many employees for shifts in skills once or
twice during the course of their working lives. Although the above
factors dwarf the importance of imports in establishing this need, the
idea is superficially popular to blame imports—partly because this
falsely implies there is a ready solution.
Again, a substantial retraining program is not only needed for do-
mestic reasons but would gain labor support and represent a positive
appeal to the general public as a fairer redistribution restructuration.
D. Accelerated Domestic Procedures
Many complaints have been registered by all of our advisory
groups—industrial, labor and agriculture—on the complexity and
slowness of our domestic procedures in dealing with trade problems. A
plan for accelerating and simplifying these procedures to deal more
forthrightly and promptly with complaints is clearly called for and
would be very popular. These improvements could be linked with the
implementation moves for the Tokyo Round codes, facilitating domes-
tically the handling of escape clause actions, anti-dumping cases and
subsidy/countervail claims, among the more important.
E. Procedural Customs Improvements
There are a number of these that could stand attention and simpli-
fication. Some of these ideas are already assembled by Senator Dan-
forth’s staff and framed into a bill. By combining these ideas with the
implementation steps for the new customs valuation code, another
center of support might be added.
F. Adapted Buy America Program
Complementing the government procurement code will be the do-
mestic need to adapt and reinforce our Buy America procedures. Al-
ready there is a group in the Senate, headed by Senator Heinz, strongly
advocating further Buy America measures. There is wide popular sup-
port for this activity. If their concern could be refocused on non-
