December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 799 232. Draft Memorandum of Agreement Between the Governments of the United States of America and the State of Israel1 Washington, undated Memorandum of Agreement Between the Governments of the United States of America and the State of Israel Recognizing the significance to Israel2 of the conclusion of the Treaty of Peace between it3 and Egypt and considering the importance of full implementation of the Treaty of Peace to Israel’s4 security interests, the contribution of the conclusion of the Treaty of Peace to the security and development of Israel5 as well as its significance to peace and stabil-ity in the region, and to the maintenance of international peace and security; Recognizing that the withdrawal from Sinai imposes additional heavy security, military and economic burdens on Israel; The Governments of the United States of America and the State of Israel, subject to their constitutional processes and applicable law, confirm as follows: 1. In the light of the role of the United States in achieving the Treaty of Peace and the parties’ desire that the United States continue its supportive efforts, the United States will take appropriate measures to promote full observance of the Treaty of Peace. 2. Should it be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the United States that there has been a violation or threat of violation of the Treaty of Peace, the United States will consult with the parties with regard to 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 5, Middle East Peace Treaty—1979. No classification marking. The memorandum is stamped “CV,” indicating that Vance saw the document. In the upper right-hand corner, Carter wrote: “My suggestions. JC.” An earlier, March 16 line-in, line-out draft of the memorandum text, containing Israel’s proposed deletions and additions, is ibid. A handwritten record of Vance’s March 23 meeting with Dayan, at which they discussed the draft Memorandum of Agreement, is in the Department of State, U.S. Embassy Tel Aviv, Principal Officer Program Files, Lot 85F104, Personal for Ambassador Lewis—Sensitive Notes 1979. The final version of this memorandum of agreement, dated March 26, is printed in Dayan, Breakthrough, pp. 356–357. A similar draft memorandum of agreement with Egypt, replicating most of the points of the agreement with Israel is in the Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance—Secretary of State 1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 5, Peace Treaty March 1979. 2 Carter struck through the phrase “to Israel.” 3 Carter deleted “it” and replaced it with “Israel.” 4 Above this, Carter wrote “[Egypt].” 5 Above this, Carter wrote “[Egypt].”
