1490 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement be present when documentary records are removed and processed, and shall supervise proper use of post instruments. The right of extra-­territoriality shall not extend to the territory and the premises of the control posts. The security personnel of the control post, who shall be subor­ dinate to the Chief of the Post, shall be the responsibility of the local authorities. Movement of foreign personnel of the posts in the territory of the state must take place on regular terms and conditions in accordance with the procedure existing for foreigners. Any missions of foreign states in the state concerned must not interfere in the work of the control posts. The provisions of this paragraph as well as those of paragraphs 10 and 11 shall also apply to control posts on ships. 10. Each control post shall maintain a special log-­book for the reg­ istration of seismic oscillations, radiation, accoustic waves and data on the analysis of radioactive debris samples and, in the event of detection of a PAL which may be suspected as being caused by nuclear explo­ sions, shall submit a report to the commission. The reports of a control post shall be signed by the Chief of the Post and by the Chief Controller (or both Chief Controllers). In the event that the Chief Controller (or one of the Chief Controllers) does not agree with the conclusions of the Chief of the Post, he must state his dissenting opinion in the report. Control posts must also submit the results of their observations at the request of the Commission. In all cases, a copy of the control post’s report shall be transmitted to the appropriate government agencies of the state in whose territory the post is located. All documentary records of the registering instrument and other observation data shall be preserved by the control post for three months, after which they shall be made available to the agencies concerned of the country in whose territory the post is located, to be used for scien­ tific and technical purposes. 11. The communication between the Commission and the con­ trol posts, and between the control posts and the Commission, shall be through existing communication channels. Where control posts are located in remote areas, the governments of the states in which these regions are located must arrange for the construction of appropriate means of communication which would ensure a reliable, round-­the-­ clock transmission of data from the control posts. The mail of the con­ trol posts shall be carried by airmail via existing airlines. 12. In the event that a state cannot with its own resources organize and staff a control post, the organization and the staffing of the post
