168‚ÄÉ Foreign Relations, 1955‚Äì1957, Volume III, Supplement
I¬Ývery bluntly stated I had not and would not trade the fate of Amer¬≠
icans detained by them for political concessions or agreements they 
desired obtain. Said it seemed clear to me what he was saying was 
that release remaining Americans would be dependent upon whether 
in future I¬Ýwilling to agree further agreements desired by them. This 
I¬Ýwould not rpt not do. I was prepared deal with each problem that we 
discussed on its own merits, we had taken action respect Chinese US 
without condition and without attempting extract political concessions 
from them in return.
I had first hoped and expected they would promptly release all 
Americans thus paralleling action taken by us with respect Chinese, 
we could thereupon quickly agree on announcement of what each 
country had done and announce agreement on representation. I had 
then attempted obtain his agreement that release Americans would 
be simultaneous with announcement and had now gone to position 
that only some Americans would be released at time of announcement 
(even though I had previously made clear was no justification with¬≠
holding their release for this reason) and only asked that he give me 
definite time limit in which remainder would be released. ‚ÄúI do not see 
how it is possible for me to go any further.‚Äù
I also argued at some length that agreement on words in announce¬≠
ment without clear and common understanding exact meaning would 
not contribute to ‚Äúimprovement of relations‚Äù in future but could only 
lead to misunderstanding. If ‚Äúas soon as possible‚Äù, ‚Äúpromptly‚Äù or what¬≠
ever word was agreed upon meant to them a period of for example a 
year ‚Äúthat was one thing‚Äù but if it meant period of ‚Äútwo or in any event 
not more than three months that was something else‚Äù. Said whatever 
word or phrase this respect was used American people would expect 
very prompt action on release remainder and if this did not eventu¬≠
ate ‚Äústate of relations‚Äù could not but deteriorate. From our discussion 
thus far very clear PRC concept of ‚Äúas soon as possible‚Äù, ‚Äúquickly‚Äù, 
‚Äúpromptly‚Äù very different from ours. Could not reach any agreement 
on words until we were clear what we were talking about.
Wang did not contest my statement release remainder would be con¬≠
ditional on political factors. Now quite clear ‚Äúpolitical hostage‚Äù aspect 
does not shock them. On contrary they are clearly proceeding on premise 
that release of Americans is political act of grace and therefore directly 
related to other political factors in relations between two countries. This 
position more frankly and clearly stated today than ever before. It was 
almost complete retreat from ‚Äúlegalities and juridical procedures‚Äù.
Next meeting Saturday, 10 am.
Gowen
Note: Mr. Waddell‚Äôs office (FE) notified 11:50 a.m. 8/25/55 DES
