Chapter 4, February–April 1990  475
Soviet radars in return for the U.S. offer to visit Thule and Fylingdales. 
As for the U.S. request to take the Krasnoyarsk radar down to the 
ground, he was not against this but joked that he hoped the U.S. would 
pay for this. The Secretary replied that we could probably find a way.
Karpov said he would not like the U.S. to have the impression that 
the Soviet SCC delegation had been employing evildoers who were 
not fulfilling the decisions conveyed at the ministerial level. The SCC 
included legal people who have been guided by the 1974 procedures 
regarding destruction of ABM radars. He noted that the U.S. radar at 
Malmstrom had been eliminated in the way the Soviets had suggested 
in Geneva for Krasnoyarsk.
Shevardnadze remarked that this was why we needed to change 
people; old ideas still burdened the Soviet side.
The Secretary said it was, indeed, very important that there be 
some new blood. We also had people who wanted to destroy the con-
crete foundations at Krasnoyarsk.
Karpov said that the Soviet proposal had been based on what the 
U.S. had done at Malmstrom. After all, this had been enough for a large 
phased-­array radar; why not do the same thing to a ballistic early warn-
ing radar? Under the 1974 procedures, half of the phased array had to 
be dismantled. The phased array would be removed and left for six 
months, after which it would be put under concrete.
Shevardnadze said he just wanted to reiterate that everything he 
had said in Wyoming remained the Soviet position.
The Secretary said that we understood Shevardnadze to have said 
in Wyoming that the radar would be taken down to the ground. This 
was necessary as a confidence-­building measure. If he were to be asked 
why destroying half of the radar was not enough, his answer would be 
that the Soviet Minister had said it would be “completely eliminated.” 
This was the only way to build confidence.
[Omitted here are discussions not related to START.]
Shevardnadze said that to save time, the Soviets had prepared a 
paper listing all their views and suggested the experts now take up 
these questions (copy of Soviet paper is attached4).
4 Not found.
