1360 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement those on our present list. Our primary interest is not whether prisoners were taken to China, but in information about them. From my exam­ ination of the present cases I would doubt that many of them involve their ever having been taken to China. While they may be holding back some information, my feeling is that in fact they probably just do not have the records, particularly in the cases of those who fell into the hands of the North Koreans. This does not mean that we should not keep pressing them, but I am not sanguine we will ever achieve any substantial results. I also do not see the point in the draft of laboring the point on PRC belligerency ­and “volunteers” in Korea. They seem largely to have dropped this fiction and I do not think we should seem to be going out of our way to labor the point. I would, therefore, suggest a complete rewriting of the draft and believe that Dave Osborn should be able to do so. He thoroughly knows the subject, knows my ideas on it, and I would be content with anything he produces. I assume the UNC has now been informed of what I have last done at Geneva on the subject. I should think it would be well to arrange to keep it informed on a current basis and ask that they do the same. Because of the GA resolution I should also think it well to keep the record clear on keeping Hammarskjold informed. I will, of course, be very glad to discuss the subject when I am in Washington. My present plan is to spend the week beginning May 20 in the Department and I hope to be able to finish everything in that week. It will be a busy time and I hope that between you and EE you can sched­ ule it in the most efficient way. I leave myself entirely in your hands so feel free to arrange anything you think useful. I hope that the Secretary, Walter and Herman will be there at some time during that week. I am leaving here May 8 for the Vienna EE Chiefs of Mission meet­ ing which begins May 10. (There are no planes on May 9, the national holiday here, and also for various reasons I would prefer to be out of town on that day.) I plan to leave Vienna the morning of May 13 and arrive in Geneva the same afternoon. I then plan to leave Geneva the evening of May 15 for New York, and if my car is ready drive down to Washington May 16. If you want to get in touch with me while I am in Vienna you can, of course, do so through the Embassy there. Pat is leaving here directly May 10 and will arrive in Washington May 12. Regards to all and looking forward to seeing you soon for a real good chat, I remain Sincerely yours, U. Alexis Johnson
