Afghanistan 409 4. (U) The British aim was to keep Afghanistan a buffer, in the classic sense, and so it remained through the end of April 1978 when a Communist-led, armed forces-mounted coup d’état in Kabul swept aside the traditional power structure and imposed, for the first time, a government subservient to the rulers of Moscow. The buffer was gone, and the heirs to the British Raj in South Asia—Pakistan in particular, India slightly removed—reflected in varying ways their concern over its demise. 5. (C) Still there was hope that Afghan nationalism would temper the Marxism of the new Afghan rulers. The growing strength of a home-grown Afghan insurgency against the rulers of Kabul gave hope that in the short run those rulers would be too preoccupied to meddle farther afield, while in the long run they might even be replaced. 6. (U) All of that has changed with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan on 25–27 December and the subsequent installation in Kabul of a puppet government whose power rests exclusively on gun barrels of Soviet armor—the latter-day Cossacks. For Afghanistan, and for the nations of South Asia generally, the Cossacks have finally arrived, and nothing will ever be the same again. 7. (C) Implications: For Pakistan, Soviet actions at end of December 1979 are a worst-case analysis come true. Much has been written, in official and academic circles, about Pakistan’s inherent sense of insecurity and inferiority. Born of a negative—a desire to carve out an area for Muslims to live their lives free of Hindu dominance—Pakistan has been dominated by the quest through the 32 years of its existence to preserve its independence through the manipulation of outside forces. 8. (C) Pakistan has successively chosen patrons in hopes of creating a constituency outside South Asia which would remain interested in and committed to Pakistan’s integrity and independence. The relationship with the U.S., dating back to 1954, had the USSR as its focus; this remains the core of the U.S.-Pakistan relationship despite the disappointments of the Pakistan side about U.S. “failure” to defend Pakistan against India. The post-1962 Pakistani relationship with China had India, the USSR, and the U.S. as its focus; it remains a shared Pak- Chinese perception vis-à-vis both India and the USSR and has weathered successfully the transformation of the U.S.-Chinese relationship from hostility to friendship. 9. (C) Later Pakistani fascination with the Islamic and non-aligned worlds reflects both a further effort to diversify support for Pakistan from beyond its borders and a distrust of a seemingly unreliable USG. Playing a role on the international Islamic stage gave Bhutto—during a period of national reconstruction following the 1971 Bangladesh debacle—an opportunity to court Arab and Persian oil money as a way of compensating for the decline in American assistance levels. The end
