Human Rights
15
5.
Editorial Note
According to a memorandum for the record prepared by Executive
Secretary of the Department of State C. Arthur Borg on January 27,
1977, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance devoted a portion of his first
“large” assistant secretaries meeting on January 25 to outlining the re-
sponsibilities of Deputy Secretary of State-designate Warren Christo-
pher, the functional assistant secretaries, Department Counselor Mat-
thew Nimetz, and Director of the Policy Planning Staff Anthony Lake:
“After introductory remarks conveying his sense of pleasure of be-
coming Secretary, Secretary Vance set forth his view of the role of the
Seventh Floor Principals. He said that Mr. Christopher would be his
‘alter ego in every respect’ and that Christopher should receive all
paper that comes to the Secretary. Christopher will attend all meetings
if he so desires. He will have direct responsibility for overseeing Law of
the Sea matters, human rights questions, International Women’s Year
and the Board of the Foreign Service and he may be given additional
special assignments in the future. The Secretary said that P, E, and T
would have the ‘usual responsibilities’ except that T would also have
the responsibility for ‘oversight and integration’ of non-proliferation
policy as well as arms transfer questions. The Secretary said that the
Counselor would assist him in many areas as a ‘trouble shooter.’ He
has been given two specific assignments at the outset: the Greece,
Turkey and Cyprus complex and the Micronesian Negotiations. The
Secretary noted that a Cyprus fact finder would be designated later in
the week and that the Counselor will accompany that individual on a
fact-finding mission to Greece, Turkey and Cyprus.
“With regard to 6th floor responsibilities, the Secretary said that
Tony Lake would be responsible within the building for coordinating
the preparation of responses to Presidential Review Memoranda
(PRMs). Secretary made the general comment that all Assistant Secre-
taries have direct access to him whenever they feel it is necessary and
he wants them to use their prerogative. He stressed that the Principals
perform an oversight function but that this will not interfere with their
access to him.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P840101–0910)
In his memoirs, Vance further explained the extent of Christo-
pher’s role in the formulation and management of foreign policy:
“I wanted Warren to have the same relationship of mutual trust
and confidence that I had enjoyed with [former Secretary of Defense]
Bob McNamara, and he did. He was truly my alter ego, and his deci-
sion on any issue was the equivalent of mine. When I traveled, Warren
was fully in charge of the department. I did not want to try to manage
