312 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement history unfortunately shows that the Russians do not always abide by their agreements and use trade talks as an opening wedge for attaining other objectives. He was glad to hear that the Colombians are aware of this and are taking precautions to prevent any such turn of affairs. The Ambassador said the economic situation of Colombia is very bad, and it is natural for the Colombians to try to find new coffee markets wherever they can. The next two years are the critical ones. It will take $85 million to service the commercial debt in 1958 and $83 million in 1959. After that, they will be over the worst. But with coffee prices falling considerably below the budget estimates, it will impose an almost intolerable burden to meet all foreseeable obligations. Imports must be held to $18 million a month in order to come out even. The Ambassador did not see how this could be done. From 1953 to 1956 imports were in the neighborhood of $50 million per month; in 1957 they averaged $35 million; since October they have fallen below $30 million, and were only $20.5 million in January, but it is impossible to continue at this level. It would mean closing down some industries, it would not permit a sufficient supply of raw materials, it would restrain normal economic development. He assumed Mr. Rubottom had heard of the credit measures taken yesterday: this was a step in the right direction, but only a short step. Mr. Rubottom said he was very conscious of the difficulties facing the Colombians, and could assure the Ambassador of our sympathy and desire to collaborate in solving them. It was unfortunate that when coffee prices were at their maximum a few years ago the Colombians continued spending at such an excessive rate. He said he would urge the Colombians to tighten their belts as much as possible, and he said he supposed the Ambassador is aware that we in the United States are going to have to do the same. He said he had confidence that over the long term we would both come out all right. He also referred to the evidence of our willingness to cooperate which was given quite recently by the Export-Import Bank when it made available, in conjunction with New York commercial banks, a credit of $87 million dollars to help in financing the commercial backlog. The Ambassador said that he would be the first to recognize this, and Colombia was grateful for it. Mr. Rubottom said he wanted to mention another matter, for he felt that the Ambassador should understand the facts and inform the
