496
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
There follows a general account of the main positions taken and
the chief points made at this meeting.
[Omitted here is discussion of items 1 and 2 concerning policy
questions surrounding the development of practical nuclear power and
the effect of Stalin’s death on the Soviet Union and throughout the
Communist world.]
3. Developments in Iran Affecting U.S. Security (NSC Action No. 729–b;
NSC 136/1)2
Mr. Cutler briefed the Council on the latest available information
on Iran, which included the probability that Mossadegh was about to
turn down the latest plan for settlement of the oil controversy. Mr.
Cutler also outlined to the Council the three questions which Mos-
sadegh was thought to be about to present to Ambassador Henderson
by way of eliciting what assistance this Government was prepared to
give to his regime.
Secretary Dulles then stated that he had just received that morning
a telegram from Ambassador Henderson, stating that he had now
reached the conclusion that Mossadegh would not solicit an answer to
these questions unless he judged that he could expect a favorable reply
by the United States.3 We should not, said Secretary Dulles, in his
opinion give any hint to Mossadegh that he could expect a favorable re-
sponse to these questions. Any proposal that the United States pur-
chase Iranian oil at this time would constitute a terrific blow to the
British. In discussing this idea with him during his visit, Foreign Secre-
tary Eden had told Secretary Dulles that if we even sent technicians to
assist in reopening the Abadan refinery, Eden would be unable to sur-
vive as Foreign Secretary. Anything more than the technicians would,
of course, be that much worse. It was the feeling generally in the State
Department, continued Secretary Dulles, that we should not encourage
the Iranian Government as to any hope of reactivating the refinery or of
2 For NSC Action No. 729–b, see footnote 5, Document 171. For NSC 136/1, see Doc-
ument 147.
3 Reference is to questions posed by Mosadeq and reported by Henderson in tele-
gram 3605 from Tehran, March 9. Mosadeq had rejected the British proposals of February
20 for a resolution of the oil dispute. He then informed Henderson that he was consid-
ering the following question for the United States: “In absence agreement re compensa-
tion would United States Government in order assist Iran in overcoming its financial dif-
ficulties be prepared: (A) to buy Iranian oil over period of years in substantial quantities
at prices to be agreed upon; (B) to encourage private United States firms (1) to purchase
Iranian oil and (2) otherwise assist Iran in production and export of its oil; (C) to extend to
Iran immediately loan to be repaid subsequently in form of oil?” Telegram 3605 is printed
in Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. X, Iran, 1951–1954, pp. 703–706 (Document 315). Here
Dulles is referring to telegram 3644 from Tehran, March 11, in which Henderson reported
that Mosadeq would not officially ask the above questions unless he could expect a favor-
able reply. (Ibid., pp. 709–710; Document 317)
