September 18–December 16, 1978 535 the treaty signing. We have worked with OMB on this matter, but in line with your instruction no copy of this memorandum is being made. Discussion On November 2, Begin presented to Vance2 an estimate of $3.37 billion as being needed to pay for the costs of Israeli military redeployment and establishment of new bases, and asked us to pay the entire amount with a $700 million grant and the balance as concessional loans. On November 16, Finance Minister Ehrlich and associates provided some particulars: $750 million for replication of the Etam and Etzion air bases on a three-year schedule, $140 million for related air control facilities, $715 million for army redeployment, $655 million for infrastructure to support redeployed air and ground forces, $70 million for replication in Israeli territory of their Sinai naval base, $740 million for additional defense equipment and $300 million for resettlement of 1,550 families from Sinai. The Israelis are pressing for detailed bilateral discussions of this request. As you know, we have never undertaken to do more than “consult” with Israel on the costs of the two replacement air bases. A Defense Department survey team’s on-site estimates of air base replication costs is to be completed by December 8 and submitted after DOD review about December 15.3 Egypt will incur much smaller costs, probably limited to establishing an early-warning system in the Suez area. We have not yet received an Egyptian request for help in meeting these costs. The scale of any US contribution turns on three variables: —Inclusion or exclusion of redeployment costs, apart from the air bases. —Inclusion or exclusion of local costs of projects. —Inclusion or exclusion of marginally related Egyptian items in the interests of political balance in the US support package. Options These considerations are summarized in two cost options. Each is additional to annual US aid currently totalling $1,785 million for Israel and $950 million for Egypt. We favor the lower, Option A. We suggest deferring a decision, if the treaty negotiating process permits, until refined cost estimates are known in mid-December. We do not see how a US guarantee of private foreign lending to Israel would help meet these airfield costs, since Israel’s debt servicing 2 See Document 123. 3 See footnote 3, Document 159.
