234  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
After advancing loans, we have red taped the procedures to the extent 
that we have created disappointment and disillusionment on the part 
of the recipients, e.g. the Smathers loan to the Council of Rectors here, 
which was agreed upon a year ago and which is still awaiting legalities 
in Washington which are alienating the Rectors of all of the universities 
of the country.
9) We should give life to the Inter-American Defense Board or 
some other hemispheric organization as a principal instrumentality for 
our defense policy in Latin America. Through it we could give Chile, 
and probably each of the Latin American countries, a sense of participa-
tion in the world struggle against Communism, which certainly Chile, 
and probably most of the rest, do not have now. Through it we could 
also bring home the difference in the types of military expenditures 
which they make, encouraging them to reduce those which do not have 
hemispheric defense value.
10) Improve coordination of U.S. government publicity. The U.S. 
private press wire services are not subject to control, and neither are the 
local headline writers who work on their stories. Our own government 
public relations activities are, however. The extremely unfortunate 
press release of the Department of Interior of April 11 on copper tariff 
legislation cost us incalculable amounts of good will. We can blame no 
one but ourselves for this flub.
11) Encourage the Pan American Union to step up its publicity 
operations within the United States. Until our own people know some-
thing about Latin America, it is unreasonable for them to support pro-
grams designed to create good relations between us and Latin America, 
especially if these programs may involve some personal sacrifice on 
their part.
12) Start again the publication of a Government organ in Latin 
America to set forth our viewpoints on our policies. We are now doing 
very well in Chile having much material sponsored by us published 
in the regular press. This is not a substitute, though, for an authen-
tic source where the definite word of the United States Government is 
available. We have many understandable and reasonable explanations 
for things we do. Because of our dependence on third parties to put 
them forth, they are less well said and lack the ring of authenticity they 
need.
The Embassy recognizes that the above problems and suggestions 
are easier to state than they are to solve or put into effect. It recognizes, 
also, that the major problem of getting the Chileans to do their share 
remains. It believes, however, that a spirit of enterprise and an urge 
for fundamental change and improvement exist here. These have been 
hampered recently by economic problems arising from low copper 
prices, but they will emerge again with full force if the U.S. is able to do
