1978 353 not. Furthermore, how will we explain to the public if we decide to tie it to the strategic balance? Brown answered that the dollar figure for a program will make the tie and inform the public. The danger is to say that civil defense is important and then do nothing. Keeny agreed. He added that the Soviets are pushing civil defense; we do not want to create pressure on this Administration by talking about civil defense. Keeny added that he did not object to the declaratory policy but only to the internal policy statement which ties civil defense to the strategic balance. The second paragraph is particularly troublesome. It can be construed to require a civil defense buildup. Brown replied that ACDA’s paragraph four, as an expression of this concern, is the thought in the DOD version. McGiffert suggested omitting Defense’s paragraph two and Keeny agreed. Keeny added that there is so little promise in the public declaratory statement that policies inspired by the internal statement would not be explainable. Harold Brown asked Keeny if he would agree that in principle there could be differences in U.S. and Soviet casualty figures that would affect the strategic balance. Keeny agreed that there are. Brown then said that the statement is valid. Civil defense does contribute to the overall balance. Brzezinski questioned whether we must reach a full agreement on the statement. Brown said it would be a good idea to spare the President extra decisions. General Smith said the Congress, the public, and others are concerned about civil defense being part of the balance and that we cannot side step the issue as Keeny suggests. Tirana then explained that the public must know why we have a program and cited a recent TV program taping (60 Minutes) as an example. State and local officials cannot be encouraged to contribute without Federal guidance and policy rationale. Keeny argued that this is why he is concerned. The declaratory policy statement offers little, but the internal policy rationale promises a lot. Harold Brown said that we will send both policy alternatives to the President. Keeny refused to accept the Defense modified version even if the words “in addition” were omitted. Keeny said that civil defense will become a major issue, and that the President will want to be aware that we are tying civil defense to the strategic balance.
