Uruguay  1153
by the Uruguayan Government. Mr. Rubottom interjected that Lacarte 
was one of the best Ambassadors Uruguay had ever sent to the United 
States, that he had a great deal of confidence in Lacarte, and that one 
of his fears regarding the present situation was that the failure of the 
negotiations might lead to Lacarte’s recall. M. Waugh agreed with this 
estimate of Ambassador Lacarte. Mr. Bernbaum stated that Lacarte was 
to visit the Department on Friday June 20 and inquired whether Lacarte 
should then be asked to resume his conversations with the Bank. Mr. 
Waugh said that he certainly hoped that would be the case and that no 
commitments would be made by the Department.
UR–6.	
Letter from the Ambassador in Uruguay (Woodward)  
to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic 
Affairs (Dillon)1

Montevideo, July 22, 1958.
Dear Mr. Dillon:
The Matter discussed in the attached despatch2 is of such impor-
tance in United States relations with Uruguay that I am taking the lib-
erty of calling it to your attention.
Such I know how busy you are, I suggest that you read the first 
paragraph of the despatch which summarizes the reasons for which I 
believe prompt action should be taken.
With the hope that you will agree that action3 should be taken 
promptly in this matter, and with best wishes,
Sincerely yours,
Robert F. Woodward
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 411.334/7–4458. Limited Official Use; 
Official-Informal. Robert F. Woodward presented his credentials on April 21, 1958.
2 Copies of the referenced despatch (see Document UR–6, Enclosure) were also 
sent to Vice President Nixon; Robert B. Anderson, Secretary of the Treasury; Assistant 
Secretary Rubottom; and Thomas C. Mann, Assistant Secretary of State for Economic 
Affairs. 
3 A handwritten note from Dillon to William P. Snow, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
of State for Inter-American Affairs, attached to the source text, reads as follows: “Unless 
you have strong objection of which I am not aware, would agree with Woodward. I am 
prepared to help with Treasury if needed. Please keep me advised.”
