The Conference, looking forward rather than backward, confined its
attention to tangible problems, viewing nothing as static, with full
recognition that the weights of the various factors would change from time
to time. Fundamental policies of national economy, such as free trade
versus protection and nationalization of resources, were not included in the
deliberations of the Conference. Recognizing the definite progress, almost
to completion, of the stabilization of currencies on a gold basis, and that
tariff levels were less important relatively than the rationalization of tariffs
and also that nationalization of resources was more a domestic than an
international question, the transactions of the Conference did not include a
discussion on these subjects except incidentally.
The Members of the Delegation were greatly impressed with the men who
were gathered at this Conference, brought together from every quarter to
give their experience and information and contributing on every phase of
economic life. Very helpful had been the work of the Preparatory
Committee and the Economic Section of the League. This gave direction to
the discussions and considerations; and with this start, the Conference, with
its Advisors, supplemented and elaborated in a large degree the preparatory
work and material.
The Permanent Secretariat of the League had made careful and well
organized arrangements and the mechanism provided for carrying on the
work of the Conference was admirable and effective.
The Members of the American Delegation were accorded full right and
participation in the work of the Conference. The names of the Delegation of
the United States, their several responsibilities in, and respective official
connections with, the Conference, are set forth in Annex I. The Experts and
Advisers of the Delegation of the United States had participation in the
discussions and in the preparation of materials for the use of the
Conference. The names of the Experts and Advisers who assisted at the
Conference and of the Secretary and two Assistant Secretaries of the
Delegation are set forth in Annex I.
The Conference developed the value of personal contacts with members of
the several Delegations and also with the experts and advisers
accompanying them. There were 194 Delegates and a larger number of
