Covert and Overt Operations 813 —The Agency then began examining photos of desert areas to see if another alternative might be possible. This led to the identification of Desert 1 as a possibility. —The Director then described the OTTER mission. [4½ lines not declassified] —He noted that while this (the OTTER flight) was conceived of in January, permission to carry out the mission was not received until the March full moon timeframe. (4) Communications support —[3½ lines not declassified] —[9 lines not declassified] (5) Farsi-speaking drivers. —He noted that we had provided the force with this capability. —[1½ lines not declassified] —[2½ lines not declassified] d. Execution phase (1) The primary intelligence contribution was that provided [less than 1 line not declassified]. —This enabled us to know that one of the aircraft (a C–130) had been detected. —[less than 1 line not declassified] the Iranian report was confused and it subsequently got lost in the air control network. —After the landing at Desert 1, and the subsequent unfortunate events, [less than 1 line not declassified] indicated that the word had gotten out. (2) [2½ lines not declassified] —[1½ lines not declassified] e. Secrecy (1) The Director alluded to the fact that he had just read a report (on 9 June) from John McMahon3 that raised an interesting issue: that the operation may have been so secretive that undue risks may have been incurred. —The Director commended to ADM Holloway that he and his group look into what price needed to be paid for a given level of secrecy involved in any future joint task force operation. (2) The DCI stressed that only two individuals in the Agency knew that an official “go” had been given. —He noted that many more, however, had been told to be ready to “go,” but stressed that even among those in the room, only he knew that a specific decision had been made. 3 Memorandum from McMahon to Turner, June 9. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 82M00501R: 1980 Subject Files, Box 14, Folder 1)
